THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF DALLAS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ Adopted: July 12, 2010 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DALLAS, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Boyd L. Austin Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
L. James Kelly Jr. 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Nancy Rakestraw Arnold 
Kelly D. Carter 
Michael G. Cason 
Frank "Bingo" McTyre 
R. Griffin White 
City Council 
____________ 
Kendall Smith 
City Manager 
____________ 
Sarah B. Ruff 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Glen E. Stinson 
City Attorney 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DALLAS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Boyd L. Austin Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
L. James Kelly Jr. 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Nancy Rakestraw Arnold 
Christopher B. Carter 
Leah Alls 
Michael G. Cason 
James R. Henson 
City Council 
____________ 
Kendall M. Smith 
City Manager 
____________ 
Tina R. Clark 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Glen E. Stinson 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the prior compilation of ordinances, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Dallas City Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Michael E. Raabe, Code Attorney, and Deborah J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Boyd L. Austin, Jr., Mayor, and Kendall Smith, City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Dallas, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Dallas, Georgia. 2010. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2010-08 
ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE 
CITY OF DALLAS, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL 
OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; 
PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; 
PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; 
AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE 
SHALL [BECOME] EFFECTIVE 
STATE OF GEORGIA 
COUNTY OF PAULDING 
WHEREAS,     The Mayor and Council of the City of Dallas, Georgia is charged with the responsibility of protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Dallas, Georgia which includes the adoption of Codes and Ordinances for the City of Dallas, Georgia; AND 
WHEREAS,     In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Dallas, Georgia, the Mayor and Council of the City of Dallas, Georgia believes that it is in the best interest of the citizens of the City of Dallas, Georgia to adopt and enact a New Code o[f] Ordinances for the City of Dallas, Georgia; providing for the repeal of certain Ordinances not included therein; providing a penalty for the violation thereof; providing for the manner of amending such Code; and providing when such Code of Ordinance and this Ordinance shall become effective; NOW 
THERFORE,     Be it Ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Dallas, Georgia that the Code of Ordinances of the City of Dallas, Georgia is hereby amended and adopted in the following respects: 
Section 1.   The Code entitled "THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, OF THE CITY OF DALLAS, GEORGIA," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 44, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2.   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before the effective date of this Ordinance which is July 12, 2010 as hereinafter stated in Section 7, and not included in this Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3.   The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance. 
Section 4.   Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine as provided in Chapter 1. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code Section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5.   Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6.   Ordinances adopted after July 12, 2010 that amend or refer to Ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of this Code. 
Section 7.   This Ordinance shall become effective July 12, 2010. 
SO SHALL IT BE ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DALLAS, GEORGIA, THIS THE 12 DAY OF July, 2010. 
/s/ Boyd L. Austin, Jr. 
      MAYOR   ;sigl;Michael G. Cason\COUNCILMEMBER ;sigl;L. James Kelly\COUNCILMEMBER ;sigl;R. Griffin White\COUNCILMEMBER ;sigl;Nancy R. Arnold\COUNCILMEMBER ;sigl;Frank McTyre\COUNCILMEMBER ;sigl;Kelly D. Carter\COUNCILMEMBER  
ATTEST: 
/s/ Sarah B. Ruff 
      CITY CLERK   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this City of Dallas, Georgia Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 2010-06  8-30-2010 Include 2 2010-15 12-20-2010 Include 2 2011-01  2- 7-2011 Include 2 2011-09  4-11-2011 Include 2 OA-2011-01  4-11-2011 Include 2 2011-12  6- 6-2011 Omit 2 OA-2011-02  6- 6-2011 Include 2 OA-2011-03  6- 6-2011 Include 2 OA-2011-04  6- 6-2011 Include 2 OA-2011-05  6- 6-2011 Include 2 OA-2011-06  6- 6-2011 Include 2 2009-10  8- 3-2009 Include 3 OA-2011-11  1- 9-2012 Include 3 OA-2012-02  3- 5-2012 Include 3 OA-2012-03  3- 5-2012 Include 3 OA-2012-04  3-19-2012 Include 3 OA-2012-05  5- 7-2012 Include 3 OA-2012-06  6- 4-2012 Include 4 OA-2012-07  8-27-2012 Include 4 OA-2012-08 11- 5-2012 Include 4 OA-2012-09 12- 3-2012 Include 4 2012-10  8-27-2012 Include 4 OA-2013-01  2- 4-2013 Include 4 OA-2013-02  2- 4-2013 Include 4 OA-2013-03  4- 1-2013 Include 4 OA-2013-04  3- 4-2013 Include 4 OA-2013-05  9- 9-2013 Include 4 OA-2013-06 11- 4-2013 Include 4 OA-2013-07 11-25-2013 Include 4 OA-2013-08 12- 2-2013 Include 4 OA-2014-02  5- 5-2014 Include 5 OA-2014-03  6- 2-2014 Include 5 OA-2014-04  5- 5-2014 Include 5 OA-2014-05  6-16-2014 Include 5 OA-2014-06  6-16-2014 Include 5 OA-2014-07  6-16-2014 Include 5 OA-2014-08  8- 4-2014 Include 5 OA-2014-09  6-16-2014 Include 5 OA-2014-10  8- 4-2014 Include 5 2014-10  8- 4-2014 Include 5 OA-2014-11  9- 8-2014 Include 5 OA-2014-12  9- 8-2014 Include 5 OA-2014-01  6- 2-2014 Include 5 OA-2015-01  3- 2-2015 Include 6 OA-2015-02  6- 1-2015 Include 6 OA-2015-03 11- 2-2015 Include 6 OA-2015-04  7- 6-2015 Include 6 OA-2015-05  8-31-2015 Include 6 OA-2015-06  8-31-2015 Include 6 OA-2015-07  8-31-2015 Include 6 OA-2016-01  3- 7-2016 Include 7 OA-2016-02  5- 2-2016 Include 7 OA-2016-04  6- 6-2016 Include 7 2016-05  6- 6-2015 Include 7 OA-2016-03  7-11-2016 Include 7 OA-2016-05  8-29-2016 Include 7 OA-2016-07  8-29-2016 Include 7 OA-2016-08 10- 3-2016 Include 7 OA-2017-01 12-11-2017 Include 8 OA-2017-02 12-11-2017 Include 8 OA-2009-02  8- 3-2009 Include 8 OA-2011-12 12- 5-2011 Include 9 OA-2018-01  3- 5-2018 Include 9 OA-2018-02  4- 2-2018 Include 9 OA-2018-03  4- 2-2018 Include 9 OA-2018-04  6- 4-2018 Include 9 OA-2018-05  6- 4-2018 Include 9 OA-2018-06  8- 6-2018 Include 9 OA-2018-08 10- 1-2018 Include 9 OA-2018-09 10- 1-2018 Include 9 OA-2018-10 10- 1-2018 Include 9 OA-2018-11 12- 3-2018 Include 9 OA-2019-01  6- 3-2019 Include 10  
PART I - CHARTER   CITY OF DALLAS, GEORGIA[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the city, as adopted by 1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 976), page 4121. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
    The City of Dallas in Paulding County is reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Dallas." References in this Charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Dallas, Georgia. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 1.11. - City property. 
    Title to any property, real or personal, within or without the corporate limits of said city, heretofore acquired by the City of Dallas, with or without proper Charter authority, is vested in the City of Dallas created by this Act, the acquisition thereof being ratified and made lawful. The City of Dallas, created by this Act, is authorized and empowered to purchase, hold, rent, lease, and receive by gift or otherwise, and to enjoy, possess and retain, temporarily or permanently, any property, real or personal, of any kind whatsoever, either within or without the corporate limits of said city, for corporate purposes. 
Sec. 1.12. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the City Clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "official map or description of the corporate limits of the City of Dallas, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the City Clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(b)  The City Council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace but such earlier maps shall be retained in the office of the City Clerk. 
Sec. 1.13. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and Laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in the Charter. 
(b)  The powers of this City shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. 
Sec. 1.14. - Examples of powers. 
    The powers of this city shall include, but are not limited to, the following powers: 
(1)  Ad Valorem taxation: to levy, assess, and collect ad valorem taxes on all taxable property in the city; 
(2)  Other taxes: to levy, assess, and collect other taxes allowed by general law; 
(3)  Business regulation and taxation: to levy, assess and collect occupational and business taxes and to license and regulate occupations and businesses; 
(4)  Appropriations: to make appropriations and expend funds for support of the city and other lawful purposes; 
(5)  Municipal debts: to borrow money and issue bonds as authorized by general law; 
(6)  Gifts: to accept gifts and grants for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city on such terms as the donor may impose; 
(7)  Condemnation: to condemn property inside or outside the city for present or future use; 
(8)  Municipal utilities: to acquire, lease, operate and dispose of public utilities; 
(9)  Public utilities: to grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and to prescribe the conditions of such franchises and contracts; 
(10)  Roadways: to open, maintain, improve, and close street and roads and to grant franchises and right-of-ways thereon; 
(11)  Public facilities: to acquire, operate, and dispose of public buildings, public projects, parks, cemeteries, golf courses, and other public improvements, inside or outside the city; 
(12)  Sidewalk maintenance: to require real estate owners to repair or maintain sidewalks adjoining their lands; 
(13)  Building regulation: to regulate the building trades and the construction of buildings and to adopt and enforce building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, heating and air-conditioning codes; 
(14)  Planning and Zoning: to provide for city planning by zoning, subdivision regulations, and the like; 
(15)  Police powers: to exercise the police power for the public safety and well-being of the city; 
(16)  Roadside regulation: to prohibit or regulate signs, billboards, and other items upon or adjacent to streets and roads; 
(17)  Health: to prescribe and enforce health and sanitation standards; 
(18)  Pollution: to regulate emissions which pollute the air or water; 
(19)  Fire safety: to fix fire limits and to prescribe and enforce fire safety regulations; 
(20)  Public hazards: to provide for the destruction or removal of public hazards; 
(21)  Waste disposal: to provide for and regulate the collection, disposal, and recycling of garbage and wastes; 
(22)  Garbage fees: to fix and collect garbage fees; 
(23)  Sewer fees: to fix and collect sewer fees; 
(24)  Water fees: to fix and collect water-use fees; 
(25)  Nuisances: to define and provide for the abatement of nuisances; 
(26)  Property protection: to preserve and protect the property of the city; 
(27)  Prisoners: to provide for the public work by municipal prisoners and their confinement; 
(28)  Animal control: to regulate or provide the keeping of animals; 
(29)  Motor vehicles: to regulate the operation and parking of motor vehicles; 
(30)  Taxicabs: to regulate vehicles operated for hire in the city; 
(31)  Pensions: to provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for city employees and officers; 
(32)  Special assessments: to levy, assess, and collect special assessments to cover the cost of public improvements; 
(33)  Contracts: to enter into lawful contracts and agreements; 
(34)  City agencies: to create, alter, or abolish departments, offices, boards, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer appropriate authority upon them; 
(35)  Penalties: to provide penalties for violations of municipal ordinances; 
(36)  Police and fire protection: to exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(37)  Emergencies: to provide for the determining, proclamation, and combating of emergencies; 
(38)  Urban redevelopment: to organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(39)  Public transportation: to organize and operate public transportation systems; 
(40)  General health, safety, and welfare: to define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city; and 
(41)  Other powers: to exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers. 
Sec. 1.15. - Exercise of powers. 
    All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city or its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, by general law, or by this Charter. If general law and this Charter make no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
    The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six council members. The mayor and council members shall be elected in the manner provided in Article V of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
    The mayor of the city shall serve for a term of four years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or council member unless he or she is a qualified municipal voter and shall have been a resident of the city for one year immediately prior to the date of his or her qualifying for said position. The mayor and each council member shall continue to reside within the city limits proper during their period of service. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The office of mayor and council member shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, relocation of residency outside the city limits proper, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled from the city council by election of one of its members, by majority vote, to serve until the next election where a mayor shall be elected to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  A vacancy in the office of one or more council members shall be filled by the mayor and city council by the election of any citizens of said city eligible to hold such office, who shall serve until the next election, to be held every two years, where a council member or members shall be elected to fill the remainder of the unexpired term. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
(a)  Until changed as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the mayor and city council shall continue to receive the same compensation to which they were entitled immediately prior to the effective date of this Charter. 
(b)  The compensation of the mayor and city council members may be changed by ordinance; but any increase shall be subject to Code Section 36-35-4 of the O.C.G.A. or any similar law hereafter enacted. 
(c)  The mayor and city council members shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Sec. 2.14. - Holding other office. 
    Except as authorized by general state law, the mayor or any city council member shall not hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which he or she was elected. 
Sec. 2.15. - Conflict of interest. 
    No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair his or her performance of his or her official duties. 
Sec. 2.16. - Inquiries and investigations. 
    The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the City Council shall be punished as provided by Ordinance. 
Sec. 2.17. - General power and authority of the city council. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the City Council shall be vested with all powers of government as provided in Article I of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.18. - Organization meeting. 
    The City Council shall meet for organization on the first Monday in January, 1988, and every two years thereafter, or as soon as practical. The meeting shall be called to order by the City Clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
    I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully perform the duties of Mayor (or Council member as the case may be) of the City of Dallas, Georgia, and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the Constitution of the United States of America. 
    The first organizational meeting may be the first regular meeting after adoption. 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and locations as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a council member before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member's presence. Except where waived by all members, if effected by their presence or in writing, only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of all meetings shall be made as required by general state law. 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedures and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All officers of the city council, committees, and committee chair-persons shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority vote of the city council. The mayor shall have the power to remove members of any committee and the power to appoint new members to any committee, at any time, within the mayor's discretion, but any such action must be with the approval of a majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
    Three city council members and the mayor or mayor pro tempore shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the "ayes" and "nays" shall be recorded in the minutes, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The mayor, or mayor pro tempore if presiding, shall be entitled to vote only in the case of a tie. 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. The enacting clause shall be: "The council of the city of Dallas, Georgia hereby ordains ...." and every ordinance shall contain this enacting clause. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any city council member, the mayor, or the city manager and read at any regular or special meeting of the city council. 
(c)  Upon passage, all ordinances shall be signed by the mayor, or mayor pro tempore if presiding, and the city clerk. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the technical requirements of this section shall not invalidate an ordinance if the intention of the governing authority that the ordinance be effective is evident. 
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
    In addition to other acts required by general state law or by specific provisions of this Charter to be done by ordinance, acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be done by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three city council members and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its service; or authorize the borrowing of moneys except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinance generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording codification; printing. 
(a)  The city clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly identified book or file kept for the purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  All ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations that the city council may specify, shall be compiled, known, and cited officially as "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Dallas, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, city council members, departments, and agencies of the City and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to the Charter to be published as soon as is practical following its adoption, and the published ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. The ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. 
Sec. 2.27. - Chief executive officer. 
    The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City of Dallas, Georgia. He or she shall possess all of the executive powers granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and all the executive powers contained in this Charter. 
Sec. 2.28. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
    As the chief executive officer of the City of Dallas, the mayor shall: 
(1)  See that all laws, ordinances, and duties of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Preside at all meetings of the mayor and city council and have the right to take part in the deliberations of said council but shall not vote on any questions except in the case of a tie; 
(3)  Sign all deeds and contracts, except deeds for property sold under execution at a public sale; 
(4)  Be clothed with veto power as set out in this Charter; 
(5)  Keep the city council advised from time to time of the general condition of the city and recommend such measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the city; and 
(6)  Call the city council together at any time when deemed necessary by him or her. 
Sec. 2.29. - Mayor pro tempore. 
    The mayor and city council shall elect by a majority vote from among the city council members a mayor pro tempore who shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the mayor's disability or absence. 
Sec. 2.30. - Veto power. 
    Every ordinance and resolution passed and every election of an officer or employee by the mayor and city council shall be subject to the veto of the mayor and in the following manner: The mayor shall, within three days, write out his or her objections to such resolution, ordinance, or election and the mayor and city council shall, at the next regular or called meeting at which a quorum shall be present, order said objections entered on the minutes and take a vote on the question as to whether said ordinance, resolution, or other action shall become adopted over said veto. Should as many as four city council members vote in the affirmative, said resolution, ordinance, or other action shall stand affirmed and become effective without the approval of the mayor; otherwise, not. The "ayes" and "nays" shall in all cases be entered upon the minutes. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note- Amended by Home Rule in 1998, Res. No. 98-02, 2-2-1998. 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative responsibility; powers. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all administrative functions shall be vested in the City Manager. The Mayor and City Council shall deal solely through the City Manager with the administrative services, and the departments, agencies, and functions committed to him or her by this Charter, and no orders shall be given by the Mayor or City Council members to any subordinates of the City Manager either publicly or privately or directly or indirectly. 
(b)  The City Manager is authorized and empowered to make and execute contracts within the scope of his/her duties as defined by this Charter; provided, however, that any such contract, other than a contract of employment, must be approved by the Mayor and City Council when the consideration is over $10,000.00 with the following exceptions: 
(1)  If the contract is an employment contract for non-council appointed employees; 
(2)  If the contract is for repairs and/or maintenance of equipment and/or buildings with a monetary value of less than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000). 
(c)  All disbursements of the city will require dual signatures by the City Manager, Mayor or City Clerk. 
(Res. No. 94-01, 3-7-1994; Ord. No. 2016-05, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 3.11. - Appointment of city manager. 
    The Mayor and City Council shall appoint a City Manager, without the need for periodic reappointment, to serve subject to the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council and shall fix the salary of the City Manager. The City Manager shall be chosen on the basis of his or her character and of his or her executive and administrative qualification, with special reference to his or her actual training and experience in and his or her knowledge of accepted practices of his or her duties. 
Sec. 3.12. - Removal of city manager. 
    The Mayor and City Council may remove the City Manager by majority vote with all members of the City Council present. At least 30 days before such removal shall become effective, the Mayor and City Council shall by a majority vote adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for this removal. The City Manager may, within ten days, reply in writing and may request a public hearing. If one is requested, after full consideration, the Mayor and City Council Members, by majority vote with all members present, may adopt a final resolution of removal. By the preliminary resolution, the Mayor and City Council may suspend the City Manager from duty but shall pay him or her forthwith any unpaid balance of his or her salary for the next two calendar months following adoption of the preliminary resolution. 
Sec. 3.12 [3.13]. - Temporary city manager. 
    If, on account of the temporary absence or disability of the City Manager, it should be necessary in the judgment of the Mayor and City Council members to designate some person to serve as acting City Manager during the temporary absence or disability of the City Manager, the Mayor and City Council may execute one of the following three options: 
(1)  The Mayor may assume the responsibilities of the duties of the City Manager until the City Manager returns to his or her office; 
(2)  The Mayor and City Council may appoint the City Clerk to assume the responsibilities and duties of the City Manager; 
(3)  The Mayor and City Council may appoint any qualified person to temporarily serve as City Manager and fix his or her compensation. 
Sec. 3.14. - City manager; duties and powers. 
    In addition to those elsewhere in this Charter provided, the following powers are conferred on the City Manager and the following duties are required of him or her: 
(1)  He or she shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and head of the administrative branch of the city government; 
(2)  He or she shall be responsible to the Mayor and City Council for the proper administration of the affairs committed to this charge; 
(3)  He or she shall have the right to request the counsel, advice, or opinion of the city attorney and assistant city attorneys concerning any manner affecting the interest of the city; and it shall be their duty to respond to such request to the best of their abilities; 
(4)  He or she shall have the power, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council, to change, consolidate, or abolish any of the offices, departments, or functions over which he or she exercises supervision and control, and create in lieu thereof, such other offices, departments, and functions as he or she may deem best, which offices, departments, and functions when so created, shall be under his or her supervision and control as fully as if specified; 
(5)  He or she shall have jurisdiction over, to remove when he or she deems it for the good of the city, all of the employees of each and every department of the city. However, the removal of any permanent employee shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor and City Council; 
(6)  No claim against or in favor of the city shall be paid or collected without prior approval of the City Manager; 
(7)  All bonds required of the officers and employees shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager; 
(8)  He or she shall attend all meetings, stated and special, of the City Council with the right to take part in the discussions, but not vote; 
(9)  He or she shall have the right to recommend to the Mayor and City Council for its adoption such measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient; 
(10)  He or she shall see that all terms and conditions in favor of the City and its inhabitants in contracts with public utilities and others are faithfully kept and performed; 
(11)  He or she shall prepare the budget of the city annually and submit it to the Mayor and City Council and be responsible for its administration after its adoption by the City Council; 
(12)  He or she shall have the power to investigate the affairs, records, accounts, and expenditures of the various commissions, boards, and agencies created either by Ordinances of the Mayor and City Council or by Acts of the General Assembly of the State of Georgia relating to the affairs of the city and to report thereof at least once a year to the Mayor and City Council such matters in reference thereof as he or she deems advisable; 
(13)  He or she shall keep the Mayor and City Council advised of the financial condition of the city and make such recommendations as may seem desirable to him or her; and 
(14)  He or she shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the Mayor and City Council, this Charter, or by general state law. 
Sec. 3.15. - City attorney. 
    The Mayor shall appoint a city attorney, without necessity of periodic reappointment, upon approval by the city council, together with such assistant city attorney as may be authorized, to serve subject to the pleasure of the Mayor and Council and subjected to removal as provided below. The Mayor and Council shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, city manager, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. 
    The Mayor and Council may remove the City Attorney, or Assistant City Attorney(s) by majority vote with all members of the City Council present. 
Sec. 3.16. - City clerk. 
    The Mayor shall appoint a city clerk, without the need for periodic reappointment, upon approval by the city council, who shall not be a city council member. The city clerk shall be the custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records and minutes as required by this Charter, serve as the city treasurer, and perform other duties as may be required by the Mayor, City Council, or City Manager. The city clerk should also be qualified to maintain and control the city's financial records and general bookkeeping. 
Sec. 3.17. - Police chief. 
    The mayor shall appoint a qualified person to serve as chief of police of the City of Dallas, without the need for periodic reappointment, upon approval of the City Council. The police chief will be responsible for the enforcement of the police powers of the city and shall perform the duties allocated to him or her by the Mayor and City Council, this Charter, Ordinances and general state laws. He or she shall supervise and control all employees of the City of Dallas police department. 
Sec. 3.18. - Removal of city clerk or police chief. 
    The City Clerk or Police Chief may be removed, for cause, from office by a vote of four members of the City Council. 
Sec. 3.19. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
    The City Council shall create by Ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative functions as the City Council deems necessary and shall by Ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. All boards, commissions, and authorities should be bound by the following general regulations: 
(1)  All members of boards, commission, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the Mayor, upon approval of the City Council, for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by Ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or general state law; 
(2)  The City Council, by Ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority; 
(3)  Except as specifically authorized by general law, no member of any board, commission, authority shall hold any elective office in the city; 
(4)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, by general law, or by Ordinance; 
(5)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she has executed and filed with the City Clerk an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his or her office, such oath to be prescribed by Ordinance and administered by the Mayor; 
(6)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of the City Council; 
(7)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by general state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chair-person and one member as vice chair-person and one member as secretary; and 
(8)  Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, Ordinances of the City, or general state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the City Clerk, subject to approval of the Mayor and City Council. 
Sec. 3.20. - Personnel policies. 
    The City Council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner of which layoff shall be affected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note- Amended by Home Rule in 1998, Res. No. 98-02, 2-2-1998. 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
    There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of Dallas, Georgia. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby associate judges as shall be provided by Ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by Ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the Municipal Court unless he or she shall have obtained the age of 21 years. Members of the State Bar of Georgia shall be given preference in selection. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be set by Ordinance. 
(d)  Judges shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council, without the need for periodic reappointment, and may be removed from office by majority vote of the Mayor and Council with all members present. 
(e)  Before entering on duties of his or her office, each judge shall take an oath given by the Mayor that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the City Council. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
    The Municipal Court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by Ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The Municipal Court shall try and punish violations of all city ordinances and state offenses as provided by state law. 
(b)  The Municipal Court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $100.00 or 15 days in jail. 
(c)  The Municipal Court may fix punishment for misdemeanor offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 360 days or both, or any part of the maximum fine or imprisonment, or may sentence any offender upon conviction to labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks, square, or other public places for a period not exceeding 360 days. 
Editor's note- O.C.G.A.  36-35-6(2)(A) now limits imprisonment to six months. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
    The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the Municipal Court shall exist in all criminal cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Paulding County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
    With the approval of the City Council, the Judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the Municipal Court; provided, however, that the City Council may adopt in part or in toto, the rules and regulations for procedure in the Municipal Court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the City Clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, shall be furnished to all defendants in Municipal Court proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
    All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
(a)  On the first Wednesday in September, 1989, and on that day every two years thereafter, there shall be an election for successors to the City Council members and Mayor, if applicable, whose terms will expire the following January. The terms of office shall begin at the time of taking the oath of office as provided in Section 2.18 of this Charter. 
(b)  The Mayor shall be elected in 1991 and every four years thereafter. 
(c)  The City Council members from Ward One, Ward Three, and one Councilmember-at-large shall be elected in 1989 and every four years thereafter. 
(d)  The City Council members from Ward Two, Ward Four, and one Councilmember-at-large shall be elected in 1991 and every four years thereafter. 
(e)  The Mayor and City Council members in office on the effective date of this Charter shall remain in office until their successors are elected and take office as provided in this Charter. 
Editor's note- O.C.G.A. 21-3-51, 1990 changed all municipal elections to the Tuesday following the first Monday in November beginning in 1993 and every two years thereafter. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan election. 
    Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by majority. 
(a)  The person receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
(b)  In the event that no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, then a run-off election will be held in accordance with Ordinance and Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
(c)  In the event that there is a tie vote between the two candidates receiving the most votes, then a special election will be held in accordance with Ordinances and Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
    The City Council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the City Council at its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
    The City Council, by Ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. The City Council, by Ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum and may authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
    The City Council, by Ordinance, shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in the City of Dallas or who practice or offer to practice a calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general state law in such a way to preclude city regulation. Such fee, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.17 of this Charter. The City Council, by Ordinance, may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
Sec. 6.13. - Franchises. 
    The City Council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the City's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The City Council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or non-exclusive, and the consideration for such franchises. 
Sec. 6.14. - Service charges. 
    The City Council, by Ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for water, sewer, sanitary, health services, or any other services rendered within and without the corporate limits of the City. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.17 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.15. - Special assessments. 
    The City Council, by Ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.17 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Construction; other taxes. 
    This City shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by state law and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the City of Dallas to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.17. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
    The City Council, by Ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city by whatever reasonable means which are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for the dates when taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of Fi. Fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, allowing exceptions for hardships, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.18. - General obligation bonds. 
    The City Council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.19. - Revenue bonds. 
    Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the projects, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.20. - Short-term loans. 
    Any short-term loan obtained by the city must be repaid by the end of the City of Dallas' fiscal year of the year in which the loan was obtained unless otherwise provided by state law. 
Sec. 6.21. - Fiscal year. 
    The City Council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for the financial accounting and reporting of each and every department, office, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by general state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The City Council shall adopt and may thereafter amend an annual budget, except that the budget as finally adopted and amended, must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The City Council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of the fiscal year. If the City Council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for their operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month to month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the City Council adopts a budget for the ensuing year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such; and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable unless by a majority vote of the City Council. 
Sec. 6.23. - Tax levies. 
    As soon as possible after adoption of the budget, the City Council shall levy, by ordinance, such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated applicable revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city. 
Sec. 6.24. - Changes in appropriations. 
    The City Council, by majority vote, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose. 
Sec. 6.25. - Independent audit. 
    There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
Sec. 6.26. - Contracting procedures. 
    No contract with the City of Dallas, except as allowed under Section 3.10 Administrative Responsibility; Powers of this Charter, with a monetary value of Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500) or more shall be binding upon the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the City Manager and the City Attorney; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the City Council and such approval is entered in the City Council minutes. 
(Res. No. 94-01, 3-7-1994) 
Sec. 6.27. - Centralized purchasing. 
    The City Council may prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.28. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The City Council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as provided by general state law. 
(b)  The City Council may quit claim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon a report by the mayor or city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city is of no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the City Council may authorize the Mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the City a deed conveying said cutoff or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Official bonds. 
    The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the City Council shall from time to time require by Ordinance or as may be provided by state law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
    All Ordinances, by laws, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the City Council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Pending matters. 
    Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue; and any such city agencies, personnel, or office as may be provided by the City Council. 
Sec. 7.13. - Severability. 
    If, for any reason, any section, provision, clause, sentence, phrase, word, or part of this Charter shall be held to be unconstitutional or invalid, then that fact shall not affect or destroy the validity or constitutionality of any other section, provision, clause, or part of this Charter which is not in and of itself unconstitutional or invalid, and the remaining portions of this Charter shall be enforced without regard to the provisions, clause, or part so held to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 7.14. - Specific repealer. 
    An Act incorporating the City of Dallas, Georgia, in Paulding County, Georgia, approved March 6, 1956 (Ga. L. 1956, p. 2947), is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 7.15. - Effective date. 
    This Act shall become effective on July 1, 1988. 
Sec. 7.16. - General repealer. 
    All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ga. Laws 
Year Act No. Page Section Section 
this 
Charter 1988 976 4121 arts. I-VII Arts. I-VII  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES/RESOLUTIONS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance/ 
Resolution 
Number Date Section 
this Charter 94-01  3- 7-1994(Res.) 3.10 6.26 2016-05  6- 6-2016 3.10  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Dallas, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Dallas City Code." 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  1-101) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and all ordinances found herein, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Mayor and Council of the City of Dallas: 
    City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    City limits. The term "city limits" means the corporate limits of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Code of Ordinances, the Code and this Code. The term "Code of Ordinances," "the Code" and "this Code" means the Codified Ordinances of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Computation of time. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that the last day shall be excluded if it is a Sunday or a holiday. 
    Council, city council. The term "the council" or "the city council" means the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Paulding, Georgia. 
    Court. The term "court" means the municipal court of the City of Dallas, Georgia, except where otherwise stated. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires the head of a department of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
    Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Judge or municipal judge. The term "judge" or "municipal judge" means the judge of the municipal court of the City of Dallas, except where otherwise stated. 
    Keeper or proprietor. The term "keeper" or "proprietor" means and includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Limits, corporation or city. The term "limits," "corporation" or "city" means the corporate limits of the city, the legal boundaries of the City of Dallas, except where the provision clearly intends otherwise. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
    Mayor. Whenever the term "mayor" is used, it means the mayor of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Mayor and council. Whenever the term "mayor and council" is used, it means the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Number. A word importing only the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
    O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." refers to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments or other municipal agents by title only, such reference shall be read as though followed by the words "of the City of Dallas, Georgia." 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and" and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title. 
    Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, estates, trusts, cooperatives, receivers, fiduciaries, partnerships and all other bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of a person intended as such when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
    Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the City of Dallas. 
    Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Title of officer. Whenever the title of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Dallas" were added. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  1-102) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A.  1-3-1, 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines, notes, and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or section of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  1-103) 
Sec. 1-4. - Certain ordinances not affected by the Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this code fixing salaries of, or providing policies and programs for, providing retirement, disability or death benefits for, officials, officers or employees of the city; 
(5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; any ordinance levying any tax; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision within the city; 
(11)  Any zoning ordinance or any ordinance regulating subdivisions or any ordinance regulating signs or any ordinance regulating building design standards; 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution adopted for purposes that have been consummated; 
(13)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; and 
(14)  Any resolution of the city not in conflict with this Code. 
(b)  All such ordinances or resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  1-104) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council of the city that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  1-105) 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not new enactments. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  1-106) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included herein which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and added thereto. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and included, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: For example, "That section (or article or chapter) _____ of The Code of Ordinances of the City of Dallas, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Ordinances of the City of Dallas, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:...." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed may be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  1-107) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through ________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code, ordinances or other public notice. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and council. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, or in any other manner alter the ordinance book, minutes, notices posted by the city for the benefit of the public, or any other documents or records of the municipal government of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  1-108) 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the City any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code, ordinance or resolution the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance or resolution shall be punished as a misdemeanor offense according to the provisions of section 4.13 of the Charter of the city. 
(b)  Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance or resolution shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  1-109) 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, O.C.G.A.  36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-12. - Repealer; subjects not affected. 
    All prior ordinances of a general and permanent nature which are in conflict herewith are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this chapter, except as hereinafter provided. The repeal provided for shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this chapter; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; nor shall such repeal affect the administrative regulations or resolutions of the mayor and aldermen not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code; nor shall such repeal affect any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the mayor and aldermen to any person, firm or corporation; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; nor shall such repeal affect the annual appropriation ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing charges therefor; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance extending the limits of the city; nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - General procedures. 
    Any action of the mayor and council having a regulatory or penal effect or required to be done by ordinance under the city Charter shall be done only by ordinance. Each resolution and ordinance shall be in written form before being introduced. The affirmative vote of at least three members of the council shall be required to pass any resolution or ordinance. After adoption of ordinances, the city clerk shall number ordinances consecutively, in the order of their final adoption, and shall copy them into a permanent record book used solely for this purpose; and the city clerk shall do likewise for resolutions, using a separate series of numbers and a separate record book. The original copies of all ordinances, resolutions, and motions shall be filed and preserved by the city clerk. No ordinance shall be approved until it shall have been read at two consecutive meetings not less than seven days apart unless this "two readings" provision is waived by a majority vote of the council and the reason for such waiver is recorded in the official minutes of the meeting. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-201; Ord. No. 95-03, 3-6-1995) 
Sec. 2-2. - Effective date. 
    Except as otherwise provided by any ordinance or state law: 
(1)  All ordinances and resolutions approved in writing by the mayor shall be effective immediately after passage thereof. 
(2)  All ordinances and resolutions vetoed by the mayor shall be effective upon the final passage thereof as prescribed in section 2.30 of the city Charter. 
(3)  All ordinances and resolutions, which are neither vetoed nor approved in writing by the mayor, shall be effective three days after passage thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-202) 
Sec. 2-3. - Official copy. 
    A true copy of an ordinance, which has been duly enacted by the mayor and council, signed by the mayor, and attested to by the city clerk, shall be known as an official copy of any ordinance of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-203) 
Sec. 2-4. - Availability to public. 
    The public may request copies of any and all ordinances and resolutions of the city. The city may require up to three business days to furnish the copies and shall charge, per page, an amount set in the fee schedule kept and maintained by the clerk for uncertified and certified copies. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-204) 
Sec. 2-5. - Reports. 
    The city manager shall have the power to require reports from all officers and employees of the city, as he may deem necessary to carry out his administrative responsibilities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-401) 
Sec. 2-6. - Contracts; bonds. 
    The city manager shall make and execute contracts as provided in section 3.10(b) of the city Charter. The city manager shall also be authorized to sign the bonds of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-402) 
Sec. 2-7. - Temporary loans. 
    The mayor may obtain short-term loans in the name of the city when approved by council. Any such indebtedness shall be payable solely from the proceeds of a duly authorized bond issue or from a specific designated source, unless there is a prior appropriation out of which such indebtedness could be paid. (See section 6.20 of the city Charter.) 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-403) 
Sec. 2-8. - Mayor pro tem. 
    Except where otherwise provided by law, the mayor pro tem shall perform the duties and functions of the mayor provided for in this Code during the absence or disability of the mayor. In the event the mayor and mayor pro tem shall fail or are unable to act, any person specifically designated by the mayor and council may act in their stead. (See section 2.29 of the city Charter.) 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-404) 
Sec. 2-9. - Assistant police chief. 
    The police chief of the city shall have the authority to appoint any qualified police officer under his command to serve as the assistant police chief. Such appointment shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the mayor and council. Said assistant police chief shall assume all responsibilities and powers of the police chief during the absence or disability of the police chief. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-405) 
Secs. 2-10-2-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE BODY 

Sec. 2-37. - Regular meetings. 
    The regular meetings of the mayor and council of the city shall be held on the first Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. at the city council room unless said meeting must be rescheduled due to conflicts such as holidays. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-101) 
Sec. 2-38. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the mayor and council may be held in accordance with the provisions of section 2.19(b) of the city Charter and O.C.G.A.  50-14-1. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-102) 
State Law reference- Open and public meetings, O.C.G.A.  50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-39. - Order of business. 
    At each meeting of the mayor and council the following regular order of business shall be observed unless dispensed with by a majority vote of the members present: 
(1)  Call to order by the mayor. 
(2)  Presentation of the minutes of previous meetings by the city clerk for correction and approval. 
(3)  Recognition of visitors. 
(4)  Old business. 
(5)  New business. 
(6)  Adjournment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-103) 
Sec. 2-40. - General rules of order; quorum. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the city Charter or this Code, the rules of order and parliamentary procedure contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the transaction of business by and before the mayor and council at its meetings in all cases to which they are applicable. Three councilmembers and the mayor or mayor pro tem shall constitute a quorum. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-104) 
Sec. 2-41. - Disturbing meetings. 
(a)  While the mayor and council are in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the mayor and council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the mayor and council or its presiding officer, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(b)  Any person making personal, impertinent, or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the mayor and council shall be forthwith, by the presiding officer, barred from further audience before the mayor and council, unless permission to continue is granted by a majority vote thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-105) 
Secs. 2-42-2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-71. - Selection of chief judge and associate court judges. 
(a)  The mayor of the city shall recommend and the council of the city shall confirm and approve by majority vote, a qualified person to serve as the chief judge of the municipal court of the city who shall serve until his resignation, death, disability or removal under section 4.11(d) of the Charter of the city. 
(b)  Any necessary associate judges shall be nominated by the chief judge and then approved by majority vote of the city council of the city. Any associate judges shall serve at the pleasure of the chief judge and may be removed at any time with or without cause by the chief judge. 
(c)  Compensation of associate judges shall be set by resolution of the mayor and council of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-200) 
State Law reference- Appointment of judges of municipal courts, O.C.G.A.  36-32-2. 
Sec. 2-72. - Selection of assistant city attorneys. 
(a)  Any necessary assistant city attorneys shall be nominated by the city attorney and then approved by majority vote of the city council of the city. Any assistant city attorneys shall serve at the pleasure of the city attorney and may be removed at any time with or without cause by the city attorney. 
(b)  Compensation of assistant city attorneys shall be set by resolution of the mayor and council of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-201) 
Sec. 2-73. - City marshal. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to do all things necessary in order to be recognized as a law enforcement officer of the state and certified within the standards of the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act (POST Act), as provided in O.C.G.A.  35-8-1 et seq. 
(b)  Requirements. The requirements for the city marshal's office shall be as follows: 
(1)  All officers shall be POST Certified or in the event, the City of Dallas Marshal is not POST Certified, then he/she shall have 12 months from his/her hiring date in which to become POST Certified. 
(2)  All officers must be at least 19 years of age, have a high school diploma or GED and a valid state driver's license; 
(3)  All officers must be of good moral character and standing in the community which shall require that no officer shall have any convictions of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude and/or any convictions of any felony. 
(c)  Powers of arrest. The City of Dallas Marshal shall have the power of arrest in the enforcement of all ordinances of City of Dallas, Georgia, and the laws of the state. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  To enforce all ordinances enacted by the mayor and council of the city, including but not limited to ordinances involving building codes, building guidelines, development regulations and codes, subdivision regulations, zoning and planning, roads and bridges. 
(2)  To issue warnings, notices of ordinance violation, and citations for court appearances for the violation of ordinances. 
(3)  To investigate and collect evidence of these ordinance violations. 
(4)  To respond to complaints of alleged ordinance violations. 
(5)  To appear and testify in court. 
(6)  To do any follow-up work that may be necessary. 
(7)  To ensure proper collection of fines. 
(8)  To coordinate enforcement efforts concerning the building inspection, planning and zoning, public works and/or any other department or division of [the] city as may be deemed necessary. 
(9)  To perform any other duties, including arrests for state law violations, which are permissible and allowed under O.C.G.A.  36-8-5. 
(10)  To work in connection with city attorney's office on behalf of the city. 
(e)  Placement of position. All employees within the Marshal's Office of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall be under the ultimate control and supervision of the city manager and/or mayor and/or city council. 
(f)  Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the office of city marshal shall be for the entire incorporated area of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(g)  Chief marshal. 
(1)  There is created in the office of the city marshal a position as chief marshal, which position shall be appointed and approved by the mayor and city council of the city. 
(2)  With the prior approval of the mayor and council and/or the city manager, the chief marshal shall be responsible for developing office policy and organization within the department of the city marshal and shall be responsible for supervising all other marshals or other employees within the department of the city marshal and shall also be responsible for the promulgation of all rules and regulations for the conduct, management and control of the department of the city marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, 4-11-2011) 
Secs. 2-74-2-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-103. - Departmental organization. 
    The administrative and operating departments of the city shall be the administrative services department, the public works department, the police department, fire department and planning department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-101) 
State Law reference- Authority to form and operate departments, O.C.G.A.  36-34-2; home rule powers, O.C.G.A.  36-35-3. 
Sec. 2-104. - Bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, the mayor and council may require any department head, city official and/or employee, before entering upon discharge of their duties, to give good and sufficient bond in amounts decided by the mayor and council. Said bonds shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of the respective duties of said persons and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations or unlawful expenditures. Said surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the city manager, and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. (See section 7.10 of the city Charter.) 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-102) 
Sec. 2-105. - Performance of duties. 
    It shall be a violation of this Code for any department head, official or employee to fail to perform the duties enumerated herein. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-103) 
Sec. 2-106. - Responsibility of department heads. 
    Every department head is immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of his respective department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-104) 
Secs. 2-107-2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-126. - Functions. 
    The administrative services department shall perform all administrative duties for the mayor and council and for the city, which are not expressly assigned to another by state law, city Charter or this Code of Ordinances. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-105) 
Sec. 2-127. - Duties of city manager. 
    The city manager shall: 
(1)  Perform the duties conferred upon him by section 3.14 of the city Charter and any other applicable sections. 
(2)  Keep, or cause to be kept, true, accurate and just books of accounts of the dealings and transactions of the city, which books shall show at all times the true conditions of said city, its resources and liabilities and the disposition and use of the monies coming under the control of the city. 
(3)  Keep or cause to be kept in a safe place all monies, records and accounts. 
(4)  Disburse funds for the various purposes of the city only when an appropriation for such purpose has been made in the annual budget and the disbursement is authorized by the mayor and council. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as the mayor and council may from time to time require. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-106) 
Secs. 2-128-2-152. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-153. - Functions. 
    The public works department shall be responsible for the proper construction and maintenance of streets, sidewalks, parks, buildings, public utilities, other movable and immovable property of the city, and refuse collection and disposal. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-107) 
Sec. 2-154. - Duties of public works superintendent. 
    The public works superintendent shall: 
(1)  Make regular inspections of the streets, alleys and sidewalks within the city; make a written memorandum of same; and cause all defects and obstructions to be remedied at the earliest opportunity; especially shall he carry out this duty after storms or heavy rainfall. 
(2)  Ensure that all highways, streets and sidewalks of the city are maintained in a clean condition; and enforce and carry out all city ordinances and regulations concerning city streets and sidewalks. 
(3)  Supervise and inspect the operations of the water, sewerage, and all other public utility systems provided by the city. 
(4)  Supervise the collection and disposal of refuse accumulated within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-108) 
Secs. 2-155-2-176. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-177. - Functions. 
    The police department shall be responsible for the prevention and detection of crime, the enforcement of federal and state laws and city ordinances, the apprehension of violators of such laws and ordinances, and the protection of persons and property against injury from crime. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-109) 
State Law reference- Head of municipal law enforcement agency, O.C.G.A.  35-1-12. 
Sec. 2-178. - Chief of police; general authority and administration of department. 
(a)  Supervision of police department. The chief of police shall be the chief executive officer of the police department of the city, shall have full power and authority over the management and conduct of the department, and shall be charged with the full and complete responsibility for the successful and efficient operation of said department, subject to the general laws of the state, the Charter and this Code of Ordinances, and the administrative authority of the city manager. 
(b)  Responsibility for good order, conduct of police. The chief of police shall be responsible for the lawful order of the city and the general good conduct of the officers and men of the police department. 
(c)  Application of duties. It shall be the duty of the chief of police, at all times, both day and night, to preserve the public peace; to protect the rights of persons and property; to provide proper police force at fires; to protect firemen and property thereat; to suppress riots and insurrections; to disperse unlawful and dangerous crowds and assemblages which obstruct free passage on public streets, sidewalks, parks, and places; to preserve order at elections and all public meetings and assemblages within the city; to regulate the movement of vehicles in the streets; to assist in the control of animals running wild upon the streets of the city; to enforce all ordinances and regulations of the city, the state, and the United States of America; to establish systems and procedures for the preservation of evidence and reports of investigations of crimes; and to conduct an aggressive continuing program of training for the members of the police department. Such enumeration of duties shall not be deemed exclusive or exhaustive, but it shall be the duty of the chief of police to perform such other duties as may from time to time be assigned to him by the appropriate authority. 
(d)  Disciplinary powers. The chief of police shall have the power to suspend, with or without pay, discharge, or reduce in rank, any police officer, where such action is deemed necessary or appropriate for the preservation of the good order of the police department, the promotion of discipline and compliance with the police regulations, and the promotion of the efficient enforcement of the ordinances of the city. (Note. All employees are due appeal rights under the city personnel polices.) 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-110) 
Sec. 2-179. - Police regulations. 
    The police chief shall prepare all regulations for the performance of the city police department. Regulations shall then be reviewed by the city manager and presented to the city council along with any comments that the city manager may have. Upon adoption by the mayor and council, said regulations shall become effective. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-111) 
Secs. 2-180-2-196. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PLANNING DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-197. - Planning commission. 
(a)  Membership. There shall be five voting members of the planning commission to be appointed by the mayor and council of the city; members shall be appointed for two year terms and must be residents of the city. Terms are to begin January 1 of each calendar year. 
(b)  Officers, members and their duties. 
(1)  The offices of the planning commission shall consist of a chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary. These officers shall be elected by the membership from its appointive members. 
(2)  The chairperson shall preside at meetings and hearings of the planning commission; have the privilege of discussing all matters before the planning commission and vote only in the case of a tie vote, and have the duties normally conferred by parliamentary procedure on such officers. 
(3)  The vice-chairperson shall act for the chairperson in his absence and shall assume the duties of the chairperson upon vacancy of that office. 
(4)  The secretary shall be responsible for official signatures on plats, reports, minutes, notices and other documents. All clerical duties of the secretary shall be performed by the city administrative department. 
(5)  The city manager or his/her designee shall be a permanent nonvoting member of the planning commission and shall participate in any and all discussions. 
(6)  The scope of duties of the planning commission shall be those contained in chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions, chapter 44, pertaining to zoning, and/or other ordinances of the city. 
(c)  Election of officers. 
(1)  Election of officers shall be held at the first official meeting of each year and those officers shall serve until reelected or successors are elected. 
(2)  Vacancies in the offices of the commission shall be filled at any official meeting. 
(d)  Meetings. 
(1)  The planning commission shall meet whenever any official business needs to be conducted or at such times as the chairperson may determine. 
(2)  Meetings shall be held at the city council room subject to the date and time as specified in the official meeting notice. 
(3)  Three voting members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum. A quorum shall be present before any business is conducted. 
(4)  All plans, reports, and recommendations of the planning commission shall be approved by at least a majority. 
(5)  A record of the vote of each member on each question shall be kept as a part of the minutes. 
(6)  All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public. 
(7)  In the event of the absence of both the chairperson and vice-chairperson from a meeting, the members present may elect a temporary chairperson and proceed with the order of business. 
(e)  Order of business. The order of business at regular meetings shall be: 
(1)  Call to order; 
(2)  Approval of minutes of previous meetings; 
(3)  Recognition of persons having business with the planning commission; 
(4)  Reports of officers and committees; 
(5)  Old business; 
(6)  New business; and 
(7)  Adjourn. 
(f)  Expense reimbursement. Members shall receive a payment per meeting to allow for expenses incurred in performing their duties; payment schedule maintained by the clerk in a separate schedule. 
(g)  Hearings. 
(1)  The planning commission shall hold public hearings on matters before the commission or at the request of the mayor and council. 
(2)  Notice of such hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least 15 days prior to the date of any such public hearing. 
(3)  The matter before the planning commission shall be presented in summary by the secretary or other designated individual and parties in interest shall have privileges of the floor. 
(h)  Amendments. These bylaws may be amended by a two-thirds vote of the membership of the planning commission subject to an ordinance amendment by the mayor and council of the city. 
(i)  Public hearings. The planning commission shall adopt policies and procedures on the conduct of public hearings but such policies must contain the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  A notice of the hearing is to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city at least 15, but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  The notice shall state the time, location and purpose of the hearing. 
(j)  Conduct of meeting. The planning commission shall adopt policies and procedures which govern the conduct of meetings and public hearings. The purpose of this section is to provide a limited time of equal duration for the proponents and opponents of recommendations brought before the commission. These procedures, to be available for distribution to the public, shall be as follows: 
(1)  The public hearing shall be called to order by the Mayor or the presiding officer; 
(2)  The ayor or presiding officer shall explain the procedures to be followed in the conduct of any public hearing on a proposed zoning decision; 
(3)  For each proposed zoning decision, if the subject of the public hearing is a rezoning request initiated by a petitioner other than the mayor and council, then the petitioner, or his representative, shall first present and explain the request for the rezoning. If the request for rezoning is initiated by the City of Dallas, or if the request is a zoning ordinance amendment, then the Dallas City Manager or his representative shall present and explain the request on behalf of the City of Dallas. Thereafter, all individuals that desire to speak in favor of the request shall be permitted to speak. The petitioner and those speaking in favor of the request shall be limited to 15 minutes total time for their presentation of data, evidence and opinion; 
(4)  For any proposed zoning decision, after all persons in favor of the request have spoken, then all individuals who desire to speak in opposition to the request, or amendment, shall have the opportunity to do so. All persons speaking in opposition to the application shall be limited to 15 minutes total time for their presentation of data, evidence and opinion; 
(5)  When any person desires to speak, they shall first raise his/her hand and be recognized by the mayor or presiding officer, then stand and state his/her name and address and then shall make whatever commend that he/she has that is appropriate to the issue; 
(6)  Thereafter, the mayor or presiding officer shall declare the public hearing closed and either another public hearing shall be commenced for the next request or the regular business session of the mayor and council or the Dallas Planning Commission shall be convened. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-140; Ord. No. OA-2012-02, 3-5-2012) 
Secs. 2-198-2-217. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PURCHASING DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2016-01, adopted Mar. 7, 2016, deleted the former Div. 6,  2-218-2-234, and enacted a new Div. 6 as set out herein. The former Div. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-16, 3-150-3-165; Ord. of Mar. 2, 1992; Ord. No. 94-04, adopted Mar. 7, 1994; Ord. No. 95-03, adopted Mar. 6, 1995; and Ord. No. 04-04, adopted May 3, 2004. 

Sec. 2-218. - Purchasing system adopted; purpose. 
    In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, nonprofessional services and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, and to ensure the quality of purchases, a centralized purchasing system is adopted. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-219. - Established. 
    There is hereby created a centralized purchasing department, in which is vested authority for the purchase of supplies, nonprofessional services and equipment. There is also created a finance committee made up of the mayor, one councilmember selected annually and the city manager. All purchases shall be subject to approval either of the purchasing agent, the finance committee or by the mayor and council. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-220. - Purchasing agent designated; powers and duties. 
(a)  The city manager is designated as the purchasing agent for the city. The city manager may delegate the routine administrative responsibilities as specified in this division or in any other applicable purchasing regulations, to another staff person. The city manager shall be the administrative head and have general supervision of the purchasing department. The duties of the purchasing agent may be combined with those of any other office or position. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall: 
(1)  Negotiate purchase and contract for equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services, or services not requiring peculiar ability required by any office or department of the city, in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this division, and such other rules or regulations as shall be prescribed by the mayor and city council, the City Charter or general state law; 
(2)  Act to procure for the city the needed quality in equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services, or services not involving peculiar ability, at the least expense to the city; 
(3)  Discourage improper manipulation of bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases; 
(4)  Prepare and recommend to the mayor and city council rules governing the purchase of supplies, services and equipment for the city; 
(5)  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing prices, market conditions and new products; 
(6)  Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this division and other rules and regulations; 
(7)  Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed, and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department of the city, or which have become unsuitable for city use; 
(8)  Maintain a bidder's list, vendors' catalogue file, and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing department. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-221. - Filing of department budget estimates. 
    All departments, commissions and agencies shall file a detailed estimate of their requirements in supplies, services and/or equipment in such manner, and at such time, and for such future periods as the purchasing agent shall prescribe. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-222. - Exemptions from centralized purchasing. 
(a)  The city manager may authorize any city department to purchase or contract for specified supplies, services and/or equipment independently of the purchasing section, but he shall require that such purchases or contracts are made in conformity with the procedures established by this division, and shall further require purchase orders and/or periodic reports from the department on the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization. 
(b)  The mayor and council may, by majority vote, declare an emergency purchase of any equipment, supplies and/or use of services that is exempt from centralized purchasing, bid procedures, or any other formal procedures that may be contained in this Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-223. - State codes to be followed. 
    This division is expressly made inapplicable to any areas that state laws or federal regulations may control or govern and any such law or regulation shall take precedence over this division and/or other such regulation that may be a part of the purchasing system. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
State Law reference- Purposes for which funds may be expended, O.C.G.A.  36-40-41; purchase of real property by certain cities, O.C.G.A.  36-37-6.2. 
Sec. 2-224. - Purchases less than $29,999.00. 
(a)  Open-market procedure. Purchases of supplies, equipment, nonprofessional services, or services not requiring an unique ability, of an estimated value of $29,999.00 or less, may be made by the purchasing agent in the open market, pursuant to the procedures prescribed below; provided, however, all bidding may be dispensed in an emergency, or where said goods and/or services can be obtained from only one source, or when the amount is less than $5,000.00. 
(1)  Minimum number of quotations. Open-market purchases shall, whenever possible, be based on at least three quotations and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible quotation. 
(2)  Notice inviting quotations. The purchasing agent shall solicit bids by written request to prospective vendors or by telephone. 
(3)  Written quotations. Written quotations shall be submitted to the purchasing agent, who shall keep a record of all open-market orders and quotes for a period of one year after the submission of quotes or the placing of orders. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. 
(4)  Written contracts. Where written contracts are entered into for purchases made under this section, the purchasing agent is authorized to execute such contracts on behalf of the city. Such purchases are to be made by purchase orders only. 
(b)  Purchase orders. Any purchase of supplies, services, and/or equipment under this division must be by approved purchase orders only. No employee, department head, or officer of the city shall make any purchase unless a purchase order has been issued and approved prior to the purchase. Repeated violations of this procedure shall decree disciplinary action. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-225. - Encumbrance of funds. 
    Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing agent shall not issue any purchase order for supplies, nonprofessional services or services involving peculiar ability or equipment, for which there is an insufficient appropriation approved or remaining in that department's budgetary account against which said purchase is to be charged. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-226. - Formal bid procedure. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases of supplies, equipment and/or services of a value greater than $30,000.00 shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder, pursuant to the procedures prescribed herein: 
(1)  Notice inviting bids. Notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles and/or services to be purchased and shall state where bid sheets and specifications may be obtained, and the time and place of the bid opening. 
a.  Published notice. Notice inviting sealed bids shall be published at least ten days prior to the date of the bid opening. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city. 
b.  Bidders' list. The purchasing agent shall also solicit sealed bids from responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders' list. 
(2)  Bidder's security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bidder's security shall be required. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security upon execution of the contract or upon the readvertisement of bids; provided however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the bidder first awarded the contract shall forfeit only the portion of his security which is equal to the difference between his bid and the bid of the next lowest responsible bidder. If the next lowest bidder is awarded the contract and he fails or refuses to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award, he shall forfeit his entire bid security. 
(3)  Bid opening procedures. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing agent, and shall be identified as "bids for project _______" on the outside of the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices or as stated in the request for proposals. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after the bid opening. 
(4)  Rejection of bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject any and all bids presented or may readvertise for new bids. 
(5)  Award of contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by majority vote of the city council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided herein. 
(6)  Award of contracts by purchasing agent. The purchasing agent is authorized to award Contracts to the lowest responsible bidder when the city council has budgeted funds for the items and the amount of the award is not more than the bid amount. 
(7)  Tie bids. If two or more bids received are for the same amount or unit price with quality, service, and delivery being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay for re-advertising for bids, the city council may accept the one it chooses, or accept the lowest bona fide offer by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening. 
(8)  Performance bonds. The purchasing agent shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering into a contract, in such amount as it shall be found reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the purchasing agent requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(9)  Purchasing from one source. Purchasing of goods or services which can be obtained from only one source may be made by the purchasing agent without advertising and after approval by the city council. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-227. - Purchases by city manager. 
    The city manager may authorize purchases of supplies, equipment, and/or services a value of less than $10,000.00 without complying with the above procedures as long as the provisions of section 2-225 are complied with. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-228. - Finance committee; creation, duties, etc. 
(a)  The finance committee shall consist of the city manager, who shall be the chairperson; the mayor of the city; and one councilmember appointed by the mayor and council to serve from January 1 to December 31 of each year. 
(b)  Two members of the finance committee shall constitute a quorum to act upon matters authorized within this section; provided, however, that one of the two members shall be the city manager. 
(c)  The finance committee may authorize purchases of supplies, equipment, and/or services of a value of $29,999.00 or less without complying with the provisions stated in section 2-226 or 2-224, but only if the provisions of section 2-225 are complied with. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-229. - Inspections and testing of materials and services. 
    The purchasing agent may inspect supplies and equipment delivered and determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing agent shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries, which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-230. - Surplus supplies and equipment. 
    All departments shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such forms as he shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any other department or which have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange the same for or trade the same in for new supplies and equipment. If the estimated value of the supplies and/or equipment is greater than $500.00, then the mayor and council shall approve the declaration of the items to be surplus and a public auction or request for bids shall be held and publicly advertised. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to transfer between city departments any usable surplus supplies and/or equipment regardless of value. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-231. - Splitting orders to avoid competitive bidding prohibited. 
    It shall be a violation of this division to split or separate into smaller orders the purchase of supplies, equipment or services for the purpose of evading the competitive bidding provisions of this division. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-232. - Equipment leasing agreements. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Leasing of nonpurchasable equipment means equipment which is available through lease only plans. 
    Leasing purchasable equipment means equipment which can be acquired through lease with option to purchase type plans. 
(b)  Equipment leasing. Leasing of purchasable or nonpurchasable equipment shall be in accordance with sections 2-224 and 2-226. Bidding may be dispensed with only as stated in section 2-224. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-233. - Maintenance agreements. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Maintenance agreements means that which guarantees to maintain equipment in good operating condition as subject to terms and conditions agreeable to both the company and the city. 
(b)  Maintenance agreements may be executed, renewed or terminated before agreement expiration by the purchasing agent with approval of the department head responsible for the equipment. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-234. - Cooperative purchasing agreements with county and other agencies. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the voluntary participation by the city in any voluntary cooperative purchasing agreements or programs (such as the state's statewide contract program) entered into between the city and the state, county, or other municipalities, and the purchasing agent is empowered and authorized to act under the provisions of the ordinance to procure for the city supplies and equipment in conjunction with such voluntary cooperative purchasing agreements or programs as may be entered into by the city. All formal contract and bidding procedures to be followed in such cases shall be those specifically enumerated in the voluntary cooperative purchasing agreement or program. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-01, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-235. - City of Dallas policy for competitive negotiation qualifications-based selection for projects using federal aid highway program (FAHP) funding. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsections (2) and (3) below, the city shall use the competitive negotiation method for the procurement of engineering and design related services when FAHP funds are involved in the contract (as specified in 23 USC 112(b)(2)(A)). The solicitation, evaluation, ranking, selection, and negotiation shall comply with the qualifications-based selection procurement procedures for architectural and engineering services codified under 40 USC 1101-1104, commonly referred to as the Brooks Act. 
In accordance with the requirements of the Brooks Act, the following procedures shall apply to the competitive negotiation procurement method: 
1.  Solicitation. The solicitation process shall be by public announcement, public advertisement, or any other public forum or method that assures qualified in-state and out-of-state consultants are given a fair opportunity to be considered for award of the contract. Procurement procedures may involve a single step process with issuance of a request for proposal (RFP) to all interested consultants or a multiphase process with issuance of a request for statements or letters of interest or qualifications (RFQ) whereby responding consultants are ranked based on qualifications and request for proposals are then provided to three or more of the most highly qualified consultants. Minimum qualifications of consultants to perform services under general work categories or areas of expertise may also be assessed through a prequalification process whereby statements of qualifications are submitted on an annual basis. Regardless of any process utilized for prequalification of consultants or for an initial assessment of a consultant's qualifications under an RFQ, a RFP specific to the project, task, or service is required for evaluation of a consultant's specific technical approach and qualifications. 
2.  Request for proposal (RFP). The RFP shall provide all information and requirements necessary for interested consultants to provide a response to the RFP and compete for the solicited services. The RFP shall: 
(a)  Provide a clear, accurate, and detailed description of the scope of work, technical requirements, and qualifications of consultants necessary for the services to be rendered. The scope of work should detail the purpose and description of the project, services to be performed, deliverables to be provided, estimated schedule for performance of the work, and applicable standards, specifications, and policies; 
(b)  Identify the requirements for any discussions that may be conducted with three or more of the most highly qualified consultants following submission and evaluation of proposals; 
(c)  Identify evaluation factors including their relative weight of importance in accordance with subparagraph (a)(1)(iii) of this section; 
(d)  Specify the contract type and method(s) of payment to be utilized in accordance with  172.9; 
(e)  Identify any special provisions or contract requirements associated with the solicited services; 
(f)  Require that submission of any requested cost proposals or elements of cost be in a concealed format and separate from technical/qualifications proposals as these shall not be considered in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase; and 
(g)  Provide a schedule of key dates for the procurement process and establish a submittal deadline for responses to the RFP which provides sufficient time for interested consultants to receive notice, prepare, and submit a proposal, which except in unusual circumstances shall be not less than 14 days from the date of issuance of the RFP. 
3.  Evaluation factors. 
(a)  Criteria used for evaluation, ranking, and selection of consultants to perform engineering and design related services must assess the demonstrated competence and qualifications for the type of professional services solicited. These qualifications-based factors may include, but are not limited to, technical approach (e.g., project understanding, innovative concepts or alternatives, quality control procedures), work experience, specialized expertise, professional licensure, staff capabilities, workload capacity, and past performance. 
(b)  Price shall not be used as a factor in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase. All price or cost related items which include, but are not limited to, cost proposals, direct salaries/wage rates, indirect cost rates, and other direct costs are prohibited from being used as evaluation criteria. 
(c)  In-state or local preference shall not be used as a factor in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase. State licensing laws are not preempted by this provision and professional licensure within a jurisdiction may be established as a requirement which attests to the minimum qualifications and competence of a consultant to perform the solicited services. 
(d)  The following non-qualifications based evaluation criteria are permitted under the specified conditions and provided the combined total of these criteria do not exceed a nominal value of ten percent of the total evaluation criteria to maintain the integrity of a qualifications-based selection: 
i.  A local presence may be used as a nominal evaluation factor where appropriate. This criterion shall not be based on political or jurisdictional boundaries and may be applied on a project-by-project basis for contracts where a need has been established for a consultant to provide a local presence, a local presence will add value to the quality and efficiency of the project, and application of this criteria leaves an appropriate number of qualified consultants, given the nature and size of the project. If a consultant outside of the locality area indicates as part of a proposal that it will satisfy the criteria in some manner, such as establishing a local project office, that commitment shall be considered to have satisfied the local presence criteria. 
ii.  The participation of qualified and certified disadvantaged business enterprise (DBE) sub-consultants may be used as a nominal evaluation criterion where appropriate in accordance with 49 CFR part 26 and the city's FHWA-approved DBE program. 
4.  Evaluation, ranking, and selection. 
(a)  Consultant proposals shall be evaluated by the city based on the criteria established and published within the public solicitation. 
(b)  While the contract will be with the prime consultant, proposal evaluations shall consider the qualifications of the prime consultant and any sub-consultants identified within the proposal with respect to the scope of work and established criteria. 
(c)  Following submission and evaluation of proposals, the city shall conduct interviews or other types of discussions determining three of the most highly qualified consultants to clarify the technical approach, qualifications, and capabilities provided in response to the RFP. Discussion requirements shall be specified within the RFP and should be based on the size and complexity of the project as defined in city written policies and procedures (as specified in  172.5(c)). Discussions may be written, by telephone, video conference, or by oral presentation/interview. Discussions following proposal submission are not required provided proposals contain sufficient information for evaluation of technical approach and qualifications to perform the specific project, task, or service with respect to established criteria. 
(d)  From the proposal evaluation and any subsequent discussions which have been conducted, the city shall rank, in order of preference, at least three consultants determined most highly qualified to perform the solicited services based on the established and published criteria. 
(e)  Notification must be provided to responding consultants of the final ranking of the three most highly qualified consultants. 
(f)  The city shall retain acceptable documentation of the solicitation, proposal, evaluation, and selection of the consultant in accordance with the provisions of 49 CFR 18.42. 
5.  Negotiation. 
(a)  Independent estimate. Prior to receipt or review of the most highly qualified consultant's cost proposal, the city shall prepare a detailed independent estimate with an appropriate breakdown of the work or labor hours, types or classifications of labor required, other direct costs, and consultant's fixed fee for the defined scope of work. The independent estimate shall serve as the basis for negotiation and ensuring the consultant services are obtained at a fair and reasonable cost. 
(b)  Elements of contract costs (e.g., indirect cost rates, direct salary or wage rates, fixed fees, and other direct costs) shall be established separately in accordance with  172.11. 
(c)  If concealed cost proposals were submitted in conjunction with technical/qualifications proposals, only the cost proposal of the consultant with which negotiations are initiated may be considered. Concealed cost proposals of consultants with which negotiations are not initiated should be returned to the respective consultant due to the confidential nature of this data (as specified in 23 USC 112(b)(2)(E)). 
(d)  The city shall retain documentation of negotiation activities and resources used in the analysis of costs to establish elements of the contract in accordance with the provisions of 49 CFR 18.42. This documentation shall include the consultant cost certification and documentation supporting the acceptance of the indirect cost rate to be applied to the contract (as specified in  172.11(c)). 
(2)  Small purchases. The small purchase method involves procurement of engineering and design related services where an adequate number of qualified sources are reviewed and the total contract costs do not exceed an established simplified acquisition threshold. The city may use the state's small purchase procedures which reflect applicable state laws and regulations for the procurement of engineering and design related services provided the total contract costs do not exceed the federal simplified acquisition threshold (as specified in 48 CFR 2.101). When a lower threshold for use of small purchase procedures is established in state law, regulation, or policy, the lower threshold shall apply to the use of FAHP funds. The following additional requirements shall apply to the small purchase procurement method: 
1.  The scope of work, project phases, and contract requirements shall not be broken down into smaller components merely to permit the use of small purchase procedures. 
2.  A minimum of three consultants are required to satisfy the adequate number of qualified sources reviewed. 
3.  Contract costs may be negotiated in accordance with state small purchase procedures; however, the allowability of costs shall be determined in accordance with the federal cost principles. 
4.  The full amount of any contract modification or amendment that would cause the total contract amount to exceed the established simplified acquisition threshold would be ineligible for federal aid funding. The FHWA may withdraw all federal aid from a contract if it is modified or amended above the applicable established simplified acquisition threshold. 
(3)  Noncompetitive. The noncompetitive method involves procurement of engineering and design related services when it is not feasible to award the contract using competitive negotiation or small purchase procurement methods. The following requirements shall apply to the noncompetitive procurement method: 
1.  The city may use their own noncompetitive procedures which reflect applicable state and local laws and regulations and conform to applicable federal requirements. 
2.  The city shall establish a process to determine when noncompetitive procedures will be used and shall submit justification to, and receive approval from, the FHWA before using this form of contracting. 
3.  Circumstances under which a contract may be awarded by noncompetitive procedures are limited to the following: 
a.  The service is available only from a single source; 
b.  There is an emergency which will not permit the time necessary to conduct competitive negotiations; or 
c.  After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined to be inadequate. 
4.  Contract costs may be negotiated in accordance with the city noncompetitive procedures; however, the allow ability of costs shall be determined in accordance with the federal cost principles. 
(4)  Additional procurement requirements. 
1.  Common grant rule. 
i.  The city must comply with procurement requirements established in state and local laws, regulations, policies, and procedures which are not addressed by or in conflict with applicable federal laws and regulations (as specified in 49 CFR 18.36). 
ii.  When state and local procurement laws, regulations, policies, or procedures are in conflict with applicable federal laws and regulations, the city must comply with federal requirements to be eligible for federal aid reimbursement of the associated costs of the services incurred following FHWA authorization (as specified in 49 CFR 18.4). 
2.  Disadvantaged business enterprise (DBE) program. 
i.  The city shall give consideration to DBE consultants in the procurement of engineering and design related service contracts subject to 23 USC 112(b)(2) in accordance with 49 CFR part 26. When DBE program participation goals cannot be met through race-neutral measures, additional DBE participation on engineering and design related services contracts may be achieved in accordance with the city's FHWA approved DBE program through either: 
a.  Use of an evaluation criterion in the qualifications-based selection of consultants (as specified in  172.7(a)(1)(iii)(D)); or 
b.  Establishment of a contract participation goal. 
ii.  The use of quotas or exclusive set-asides for DBE consultants is prohibited (as specified in 49 CFR 26.43). 
3.  Suspension and debarment. The city must verify suspension and debarment actions and eligibility status of consultants and sub-consultants prior to entering into an agreement or contract in accordance with 49 CFR 18.35 and 2 CFR part 180. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-07 , 8-29-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2016-07 , adopted August 29, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as  2-237. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as  2-235. 
Secs. 2-236-2-261. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-262. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means all departments, agencies, committees, commissions or other entities under the direct authority of the city. 
    Record series means documents or records having similar physical characteristics or relating to a similar function or activity that are filed in a unified arrangement. 
    Records means all records created or received in the performance of a public duty or paid for by public funds by a mayor and council, are deemed to be public property and shall constitute a record of public acts, as defined in O.C.G.A.  50-18-99(c). 
    Retention schedule means a set of disposition instructions prescribing how long, where, and in what form a record series must be kept. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-183; Ord. No. 02-04, 7-1-2002) 
Sec. 2-263. - Purpose. 
    It is declared that the purpose of this division is to prevent the proliferation of records in original form maintained as public records, except to the extent the records may be necessary for permanent preservation as provided by state and federal laws. Further, it is the purpose of this division to establish and maintain an active and continuing program for the economical and efficient management of public records, and to provide for maximum utilization of city resources in office space and filing equipment through approved maintenance and retention schedules. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-181; Ord. No. 02-04, 7-1-2002) 
Sec. 2-264. - State records act adopted by reference. 
    The mayor and council of the city hereby adopt the "Georgia Records Act," O.C.G.A.  50-18-99 et seq. and the rules and regulations, as amended from time to time, established pursuant to said act as a basis for establishing a records management program. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-182; Ord. No. 02-04, 7-1-2002) 
Sec. 2-265. - City clerk designated as records management officer. 
    The city clerk is responsible for the administration of the records management program and is hereby designated as the record management officer for the city. The city clerk will act for and on behalf of the city council in directing and coordinating all records management manners. The duties of the city clerk shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Establish and maintain an active and continuing program for the economical and effective management of public records; 
(2)  Assist each department in the implementation of a plan for records management; 
(3)  Conduct training in records management for designees of departments as needed; 
(4)  Coordinate records management matters with the state records committee and the state department of archives and history; 
(5)  Preserve records of continuing value; 
(6)  Coordinate removal of records not in common and current use from office space to a designated records holding facility and remove other records upon the expiration of their day-to-day utility in the office in accordance with approved disposition standards; 
(7)  Systematically eliminate all other records in accordance with approved disposition standards and retention schedules. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-184; Ord. No. 02-04, 7-1-2002) 
Sec. 2-266. - Department record management duties. 
    It shall be the duty of each department to: 
(1)  Cause to be made and preserved records required by local, state and federal laws, statues, and policies and also records containing adequate and proper documentation of the organization, function, policies, decisions, procedures and essential transactions of the department and designed to furnish the information necessary to protect the legal and financial rights of the city and of persons directly affected by the activities of the department; 
(2)  Cooperate fully with the city clerk in complying with this division; 
(3)  Establish and maintain an active and continuing program for the economical and efficient management of records and assist the city in the conduct of records management surveys and inventories; 
(4)  Implement records management procedures and policies issued by the city; 
(5)  Establish necessary safeguards against removal or loss of records and such further safeguards as may be required by rules or policies of the city. The safeguards shall include notification to all officials and employees of the agency that no records in the custody of same are to be alienated or destroyed except with this division; and 
(6)  Designate a department records manager who shall maintain and operate a records management program in accordance with directives of the city clerk and this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-185; Ord. No. 02-04, 7-1-2002) 
Sec. 2-267. - Retention schedules. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference hereto, the state department of archives and history's "Retention Schedules for Local Government Records," as issued April 2001, as the city's official schedule for the retention and disposition of public records. These schedules will be updated periodically by the state department of archives and history and all updates shall become a part of this division without the need for future amendments. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-186; Ord. No. 02-04, 7-1-2002) 
Sec. 2-268. - Disposition of records. 
(a)  Centralized records centers or local holding areas shall be established and secured to safeguard records. All records not required for day-to-day operations shall be transferred to the record centers or holding areas until destroyed in accordance with the approved records retention schedules and destruction policies and procedures. 
(b)  An archival depository will be selected to store those records determined to have permanent historical value. 
(c)  No record shall be altered, alienated, or destroyed except in accordance with this division. 
(d)  No record shall be placed in the custody of private individuals or institutions or semiprivate organizations except for disposal and destruction purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-187; Ord. No. 02-04, 7-1-2002) 
Sec. 2-269. - Destruction of records. 
(a)  Any department, which has records that are aged beyond the approved retention schedule, may apply to the city clerk to destroy said records. Any application for destruction shall be approved by the city clerk who shall complete and execute a certificate of records destruction (copy attached) for each record or record series. 
(b)  No record shall be destroyed until certified by the city clerk and the department record officer upon the certificate stated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-188; Ord. No. 02-04, 7-1-2002) 
Sec. 2-270. - Penalty and personal liability. 
(a)  The alienation, alteration, theft or destruction of records by any person or persons in a manner not authorized by an applicable retention schedule shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as allowed under the Charter of the city and laws of the state. 
(b)  No custodian of any public record, or his employees, agent or designee, acting in substantial compliance with this division shall be held personally liable or guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-189; Ord. No. 02-04, 7-1-2002) 
Sec. 2-271. - Conflict and repeal. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith and hereby expressly repealed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-194; Ord. No. 02-04, 7-1-2002) 
Secs. 2-272-2-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-291. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on July 1 and shall end on June 30 each year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-501) 
Sec. 2-292. - Proposed budget. 
(a)  The various department heads shall, on or before April 15 of each year, submit to the city manager a budget request for their respective departments for the following fiscal year. 
(b)  On or before May 15 of each year, the city manager shall submit to the mayor and council a proposed operating budget for the next fiscal year, showing separately for the general funds, each utility, and each other fund for the following: 
(1)  The revenue and expenditure during the preceding fiscal year; 
(2)  Appropriations and estimated revenue and recommended expenditures for the next fiscal year; 
(3)  A comparative statement of the assets, liabilities, reserves and surplus at the end of the current fiscal year; and 
(4)  Such other information and data as may be considered necessary by the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-502) 
Sec. 2-293. - Action on budget. 
    Before the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year, the mayor and council shall adopt a budget ordinance, based on the city manager's proposed budget, with such modifications, as the mayor and council consider necessary or desirable. Amounts need not be in more detail than a lump sum for each department, office, and agency unless otherwise directed by the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall not make any appropriations in excess of estimated revenue, except to provide for an actual emergency threatening the health, property, or lives, safety or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. If the mayor and council fail to adopt a budget ordinance before the beginning of the new fiscal year, the appropriations for the last fiscal year shall continue as the appropriations for the new fiscal year until a budget ordinance can be adopted. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-503) 
Sec. 2-294. - Capital improvements budget. 
    On or before May 15 of each year, the city manager shall submit to the mayor and council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing such improvements. The mayor and council shall accept with or without amendments or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The mayor and council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such projects are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening the lives, health or property of inhabitants, and passed by at least five members of the mayor and council. Such capital improvements budget may be revised and extended each year with regard to the capital improvements still pending or in the process of construction or acquisition. Before the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year, the mayor and council shall adopt an appropriations ordinance based on the proposed capital improvements budget, with such modifications as the mayor and council consider necessary or desirable. No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided the city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a majority vote of the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-504) 
Sec. 2-295. - Annual audit. 
    The mayor and council shall employ a certified public accountant to make an annual audit of all financial books and records of the city. The accountant shall file his report with the mayor and council and shall prepare a summary of the report, which shall be furnished or made available to the mayor and every councilmember. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-505) 
Sec. 2-296. - Financial statement. 
    The mayor and council shall cause to be published within six months after the close of each fiscal year, in accordance with state law, a general balance sheet and statement of revenues and expenditures showing all municipal accounts as of the close of such preceding fiscal year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-506) 
Sec. 2-297. - Compliance with state fiscal requirements. 
    The mayor, council, city manager, city clerk and city auditor shall ensure that the city is in compliance with all state and federal financial accounting requirements to the best of their knowledge. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-507) 
Secs. 2-298-2-327. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF ETHICS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A.  21-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-328. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board means any member of any board appointed or elected by the mayor and council of the city. 
    City means the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined, means the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, assistant city managers, city clerk, deputy city clerks, whether such person is salaried, hired or elected, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city Charter, as it may be amended from time to time. The term "city official," unless otherwise expressly defined, includes individuals appointed by the mayor and city council to all city commissioners, committees, boards, task forces, or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this article by the city council. 
    Commission means any member of any commission appointed or elected by the mayor and council of the city. 
    Council means the city council. 
    Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council and other city board or commission, as well as the discussions of deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
    Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
    Employee means any person who is a fulltime or parttime employee of the city. 
    Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
    Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of any city official or employee. 
    Incidental interest means an interest of a city official or employee in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
    Mayor means the mayor of the city. 
    Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, or employee, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a city official or employee in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions incidental to the extent that the councilmember would be in common with the general public. 
    Substantial interest. 
(1)  The term "substantial interest" means a known interest of a city official or employee, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity: 
a.  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
b.  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions, or professional fees or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
c.  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
d.  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(2)  The term "substantial interest," of a city official or employee in real property, means an interest in real property, which is an equitable or legal ownership, with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.4, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-329. - Findings. 
(a)  The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees conduct themselves in the posts to which they are elected or appointed. 
(b)  All government, of right, originates with the people, is founded upon their will only, and is instituted solely for the good of the whole. Public officers are the trustees and servants of the people and are at all times amenable to them (Ga. Const. art. I,  II,  I). 
(c)  The people of this state have the inherent right of regulating their internal government. Government is instituted for the protection, security, and benefit of the people; and at all times they have the right to alter or reform the same whenever the public good may require it (Ga. Const. art. I,  II,  II). 
(d)  The people have a right to expect that every public official and employee of the city will conduct himself in a manner that will end to preserve the public confidence in and respect for the government he represents. 
(e)  Such confidence and respect can be best promoted if every public official and employee of the city, whether paid or unpaid, and whether elected or appointed, will uniformly: 
(1)  Treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness, and equality under the law; and 
(2)  Avoid conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.1, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-330. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the government structure; that public office and employment by the city not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all city officials and employees of the city, are hereby adopted. 
(b)  This article has the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials and city employees; 
(2)  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; 
(3)  To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters that affect the city; and 
(4)  To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.2, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-331. - Scope of persons covered. 
    The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all members of the city council, city employees, planning commission, board of appeals, historic preservation commission, all advisory commissions, and committee members. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.3, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-332. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  No city official or employee shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any other purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(b)  No city official or employee shall participate in or vote on in any matter before the council, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(c)  No city official or employee shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or any board or commission. 
(d)  No city official or employee shall solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or group: 
(1)  Which has, or is seeking to obtain, contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city; 
(2)  Which, in exchange for the thing of value, seeks to have a city official or employee exercise a matter of discretion in his favor; 
(3)  Which, in exchange for the thing of value, seeks to have interest which may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duty of the city official or employee. 
This subsection shall not apply to campaign contributions which shall be reported as required by the laws of the state. 
(e)  No city official or employee shall enter into any contract with the city except as specifically authorized by state statutes. Any councilmember or member of a board or commission or employee who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain of any city official or employee. 
(g)  All public property owned by the city shall be disposed of in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(h)  No city official or employee shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a city official or employee, if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair judgment or performances of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official or employee accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official or employee might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official or employee shall disclose the fact to the board or commission on which he serves or to his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official or employee shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official or employee shall not use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he direct employees to use such property for the purposes. 
(m)  Meetings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, title 50, chapter 14, as amended, and title 36, chapter 80, section 1, as amended, as it applies to municipalities. 
(n)  A city councilmember or employee shall not use his superior position to request or require a city employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of his family, business, social club, church, or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods or services to be sued for personal, or political purposes; 
(3)  Work for him personally without offering just compensation; or 
(4)  Utilize city property, equipment, or other employees for personal benefit. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.5, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-333. - Conflict of interest. 
    A city official or employee may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity, or property in which the official or employee has substantial interest; in addition, a city official or employee who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city of the entity. Where the interest of a city official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official or employee may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.6, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-334. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.7, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-335. - Disciplinary action. 
(a)  Any persons violating any provisions of this policy are subject to: 
(1)  Written and oral reprimand by majority vote of the mayor and council of the city; or 
(2)  Request for resignation by majority vote of the mayor and council of the city. 
(b)  Each council, board, commission, or committee shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations to enforce such disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.9, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-336. - Gifts; gratuities; special privileges. 
(a)  City officials or employees shall not accept any gifts, loans, rewards, favors, or services that may reasonably tend to improperly influence them in the discharge of their official duties. This limitation is not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally nor to prohibit employees from accepting loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important that employees guard against relationships which might be construed as or give the appearance of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. 
(b)  City officials or employees shall not use or attempt to use their position to secure an economic benefit or advantage, special privileges or exemptions for themselves or others including the use of knowledge obtained by or through their employment or by virtue of their position with the city. 
(c)  City officials or employees shall not accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity which they may reasonably expect would require or induce them to disclose confidential information acquired by them by reason of their official position. 
(d)  City officials or employees shall not accept payment from outside sources for professional services (i.e., teaching, instructing, speaking engagements, consulting, honorariums) when such activities are done on city time or when such services pertain to the purchase or sale of city property. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.10, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-337. - Outside employment of fulltime employees. 
(a)  City employment shall be considered to be the primary employment of all fulltime employees. No fulltime employee may engage in outside employment which will interfere with the interest of city service. Standards by which some employment is not acceptable include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Illegal activity; 
(2)  Employment that, by virtue of association, will adversely reflect upon the reputation of the city; 
(3)  High hazard or fatiguing work which might detract from or reduce the employee's ability to perform any activity within the scope of the employee's work or duties required by the city. 
(b)  Prior to beginning any regularly scheduled outside employment, employees will obtain specific written approval from their department director, or the mayor and council of the city on request forms which indicate the name of the outside employer, the nature of the work, hours of work, address and telephone number where the employee can be reached. Such information will become a part of the employee's official personnel record. Employees are required to obtain approval from their department director for any change in a previously approved outside employment request. 
(c)  Any employee accepting or engaging in outside employment under the terms of this rule shall make arrangements with the outside employer to be available immediately to any emergency call of duty by the city whenever the employee's department director or the mayor and council shall determine that the employee's services are necessary. 
(d)  Employees sustaining injuries while engaged in outside employment may be ineligible to receive benefits under the city's worker's compensation program. If an employee sustains an injury while engaged in outside employment, but is performing duties within the scope of his city responsibilities (i.e., a police arrest), he may be eligible for partial city worker's compensation benefits. 
(e)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section will result in disciplinary action as set forth in section 2-335. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.11, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-338. - Administration. 
(a)  Ethics committee. The ethics committee shall consist of three persons, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the council, and the third appointed by the two above named, subject to approval by a majority vote of the mayor and city council. The third member of the ethics committee shall be a member in good standing of the state bar. All members shall be residents of the city, and shall serve a two-year term. All vacancies of this ethics committee shall be filled by majority vote of the mayor and council. 
(b)  Receipt of complaints. 
(1)  All complaints against city officials or employees shall be filed with the ethics committee. The ethics committee may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a written complaint on such form as may be prescribed by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics committee shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded, or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the mayor and council. The ethics committee shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. All files shall be maintained by the city clerk. 
(3)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the ethics committee shall be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded, or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such a complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have as prescribed by law against the respondent government servant. 
(4)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings where provided for in the rules. 
(5)  The mayor and council shall adopt all forms for formal complaints, subpoenas, notices, applications for reinstatement and any other written instruments necessary or desirable under these rules. 
(6)  The ethics committee shall report to the mayor and council all complaints which require any disciplinary action. The mayor and council shall set a time, date and place for any required hearing on any disciplinary action with not less than 15 days prior written notice of any such hearing to any affected city official or employee, board member, or committee member. 
(7)  The mayor and council shall render a written final decision on any disciplinary action taken by the mayor and council pursuant to this article within ten days from the date of any hearing by the mayor and council. Any such final decision shall also be provided to any affected city official, employee, board member or committee member within ten days from the date of any hearing by the mayor and council on any disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.12, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-339. - Additional regulations. 
    This chapter shall be cumulative to any other ordinance, resolution or act now existing of this Code of Ordinances. This article shall also revoke and repeal any other ordinances which are contrary to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.13, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-340. - Right to appeal. 
    Any final decision by the mayor and city council pursuant to any disciplinary action, shall be reviewable by written appeal within 30 days of the date of any such final decision to the superior court of the county. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry as to whether there was any evidence before the mayor and council which supported the decision of the mayor and council; provided, however, no action of the mayor and council in refusing or failing to take disciplinary action pursuant to this article shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.14, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-341. - Proprietorship of creations. 
    All plans, designs, reports, specifications, drawings, devices, inventions, and other items produced or created by any employee during working hours or through the use of city facilities or equipment or produced or created at the request of the city shall be and become the sole property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.15, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 2-342. - Confidential information. 
    City officials or employees shall not disclose confidential information gained by reason of their official position or employment, nor shall they otherwise use such information for their personal gain or benefit. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05,  3-601.16, 4-7-2008) 
Secs. 2-343-2-372. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - IDENTITY THEFT PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-373. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
    Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
    Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
    Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
    Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
    Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
    Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
    Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
    Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09,  4-203, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 2-374. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09,  4-202, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 2-375. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include utilities, water, sewer, garbage, etc. 
(c)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: the city is aware of identity theft which has occurred in other places and to other businesses located in the county. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a low to moderate risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09,  4-204, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 2-376. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall fill out a written application which shall include a photograph of the applicant and provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer as follows: 
(1)  A valid government-issued identification card; 
(2)  Valid driver's license; 
(3)  Passport; 
(4)  School-issued identification card. 
Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and/or other filing system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number. 
(c)  Notifications from consumer reporting agencies. The city does not request, receive, obtain or maintain information about its utility customers from any consumer reporting agency. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09,  4-205, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 2-377. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such passwords shall be at least five characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and/or symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09,  4-206, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 2-378. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09,  4-207, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 2-379. - Sources and types of red flags. 
    All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts. Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification. Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's death master file. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail-drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Suspicious or unusual activity. Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment, but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notification of possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09,  4-208, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 2-380. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the clerk of the city. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city attorney of the city, who may, in his discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. If the city attorney, in his discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city attorney: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 48 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city attorney, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city attorney, in his discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city attorney: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09,  4-209, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 2-381. - Updating the program. 
    The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09,  4-210, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 2-382. - Program administration. 
(a)  The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The city clerk will report to the city manager at least annually on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. 
(b)  The city clerk shall exercise his discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09,  4-211, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 2-383. - Outside service providers. 
    In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the city clerk shall exercise his discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09,  4-212, 4-6-2009) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2015-03, adopted Nov. 2, 2015, deleted the former Ch. 4,  4-1-4-158, and enacted a new Ch. 4 as set out herein. The former Ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Comp. of Ords. 2005,  5-1, 5-3-5-17, 5-71-5-76, 5-91-5-98, 5-110-5-112; Ord. No. 06-26, adopted July 10, 2006; Ord. No. OA-2011-03, adopted June 6, 2011; Ord. No. OA-2013-07, adopted Nov. 25, 2013; Ord. No. OA-2014-12, adopted Sept. 8, 2014. 
State Law reference- Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. III,  IX,  VI(e); Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A.  3-1-1 et seq.; furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age, use of false identification, O.C.G.A.  3-3-23; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A.  16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A.  36-32-10; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A.  40-6-391; local regulation of alcoholic beverage manufacture, distribution, and sales, O.C.G.A.  3-4-40 et seq.; signs advertising alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A.  3-4-3. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND LICENSING 

Sec. 4-1. - General policies and purpose. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold, manufactured, distributed and imported in the City of Dallas, Georgia only after the issuance of a license for such sale by the City of Dallas, Georgia and only in the manner permitted by said license, unless exempted by the laws of the State of Georgia. Alcoholic beverages may be sold, manufactured, distributed and imported in the City of Dallas, Georgia only by a licensee who complies with the rules and regulations of this ordinance, and with the licensing, regulatory and revenue requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the sale of alcoholic beverages in the City of Dallas, Georgia is a privilege and not a right, and the issuance of a license hereunder shall not create any property rights in the licensee. 
(c)  The City of Dallas, Georgia council designates the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal for the purpose of administering this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal may be delegated by the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal to other City of Dallas, Georgia personnel. The City of Dallas, Georgia marshal shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions, or any other provision of this chapter, unless that authority is provided to another administrative official within a specific article. Interpretations of the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal or other administrative official may be appealed under the provisions of section 4-12. The City of Dallas, Georgia marshal shall have administrative authority of this Code. 
(d)  Each licensee of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall display the license prominently at all times at the premises for which the license is issued. 
(e)  The holder of every alcoholic beverage license hereunder shall have available in his place of business at all times a copy of this chapter and shall be responsible for compliance herewith by all persons on the premises. 
(f)  Any premises outlets which cannot be determined as one identifiable place of business shall require additional licenses regardless of such establishments having the same tradename, ownership, or management. 
(g)  The purposes of this chapter include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Compliance with the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons. 
(3)  Protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing alcohol and shall include but shall not be limited to, malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits. 
    Alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer who has been licensed by the City of Dallas, Georgia to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink or the unopened package. 
    Art shop means a retail business devoted exclusively to providing art education that is limited to instruction in painting, sculpture and similar crafts. An art shop may also sell and display portraits, paintings, sculptures, art supplies and similar art work and crafts. An art shop shall not allow activities that would cause the business to be an "adult entertainment establishment" as defined in chapter 44 of the City of Dallas, Georgia Code of Ordinances. 
    Authorized catered event means an event at a location not otherwise licensed for consumption of alcoholic beverages by the drink at which alcoholic beverages are furnished, for consideration, and sold, dispensed or provided free of charge to persons present at the event, by the drink, pursuant to a permit obtained under this section. 
    Business means any person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity which exerts substantial efforts within the City of Dallas, Georgia, engages in, causes to be engaged in, and/or represents or holds out to the public to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain or benefit, either directly or indirectly. 
    Brewery means a place where malt beverages are manufactured or brewed. 
    Brewpub means any restaurant in which malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. Barrels of malt beverage sold to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution shall not be used when determining the total annual gross food and beverages sales. 
    BYOB or brown bagging means possession of an open glass bottle, can, or other container containing an alcoholic beverage or consumption of an alcoholic beverage on premises: 
(1)  For which a City of Dallas, Georgia business/occupation tax certificate has been issued; and 
(2)  Which occurs at a location different from where said alcoholic beverage was purchased. 
    Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order: united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies, place where persons regularly assemble in a facility for worship, congregation, or organization for religious purposes. 
    College Campus means a collection of two or more buildings used for educational purposes, on either one parcel or contiguous parcels that are under the same ownership by either a public or private institution of higher learning. 
    Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume. 
    Establishment means any physical location or section thereof for the operation of a business. 
    Food caterer means any person who holds a valid business license and for consideration, prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
    Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentations with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to "brandy." 
    Georgia Farm Winery means a farm winery which is licensed by the state to manufacture wine in Georgia. 
    Growler means a reusable, resealable, and professionally sanitized glass jug used to transport malt beverages or wine for off-premises consumption that is not to exceed 64 ounces and is filled with malt beverages or wine from a keg by a licensee, or an employee of a licensee, with a malt beverage and/or wine license for consumption off premises issued by the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Hard cider means an alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the juice of apples, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to flavored or carbonated cider. For purposes of this chapter, hard cider shall be deemed a malt beverage. 
    Importer means any person who imports an alcoholic beverage into this state from a foreign country and sells the alcoholic beverage to another importer, broker or wholesaler and who warehouses a stock of the alcoholic beverage. 
    Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any person licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the State of Georgia and who possesses a license by a local government in the State of Georgia authorizing such person to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink off licensed premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
    Licensee means any person who holds a license from the City of Dallas, Georgia to engage in the selling, manufacturing, distributing or importing at retail or wholesale, of any alcoholic beverages. 
    Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 40. 
    Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    Managing agent means an individual that is at least 21 years of age, is a U.S. citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residency, is a resident of the State of Georgia, has day-to-day managerial authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises including the sale of alcoholic beverages, and is employed full-time by the licensed business. 
    Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; provided, however, that a vintner that blends wine with distilled spirits to produce a fortified wine shall not be considered a manufacturer of distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
    Minor means any person less than 21 years of age. 
    Multi-use facility means a structure containing three or more retail or office establishments and one or more eating establishment, which has a court area for pedestrian use. 
    Non-profit, charitable and civic organization means a bona fide nonprofit civic organization which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of subsection (c), (d), or (e) of 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
    Nonprofit botanical garden or nature science center means a facility primarily used to develop and maintain animals or plant collections, including flowers, shrubs and trees, for public display, education, research, conservation and enjoyment, through, without limitation, horticultural gardens, public and private programs, exhibitions and special events, having not less than 75 acres of outdoor gardens or land preserved for conservation, containing a documented collection of living plants, shrubs and trees, having meeting event space with a capacity for not less than 100 people, that is owned by a corporation that is exempt from federal income taxes pursuant to section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended. 
    Open air caf means a premise located within the pedestrian court area and adjacent sidewalk of a multi-use facility where food is available for purchase during all hours of operation and where alcoholic beverages may be purchased from a restaurant contained within the multi-use facility for consumption within the open air caf. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, social club, joint venture, association, company, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnerships, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, the plural as well as the singular member, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
    Premises means one physically identifiable place of business operated by the same ownership and overall management consisting of one or more contiguous rooms with only one address registered as a single place of business with the local licensing authority and the state. "Premises" is further defined to include the following areas: 
(1)  In the case of hotels, motels or private clubs, the swimming pool which is owned by said hotel, motel or club. 
(2)  Outdoor areas or patios approved pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  In the case of a malt beverage and/or wine licensee where a golf course is located adjacent to and contiguous with a restaurant, the playing area of the golf course. 
(4)  In the case of a nonprofit botanical garden or nature science center the geographic grounds. 
(5)  In the case of an open air caf the pedestrian court area and sidewalk in front of the building in which the multi-use facility is contained. 
(6)  In the case of the Dallas Civic Center, the geographic grounds of the Dallas Civic Center. 
    Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
i.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
ii.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary as defined by state law. 
    Private function means any affair where attendance is by invitation only, where no business transactions are conducted during the private function and there is no cost to attend or to consume the food or alcohol either by donations or by any other means. 
    Residence means the act or fact of living or regularly staying at or in some place for the discharge of a duty or the enjoyment of a benefit or the place where one actually lives as distinguished from his domicile or place of temporary sojourn. 
    Resident means a person whose primary residence is within the territorial limits of the county. 
    Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, air conditioned, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests for every hour they are open. At least one meal per day shall be served at least five days a week, except that restaurants that open for business more than five days a week, shall be required to serve at least one meal per day each day that the restaurant is open, with the exception of holidays, vacation and periods of redecoration, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A restaurant shall provide at least 30 seats for customers. 
    School means an organized source of education or training whether public or private for the teaching of children in which the traditional subjects and learning processes associated with the Pre-K-12 grades of school are taught. 
    Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine can be given free of charge or for a fee. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. This shall include any person that transports or delivers alcoholic beverages from a manufacturer for sale at retail by the package. 
    Wine tasting means an event as defined in the rules and regulations of the department of revenue. 
    Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-3. - Qualifications for licensing. 
(a)  To qualify for an alcoholic beverage license, an applicant shall meet the following: 
(1)  Designate a managing agent that meets the defined qualifications in section 4-2. In the case of a non-profit private club, the managing agent may be an officer of the organization in lieu of a full-time employee if the individual is otherwise qualified. 
(2)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in Paulding County, Georgia a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of Paulding County, Georgia. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written, notarized consent of such agent with the City of Dallas, Georgia in such form as may be prescribed. 
(3)  Have a certificate of occupancy that has been issued by the City of Dallas, Georgia for the premises for which an alcoholic beverage license is sought. 
(b)  Where the application is made on behalf of a corporation, partnership, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership or sole proprietorship, the license shall be issued jointly to the organization and an individual that meets the qualifications of a managing agent. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-4. - The application process. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain an alcoholic beverage license in the City of Dallas, Georgia shall submit a written and signed application on forms provided by City of Dallas, Georgia and in connection therewith, shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits, bonds and other supporting data as required thereby. 
(b)  All applications for licenses to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be made in person by the applicant to the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal or designee and shall contain but not be restricted to the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name, age, address and length of residency of applicant. 
(2)  The name of the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other organization applying for the license. Said name shall include the legal name as well as the trade name of the business. 
(3)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person with an interest in the application has made application at any previous time for any alcoholic beverage license and the disposition of such application. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any person with an interest in the application has ever been convicted of a crime, other than for traffic violations. 
(5)  Whether a previous license issued to the applicant or any person with interest in the application has been revoked by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government and the reason therefor. 
(6)  The identity of any other person interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses or both of the proposed business. 
(7)  The physical address and detailed plans of such building and outside premises, and evidence of ownership of the building, or a document that evidences the right of the applicant to use the premises, including but not limited to a deed, lease, sublease, management agreement, concession agreement, shall be attached to the application. 
(8)  Every new application for a package license hereunder shall be accompanied by a drawing to scale, showing the nearest church, school or college or by the affidavit of a registered surveyor that the proposed location of the business complies with the distance requirements as specified in this chapter. Applications for renewal of licenses, or for premises that have been licensed in the preceding 12 months, are exempted from this subsection. 
(c)  Every managing agent, owner and interest holder listed in an application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be fingerprinted in a manner prescribed by the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(d)  The license fees as required in the schedule of fees for the City of Dallas, Georgia are due and payable upon the filing of the application. Any person who is doing business on or after the first day of January shall pay the full annual license fee without proration; provided, however, that if an application is filed after July 1st, the license fee shall be prorated monthly for the remainder of such calendar year. 
(e)  All new applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be accompanied either by lawful money of the U.S., credit card or by a certified check, cashier's check or money order, payable to the City of Dallas, Georgia for the proper amount of the license fee. If the application is denied or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, less a $150.00 administrative fee which shall be retained by the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(f)  The City of Dallas, Georgia license issued shall be valid for the calendar year indicated thereon and shall expire at midnight on the last day of the year. 
(g)  All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be filed with and approved by the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal provided the applicant meets all of the requirements and qualifications of this chapter. 
(h)  The City of Dallas, Georgia marshal may in the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal's discretion require a personal statement of any employee of any licensed establishment for licensing purposes. 
(i)  The written application for the license shall be a permanent record which the licensee must maintain current as required by this chapter. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-5. - Grounds for denial of application. 
(a)  The following shall be sufficient cause for the denial of an application: 
(1)  Failure of the applicant to meet the qualifications for licensing as set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  The making of any untrue or misleading statement in the application for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(3)  Failure to meet distance requirements as provided in this chapter. 
(4)  Where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(b)  When contrary to the public interest and welfare no license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be issued to or for: 
(1)  Any person by reason of such person's business experience, trade associations, personal associations, record of arrest, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, who is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately preceding the filing of application for such license. 
(4)  Any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of a misdemeanor, particularly, but not limited to, those involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or tax law violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(5)  A location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the City of Dallas, Georgia because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties or on the neighborhood. 
(6)  A location within an area where, in the judgment of the City of Dallas, Georgia, the number of alcoholic beverage licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
(7)  A location at which the operation of the proposed business would be in violation of the City of Dallas, Georgia's Zoning Code. 
(8)  A location at which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the City of Dallas, Georgia, the problems which have arisen from the operation of an alcoholic beverage license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location. 
(9)  Which the granting of such license would constitute a violation of state law or regulations. 
(10)  The operation of a distilled spirits package business licensed hereunder by any person already holding two such licenses. 
(11)  Any person who is as close kin as brothers or sisters, by blood or marriage, to one already holding two distilled spirits package licenses under this chapter. 
(12)  Any trustee or director of a private club, if disqualified under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-6. - Renewal of licenses. 
(a)  The City of Dallas, Georgia marshal may approve all applications for renewal of an existing license upon payment of the license fees for renewal of licenses, where no objections have been filed and the application clearly shows no change in the ownership, managing agent, location, or operation of the business. 
(b)  All licenses granted under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file application, with the requisite annual fee provided in the City of Dallas, Georgia schedule of fees, on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed by November 30 of each year; otherwise, investigative and administrative costs and penalties will be assessed. No renewal license shall be granted after January 15. After January 15, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(c)  Any person renewing any license issued under this article who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after the date set for such payment shall, in addition to such annual fee, pay a late payment penalty of ten percent, plus five percent for each additional month, or fraction thereof, during which failure continues. Such penalty shall not exceed 25 percent in the aggregate. 
(d)  If objections have been filed by the City of Dallas, Georgia due to previous violations of this chapter or if there have been any changes in the ownership, managing agent, location, or operation of the business, a new application must be submitted to the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-7. - Duty to remain current. 
(a)  It is the duty and responsibility of the licensee to notify the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal of any changes to the information contained in the original application. Any amendments to the original application shall be made in writing on forms provided by the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal and shall be under oath and verified as otherwise required of license applications. 
(b)  Failure to maintain a current application shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(c)  In the event the "managing agent" either ceases to be employed by or ceases to have day-to-day managerial oversight of alcoholic beverage sales, the licensee shall notify the City of Dallas, Georgia within five days of the change and must follow the requirements to transfer the license to a new "managing agent" as set forth in subsection 4-8(b). If the applicant does not meet the qualifications for "managing agent" as required by this chapter and the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal recommends denial, the applicant may have a hearing as set out in section 4-12. 
(d)  In the event the "registered agent" changes, the licensee shall notify the City of Dallas, Georgia within five days of the change and must submit written information on forms provided by the City of Dallas, Georgia. A fee as required in the City of Dallas, Georgia schedule of fees will be charged for the processing of a change in the "registered agent." 
(e)  No person shall have, own or enjoy any ownership, interest in, share in the profits from, or otherwise participate in the business of any alcoholic beverage licensee in the City of Dallas, Georgia unless a full description of such interest shall have been furnished to the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal at the time such interest arose. It shall be the duty of the licensee to report to the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal, within five days, any change in any interest in such licensee's business including but not limited to: 
(1)  Any division of the profits; 
(2)  Any division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever; 
(3)  Any change in the payment of rents or leases; 
(4)  Any change in the ownership of any lease or building or land used in such business; 
(5)  Any change in the ownership of any corporation that has any interest in such business or the change of management of such corporation. 
(f)  After receipt of such notice, the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal shall notify such person within a reasonable time of any objection to the ownership or interest set forth therein, based on the interest holder's ability to qualify as a licensee under this chapter. In the event such interest is not disposed of within 30 days after the mailing of the notice by the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal, or in the event no objections are filed within such thirty-day period, or in the event such person fails to notify the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal of the transfer of any such interest within 20 days after the acquisition thereof, then the license as provided for herein may be subject to suspension or revocation by the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal. 
(g)  The licensee shall make all reports and notices required by this section in written form required by the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal and such reports shall be an amendment to the licensee's permanent license application on file with the City of Dallas, Georgia and as such shall be under oath and verified as otherwise required of license applications. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-8. - Transfer of licenses. 
(a)  No City of Dallas, Georgia license may be transferred from one person or from one location to another without permission and approval of the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal upon receipt of a written application made. Approvals as to any change shall be at the discretion of the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal. 
(b)  In the event of a change in the managing agent of a licensee, the City of Dallas, Georgia license shall remain in effect pending approval or denial of the transfer provided: 
(1)  The licensee notifies the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal within five days of the change of the managing agent; 
(2)  The licensee submits a proper written application for approval thereof; 
(3)  The licensee pays a transfer fee as required in the schedule of fees; 
(4)  The transferee meets all qualifications of a managing agent as required by this chapter; and 
(5)  There has been no change of ownership, location or operation of the business. 
(c)  Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at some other new location must make a complete new application for such new location. Upon proper application and provided that there has been no change of ownership or interest in the business, the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal may permit the license to be transferred upon payment of a fee required in the schedule of fees for a change of location, provided that the licensee and the new location meet all qualifications required by this chapter. The fee for a change of location shall be in addition to the original license fee paid by the licensee for the calendar year. 
(d)  Upon the sale of an existing business, the City of Dallas, Georgia license issued for that business location shall remain in effect pending approval or denial of a new application by the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal, provided that the buyer or transferee meets all the qualifications of a managing agent as required by this chapter, and provided that the buyer or transferee has immediately upon the date of sale or prior to the date of sale made proper written application and has paid the original license fee required by in the schedule of fees. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-9. - Right to investigate. 
(a)  Upon receipt by the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal of any application for an alcoholic beverage license, or for the transfer of any license, each person listed on the application shall consent to a criminal background check on the forms supplied by the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal. 
(b)  The City of Dallas, Georgia marshal, the assistant City of Dallas, Georgia marshal, the chief of police, or any policeman of the City of Dallas, Georgia may enter upon the premises operated under the provisions of this chapter during operating hours for the purpose of inspecting the premises and enforcing this chapter and shall have access during the inspection of all books, records, and supplies relating to the sale, storage or possession of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-10. - Alcoholic beverage review board. 
    There is hereby established an alcoholic beverage review board which shall have the duty of hearing appeals from decisions of the City of Dallas, Georgia Marshal or his/her designee denying the issuance or renewal of any license pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages in the City of Dallas, Georgia and to hear appeals from the decision of the City of Dallas, Georgia Marshal or his/her designee revoking or suspending a license. The alcoholic beverage review board shall be composed of the City of Dallas, Georgia manager, the chief of police, and a councilmember appointed by the mayor at the beginning of each calendar year. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-11. - Surrender, suspension or revocation of license or imposition of a monetary administrative penalty. 
(a)  The following may be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license or for the imposition of a monetary administrative penalty against the licensee. 
(1)  The violation by the licensee of any state or federal law or regulation, except misdemeanors or any ordinance of the City of Dallas, Georgia, other than traffic violations. The determination of whether any such violation has occurred shall be made by the alcohol review board and an actual conviction in a court for such offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license or issue a monetary administrative penalty. 
(2)  The failure of the licensee or his employee to report promptly to the police department any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, occurring on the premises. 
(3)  Any conduct on the part of the owner of the business, the licensee or his employee contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. While not to be considered a comprehensive or exhaustive listing of prohibited behavior, specific instances of prohibited behavior by the owner, the licensee and/or his employee include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Consumption or under the influence of alcoholic beverage while working or on duty; 
b.  Breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence; 
c.  The conviction of the owner, licensee, or employee of any felony reasonably related to the ability of the licensee to operate and maintain the premises in a proper manner; 
d.  The violation of any state law or regulation governing the manufacture, sale, distribution or transportation of alcoholic beverages; 
e.  The violation of any section of O.C.G.A. Tit. 10, Ch. 1, Art. 15, Pt. 1 (O.C.G.A.  10-1-370 et seq.), the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, reasonably related to the operation of licensed establishments; 
f.  The conviction of the owner or the licensee of driving under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or drugs on two or more occasions; 
g.  Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other unlawful act where the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct; 
h.  The selling or serving of any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication; 
i.  The failure to comply with any and all federal, state or municipal tax laws and regulations applicable to the operation of establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages; 
j.  Failure by the licensee to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises or on any property owned or leased by the owner or licensee, including but not limited to parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
(4)  Operating or conducting the business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance. Any combination totaling three or more of the following occurrences within any thirty-day period shall constitute prima facie evidence that the licensee is operating or conducting an alcoholic beverage business in a manner which is contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance: Three or more violations of law, violations of municipal ordinances, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, all occurring on the premises. The business license holder shall, upon suspension for violations of this section, have the burden of proving such occurrences were beyond his control and not related to the operation of his business. 
(5)  The violation of any state law or regulation or municipal ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  The violation of any provision contained in this chapter. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the definition of an employee shall include any agent or independent contractor that is working for hire on the licensed premises. 
(c)  The City of Dallas, Georgia marshal shall have the right to suspend any alcoholic beverage license pending a hearing as provided for in section 4-12 where in the judgment of the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare or morals. 
(d)  The City of Dallas, Georgia marshal, chief of police or any police department shift commander on duty at the time may close any location holding an alcoholic beverage license for a period not in excess of 24 hours in the event there shall occur on the premises any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, or other occurrence which is contrary to the public health, welfare, safety or morals, when in the judgment of the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal, chief of police or shift commander such action is necessary to protect the public health, welfare, safety or morals. 
(e)  In the case of the revocation or surrender of an alcoholic beverage license before expiration, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund. 
(f)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only so long as the licensee is actively engaged in such business, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration, and in the event the licensee shall cease to be actively engaged in such business such license shall be invalid and the licensee of such business shall immediately notify the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal and return his license thereto. 
(g)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by a holder of an alcoholic beverage license, or his agent, or employee, shall be unlawful, and shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and shall also subject the holder of such license to suspension or revocation of such license or monetary administrative penalty, or any combination thereof as the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal deems proper. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-12. - Hearing on denial, suspension or revocation or imposition of monetary administrative penalty. 
(a)  Before the denial of any application, including a renewal application, for an alcoholic beverage license or for the transfer of any alcoholic beverage license, or the revocation or suspension of any existing alcoholic beverage license, or for the imposition of a monetary administrative penalty against a licensee, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, shall be given notice in writing from the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal to show cause before the alcohol review board at a time and place specified therein not less than three days nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the notice, why such application for license or for transfer of license should not be denied, or why such license should not be revoked or suspended as the case may be, or why a monetary administrative penalty should not be imposed, stating the grounds therefore, and at the appointed time and place the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exist, why such application should not be denied or such license revoked or suspended or a monetary administrative penalty imposed after which the alcohol review board shall take such actions as he or she in his or her judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. All decisions of the alcohol review board shall be in writing with reasons therefore stated and mailed or delivered to the applicant or licensee. 
(b)  The decision of the alcohol review board shall be final unless appealed within 30 days by certiorari to the superior court of Paulding County. If the decision is appealed, the City of Dallas, Georgia solicitor or his designee shall represent the City of Dallas, Georgia in superior court. 
(c)  In all instances of a denial of any application for an alcoholic beverage license or the revocation of any existing alcoholic beverage license, the applicant, licensee or any person(s) with 25 percent or more interest, shall not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of the denial or revocation. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-13. - Employee permits. 
(a)  No person shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages, or be in any managerial position, by an establishment holding a license for the sale of distilled spirits by the package or for consumption on premises or an establishment holding a license for malt beverage or wine for consumption on premises unless such person has been approved by the chief marshal or his designee. The individual named on the alcoholic beverage license as the managing agent for such establishment shall be exempt from obtaining an employee permit. 
(b)  Upon approval by the chief marshal or his designee, such person shall be issued an employee permit which shall contain the name, expiration date, and photograph of such employee. Such employee permit shall remain the property of the City of Dallas, Georgia and shall be in the possession of the employee at any time he or she is working at any licensed establishment, and shall be produced upon the request of any law enforcement officer of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the Dallas Marshals Bureau and upon the payment of the non-refundable fee designated in City of Dallas, Georgia schedule of fees. The applicant shall furnish, at the time of presenting the application, a valid current identification. Such application shall contain the following information: Applicant's name, date of birth, height, weight, race, sex, address, telephone number, and disclosure of arrest record. Applicant must consent to and provide fingerprints to obtain and inspect any criminal history on such applicant which is in the possession of any law enforcement agency. 
(d)  No person shall be granted an employee permit that has been convicted, plead guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving the sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages to an underage person or any felony within three years of the date of the application. 
(e)  No person shall be granted an employee permit if he or she has been the holder of an alcoholic beverage license or employee permit which has been revoked within five years of the date of the application. 
(f)  An employee permit shall be valid for three years from the date of issue. At the expiration of three years, the employee permit may be renewed upon the submission of a renewal application, the payment of the appropriate fee, and upon determination that such individual remains qualified under this chapter. 
(g)  The employee permit is non-transferable and is valid only for the individual named on the permit. Such permit is valid for the individual named while employed in any establishment licensed in the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(h)  An employee permit may be suspended or revoked by the chief marshal if it is determined that the individual has violated any provision of this chapter or committed any offense which would make him or her ineligible to hold such a permit. 
(i)  Falsifying or failing to disclose any information required by this chapter shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the employee permit. 
(j)  Notification of any denial, suspension, or revocation of an employee permit shall be in writing and served either in person or by certified mail and shall contain the reasons for such action and the notice of the right to appeal the decision. 
(1)  Decisions of the chief marshal that adversely affect or aggrieve any applicant, certificate holder, or permit holder under this chapter may be appealed to the alcohol review board as provided in section 4-12 of this Code. All appeals shall be submitted in writing to the chief marshal within ten calendar days after notification of the adverse decision. 
(2)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of the filing of the written appeal, unless a continuance of such hearing is agreed to by the appellant and the chief marshal, or unless the hearing is rescheduled by the hearing officer. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. 
(3)  The appellant shall be notified in writing of the date and time of the hearing at least seven calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(4)  The findings of the alcohol review board shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of the finding by certiorari in writing to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(k)  No licensee shall allow any employee or manager required to hold an employee permit to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in their possession a current valid employee permit. Provided, however, that an individual may be employed for a period of time not to exceed 14 days pending the submission of the application to and the approval of the permit by the marshals bureau. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Secs. 4-14-4-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGE AND WINE MANUFACTURERS 

Sec. 4-20. - Malt beverage breweries or wineries. 
(a)  A licensed brewery shall not engage in retail package or retail consumption sales on premises, directly or indirectly, of alcoholic beverages at any time. 
(b)  A Georgia Farm Winery may engage in retail package sales of wine in a tasting room or the retail consumption sales on premises of its wine and the wine of any other Georgia Farm Winery in a tasting room. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-21. - Malt beverage brewery facility tours. 
(a)  During an educational or promotional tour a free tasting of malt beverages may be conducted by the licensed brewery in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A.  3-5-38, Regulation 560-2-7-.01 as amended from time to time. 
(b)  All malt beverages provided for at the tasting shall be served by a state licensed representative of the brewery. 
(c)  No malt beverages may be served during or after a tour if: 
(1)  A brewery charges a fee for providing an educational or promotional tour; or 
(2)  The tour of the facility is conducted on Sunday. 
(d)  The licensed facility may elect to provide non-alcoholic food or beverages at no charge, either directly or indirectly, to the attendees. 
(e)  The attendees may, if permitted by the licensed facility, bring non-alcoholic food or beverages to the licensed facility solely for use during or following the tour, or as part of any tasting at the licensed facility. 
(f)  No person who is a participant in a tour may bring alcoholic beverages to the licensed facility under any circumstances. 
(g)  Souvenirs offered for sale by a brewery may be used in tastings sponsored by the brewery. 
(1)  The brewery shall disclose, in writing by posted signs, or distributed notices given to the tour participant(s), that there are no requirements to purchase the souvenir container to participate in the tour or tasting; 
(2)  The souvenir container may be used in subsequent tours of the brewery. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Secs. 4-22-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX ON MIXED DRINKS CONSUMED ON PREMISES 

Sec. 4-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means the person designated by the licensee in this application for permit to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
    Drink or mixed drink shall include any distilled spirits served for consumption on the premises, which may or may not be diluted by water or other substance in solution. 
    Licensee means any person who holds a license from the City of Dallas, Georgia to engage in the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
    Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
    Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including receipts, cash, credit, property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any distilled spirits by the drink. 
    Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
    Tax means the tax imposed by this section. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-32. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied upon every purchaser of a distilled spirits purchased by the drink within this City of Dallas, Georgia a tax in the amount provided in the schedule of fees. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-33. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Every licensee or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed herein from purchasers of distilled spirits by the drink within the licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be required by the City of Dallas, Georgia to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(b)  In all cases where the collection of food and drinks is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee is liable at the time of and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The City of Dallas, Georgia shall have authority to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-34. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this section shall become due and payable from the purchaser at the time of purchase of any mixed drink in this City of Dallas, Georgia. All amount of such taxes collected by the licensee shall be due and payable to the City of Dallas, Georgia monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period for which this tax is imposed; provided, however, that upon a proper showing that the tax imposed will not be collected until after a regular billing period of the collecting agent, then the collection of the tax may be deferred by the City of Dallas, Georgia for an additional period not exceeding 30 days. 
(b)  On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the City of Dallas, Georgia in such form as the City of Dallas, Georgia may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax hereunder. All returns shall show the gross receipt of the sale of distilled spirits by the drink and the amount of the tax collected on such drinks. 
(c)  Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act," approved February 20, 1951, as now or hereafter amended (O.C.G.A.  48-8-50). 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-35. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If the City of Dallas, Georgia has cause to believe that the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the City of Dallas, Georgia by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  The City of Dallas, Georgia or its designated representatives shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the City of Dallas, Georgia. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-36. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  If any person fails to make a return, the City of Dallas, Georgia shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this City of Dallas, Georgia which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in possession of or may come into the possession of the City of Dallas, Georgia official. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 4-35(c). 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-37. - Penalty for nonpayment. 
    Any person who fails to pay the tax herein imposed or fails to pay any amount of the tax required to be collected and paid to the City of Dallas, Georgia within the time required shall pay a penalty of 25 percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in subsection 4-36(b). 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-38. - Action for collection. 
(a)  At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the City of Dallas, Georgia may bring an action in the courts of this state any other state or of the United States in the name of the City of Dallas, Georgia to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City of Dallas, Georgia under this chapter, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-39. - Overpayment. 
    If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the City of Dallas, Georgia, he will have three years from the date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the council, the excess amount paid the City of Dallas, Georgia may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or from his administrators. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-40. - Purchasers or successors of business. 
(a)  If any licensee liable for any amount under this chapter transfers, conveys, assigns, or sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the City of Dallas, Georgia either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser successor, transferee, or assignee of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-41. - Administration. 
(a)  Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the City of Dallas, Georgia shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the City of Dallas, Georgia may require. 
(b)  The City of Dallas, Georgia or any person authorized in writing by the City of Dallas, Georgia may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee for sale of distilled spirits by the drink and any licensee liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(c)  In administration of the provisions of this subsection, the City of Dallas, Georgia may require the filing of written reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to purchases which are subject to the tax. Reports shall be filed with the City of Dallas, Georgia when required by the City of Dallas, Georgia and shall set forth the purchase price for each purchase, the date or dates of purchase, and such other information as the City of Dallas, Georgia may require. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-42. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the subsection is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee or any other person who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the City of Dallas, Georgia or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection shall, in addition to the other penalties and liabilities provided for herein, have his license or permit revoked as provided for previously herein. Section 4-11 shall apply to such revocation. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Secs. 4-43-4-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAX REQUIRED OF WHOLESALE DEALERS 

Sec. 4-50. - Imposition of tax. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer distributing malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits within the City of Dallas, Georgia an excise tax in the amounts fixed in the City of Dallas, Georgia schedule of fees. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-51. - Payment of taxes. 
(a)  Payment of excise taxes for the distribution of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits shall be remitted by the tenth day of each month following the month in which deliveries were made. 
(b)  Copies of the "summary of sales" showing delivery by each supplier to retailers and/or consumption on the premises licensees shall be furnished to the City of Dallas, Georgia's finance department with each monthly payment. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Secs. 4-52-4-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MALT BEVERAGE AND WINE-ORIGINAL PACKAGE 

Sec. 4-60. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No malt beverage and/or wine shall be offered for sale by the package within 100 yards of any church, school building, school grounds or college campus. This subsection shall not apply: 
(1)  To a grocery store licensed for the retail sale of only wine and malt beverages for consumption off the premises, which shall be allowed to sell wine and malt beverages within 100 yards of any college campus. As used in this subparagraph, the term "grocery store" means a retail establishment which has at least 85 percent of its total retail floor space reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic items and conducts all of its sales inside the building containing its retail floor space. 
(2)  To any premises or location where alcoholic beverages are being sold or dispensed in compliance with the other provisions of this chapter and a school or college campus is built or erected within the minimum distances provided for in this section. 
(b)  No malt beverage and/or wine shall be offered for sale by the package within 200 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government. 
(c)  All measurements to determine distances required by this chapter shall be measured as provided for in section 4-110. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-61. - Hours of sale. 
    The hours of sale of malt beverages and wine at retail and not for consumption on premises is 7:00 a.m. to 11:55 p.m. Monday through Saturday and Sunday 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-62. - Growler sales. 
(a)  Package malt beverage licensees or wine licensees, who are not also licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package, may fill growlers with malt beverages and/or wine at the licensed location subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  At least 90 percent of the licensee's total gross sales are from packaged sale of malt beverages and/or wine or the licensee's premises have a minimum of 400 square feet of floor space dedicated to the display of malt beverages and/or wine offered for sale. 
(2)  A growler shall not exceed 64 ounces. Growlers may only be filled from kegs or barrels procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. 
(3)  Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. 
(4)  Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. 
(5)  Samples of tap malt beverages or wine may be made available. No individual shall be allowed to sample more than a total of 16 ounces which shall be comprised of at least four different varieties of malt beverages or wine. 
(6)  A licensee may charge a fee for samples of tap malt beverages or wine. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-63. - No consumption on premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises licensed for the sale of malt beverages or wine by the package and it shall be unlawful for any licensee by the package to open for, or break the package for, a purchaser and/or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises. 
(b)  This section shall not apply for the holder of a temporary limited license as provided for in this chapter during the hours for which the temporary limited license is valid. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Secs. 4-64-4-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DISTILLED SPIRITS-ORIGINAL PACKAGE 

Sec. 4-70. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No distilled spirits shall be offered for sale by the package within 200 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, education building, school grounds or college campus. 
(b)  A new retail package liquor licensed place of business or the relocation of an existing retail package liquor licensed place of business engaged in the retail package sales of distilled spirits shall not be located within 500 yards of any other business licensed to sell package liquor at retail. 
(c)  The distance provided for herein shall not apply: 
(1)  To any premises or location where alcoholic beverages are being sold or dispensed in compliance with the other provisions of this chapter and a school or church is built or erected within the minimum distances provided for in this section. 
(2)  To any premises or location licensed as an importer, so long as the same is allowed by the state; provided, however, no signs or other forms of advertisement shall be placed on or near the licensed premises, which directly or indirectly advertise that alcoholic beverages are stored or warehoused on the premises. 
(d)  No distilled spirits shall be offered for sale by the package within 200 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government. 
(e)  All measurements to determine distances required by this chapter shall be measured as provided for in section 4-110. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-71. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  The hours of sale of distilled spirits at retail and not for consumption on premises is 7:00 a.m. to 11:55 p.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(b)  No retail dealer of distilled spirits shall be in, or permit others to be in its place of business Monday through Saturday any time prior to 6:00 a.m. or 30 minutes past closing time on Sundays prior to 10:30 a.m. or 30 minutes past the closing time. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-72. - No consumption on premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises licensed for the sale of distilled spirits by the package and it shall be unlawful for any licensee by the package to open for, or break the package for, a purchaser and/or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-73. - Sufficient lighting required. 
    The building in which each retail dealer of distilled spirits in the unbroken package is located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself, the premises and all entrances are readily visible at all times from the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Secs. 4-74-4-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 4-80. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits for consumption on the premises may be offered for sale, sold or dispensed within 100 yards of any property containing 300 housing units or fewer, which property is owned or operated by a housing authority created by Article 1 of Chapter 3 of Title 8 of the Housing Authorities Law. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, or to the renewal of such license. 
(b)  All measurements to determine distances required by this Chapter shall be measured as provided for in section 4-110. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-81. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  The hours of sale for consumption by the drink on the premises where sold is 9:00 a.m. to 11:55 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and from 12:30 p.m. till 12:00 midnight on Sunday. 
(b)  Any alcoholic beverage served must be consumed within 30 minutes of the required closing time. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-82. - Food volume ratio for restaurants. 
(a)  Restaurants shall maintain at least 50 percent of their business volume from the sale of food, private clubs exempted. Food sales shall include all consumable items sold on the premises except alcoholic beverages. The 50 percent ratio shall be determined on a calendar quarter basis on the monthly report submitted by each licensee. 
(b)  Monthly reports for the preceding month's alcohol and food sales shall be submitted on forms provided by the City of Dallas, Georgia on or before the 20th day of the month. 
(c)  In the event food sales fall below 50 percent of the business volume of the licensee for any two consecutive quarters, then the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal shall request a hearing for the suspension or revocation of such license in accordance with section 4-12. Nothing herein provided shall prevent the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal from suspending or revoking such license for any other violations of this chapter. 
(d)  Authorized officials of the City of Dallas, Georgia may examine the records of businesses licensed hereunder at any reasonable time to ascertain that the requirements of this and other provisions of this chapter are met. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-83. - Sales volume ratio for select businesses. 
(a)  Any business required to pay a business occupation tax that does not meet the criteria in section 4-82, section 4-84, or section 4-85 may obtain a consumption on premises license for malt beverages and wine subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be clearly incidental to the primary business conducted on the premises. 
(2)  Consumption on the premises licensees shall maintain at least 60 percent of their business volume from the sale of merchandise or services, not including alcoholic beverages. The 60 percent ratio shall be determined on a calendar quarter basis on the monthly report submitted by each licensee. 
(3)  Monthly reports for the preceding month's alcohol and retail or services sales shall be submitted on forms provided by the City of Dallas, Georgia on or before the 20th day of the month. 
(4)  No alcoholic beverages shall be served on Sunday. 
(5)  To qualify for a license, a retail or business establishment must be open to the public for business a minimum of 32 hours per week. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-84. - Volume ratio exemptions. 
(a)  Business establishments that have a valid consumption on premises license for malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits and meet the following requirements are exempt from the food sales ratios as provided in section 4-82 and retail sales ratios as provided in section 4-83 above: 
(1)  There shall be no fee, donation or cover charge collected or required to obtain entrance into the business or a requirement to purchase any food or beverages. 
(2)  The business shall have a maximum occupancy load of 75 individuals with seating arranged and set for at least 50 percent of the maximum occupancy load. Folding chairs, lawn furniture or other furniture that, in the opinion of the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal, is not "set" is not in compliance with this subsection and shall not be allowed. 
(3)  No alcoholic beverages shall be served on Sunday. 
(4)  Sales of alcoholic beverages are subject to the provisions of section 4-81, except that the business may not open prior to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday or 11:00 a.m. on Saturday. 
(5)  Entertainment shall be allowed provided that no sound shall be audible beyond the licensed premises. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-85. - Non-profit organizations with facilities. 
(a)  Non-profit organizations meeting the criteria of subsection (b) below may obtain a consumption on premises license subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be clearly incidental to the primary function of the non-profit organization on the premises. 
(2)  No alcoholic beverages shall be served on Sunday except as provided by O.C.G.A.  3-3-7. 
(b)  To qualify for a consumption on premises license, the nonprofit organization must be exempt from federal income taxes pursuant to section 501(c), (d) or (e) of the Internal Revenue Code and must have a building, facility or grounds that is primarily used for public education, research, conservation and enjoyment, or that serves as a repository for a collection of literary, natural, or scientific objects of interest, or works of art where such facility or building is arranged, intended, designed and open to be viewed by members of the public with or without an admission fee. This shall include, but not be limited to, nonprofit botanical gardens or nature science centers. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-86. - Brown bagging/BYOB. 
    The City of Dallas, Georgia does allow brown bagging/BYOB with approval of the property owner, and provided there are no other violation of any other provision of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-87. - No outside consumption. 
(a)  A consumption on premises licensee shall not permit a purchaser to remove from the premises any alcoholic beverage from the premises and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no beverages are sold and carried out. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverage beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(c)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverage premise and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage premise and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  This section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  For events that are sponsored or organized by the City of Dallas, Georgia but only for malt beverage and wine and where the alcohol is obtained from a participating business within the designated area and is contained in and consumed from an approved, clear plastic container and where the person consuming or possessing such alcohol is wearing an approved wristband. 
(2)  Where the City of Dallas, Georgia council through a resolution has permitted otherwise. 
(3)  For restaurants that have a valid sidewalk caf permit provided that all outdoor activities are contained within the permitted sidewalk caf. 
(4)  For an open air caf as defined by this chapter. 
(5)  Beverages for consumption at a publicly owned or privately owned golf course. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-88. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-89. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved as provided in this section. 
(b)  The requirements for approval are: 
(1)  The patio/open area must be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The only exception to this would be a fire exit as required by building and fire codes. Such fire exit would not be for general public use unless an emergency exists and would be of the type which sounds an alarm so that the establishment would be alerted of unauthorized use if no emergency exists. The height of such structure shall be a minimum of three and one-half feet above the patio floor. The structure is not required to be solid nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open area. The patio/open area shall meet all setback requirements as set forth in the Unified Land Development Code. 
(2)  The patio/open area shall not be required to be covered by a roof. 
(3)  The patio/open area shall be used merely as an extension of the interior seating area. Service in the patio/open area shall be only by waiter or waitress or by customer self-service at an interior selling location; i.e. no outside bar or service window. 
(c)  It is prohibited for an establishment to be in violation of the City of Dallas, Georgia's noise ordinance as defined in section 24-1 of the Code of Ordinances and to allow any noise to be created in a patio/open area which may be heard from a distance of 100 feet from the patio/open area. Any measurement made pursuant to this section shall describe the shortest straight line distance from the patio to the point in question. 
(d)  Patio/open area plans must be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal. Patio/open areas must be permitted and approved by the City of Dallas, Georgia's building inspection and fire departments as required by their governing regulations or codes. 
(e)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in the patio areas of such hotel or motel. "Patio areas," as that term is used herein, do not have to conform to the standards in this section. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-90. - Happy hour promotions. 
(a)  As used in this subsection, the term "drink" means any beverage which contains any amount of alcoholic by volume. 
(b)  This section shall be construed to cover, include and apply to all alcoholic beverages including malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits for consumption on premises by properly licensed establishments in the City of Dallas, Georgia. All on premises licensees are prohibited from selling or giving away alcoholic beverages under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Offering all you can drink for a set price during a set time. 
(2)  Serving multiple drinks for a single price unless the drinks are part of a variety sampler of which no more than a total of 16 ounces can be served as part of the sampler and which sampler shall be comprised of at least four different varieties of malt beverages or wine or three different mixes containing distilled spirits. 
(3)  Making a single price the basis for a required purchase of two or more servings. 
(4)  Serving alcoholic beverages by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(5)  Offering reduced-price drinks to any segment of the population for any period of time as an inducement to patronize the premises; except between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, drinks may be sold at a reduced price which is no less than half the price usually charged. 
(6)  Selling alcoholic beverages for less than half the normal retail price, or selling alcoholic beverages in pitchers or in jumbo sizes for less than half the normal retail price. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the dispensing of drinks in pitchers or in jumbo sizes, provided that such pitchers or jumbo sizes shall be available at all times that the licensee is open for business. 
(7)  Using coupons or other special promotional items as an inducement to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  Sponsoring, conducting or allowing contests or other promotions which have as their primary purpose increasing the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(9)  Offering or delivering any free alcoholic beverage to the general public. 
(c)  The prohibitions and restrictions in the foregoing subsection which apply to licensees or agents or employees of licensees shall not: 
(1)  Apply at private functions; 
(2)  Prohibit the offering of free food or entertainment at any time; 
(3)  Prohibit including drinks as part of the price of a hotel, travel, entertainment, or meal package; 
(4)  Prohibit the sale, offer to sell, or delivery of wine or malt beverage by the bottle, pitcher or carafe; 
(5)  Prohibit any motel or hotel from offering room service to registered guests. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-91. - Brewpubs. 
(a)  No individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brewpub without first obtaining a proper written brewpub license and consumption on premises license from the City of Dallas, Georgia. Each brewpub licensee shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements. 
(b)  A brewpub license authorizes the holder of such license to: 
(1)  Manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 10,000 barrels of malt beverage in a calendar year solely for retail sale on the premises. 
(2)  Operate a restaurant that shall be the sole retail outlet for such malt beverage and may offer for sale any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are authorized for retail sale under this chapter, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer for consumption on the premises only and, provided further, in addition to malt beverages manufactured on the premises, each brew pub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer. 
(3)  Sell up to a maximum of 5,000 barrels annually of such malt beverage to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution to retailers and retail consumption dealers. 
(c)  Possession of a brewpub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining any other license available under this chapter for the same premises. 
(d)  A brewpub license does not authorize the holder of such license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package for consumption off the premises. 
(e)  A brewpub licensee shall not offer or permit any free sampling of malt beverage by its customers on the premises of a brewpub. 
(f)  A brewpub licensee shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed under this chapter as manufacturers, retailers and, where applicable, wholesale dealers. 
(g)  Except as set forth in this section, a brewpub licensee shall be subject to all sections of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-92. - Private clubs. 
(a)  Private clubs, meeting the definition of this chapter, are eligible to apply for a license for consumption on premises of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No license shall be issued or renewed for the sale of alcoholic beverages prior to the furnishing of evidence, satisfactory to the City of Dallas, Georgia, that such private club has been approved as a tax exempt entity by the IRS. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-93. - Dallas civic center. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages and consumption of mixed drinks on the premises of the Dallas Civic Center shall be allowed. 
(b)  The theatre/civic center director shall authorize in writing any event in advance prior to alcohol to be sold or consumed. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Secs. 4-94-4-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EVENTS 

Sec. 4-100. - Alcoholic beverage caterers. 
(a)  Definitions for purposes of this section. 
    Nonresident caterer means a caterer that does not have its principle place of business located within the City of Dallas, Georgia limits of Dallas and which desires to serve or sell alcoholic beverages at a permitted event or function. 
    Resident caterer means a caterer that has its principle place of business located within the City of Dallas, Georgia limits of Dallas and which desires to serve or sell alcoholic beverages at a permitted event or function. 
(b)  Annual alcoholic beverage caterer's license for resident caterers. 
(1)  Any resident caterer who possesses a valid alcoholic beverage license from the City of Dallas, Georgia may apply for an annual alcoholic beverage caterer's license that permits off-premises alcoholic beverage sales at authorized catered events or functions for which an event permit has also been obtained. 
(2)  The fee for such annual resident alcoholic beverage caterer's license shall be set by the City of Dallas, Georgia council, provided however that pursuant to O.C.G.A.  3-11-2(e), the annual resident alcoholic beverage caterer's license fee shall not exceed $5,000.00 for any one licensed location. Resident alcoholic caterer's license are not printed herein, but shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the City of Dallas, Georgia clerk and may be amended from time to time as needed, by the mayor and City of Dallas, Georgia council of Dallas, Georgia. 
(c)  Event permits. 
(1)  In order to serve alcoholic beverages at a catered event or function, both resident and nonresident caterers must first apply in writing for an event permit from the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal. 
(2)  An event permit application shall include the following information: 
a.  Name of the event; 
b.  Date of the event; 
c.  Address and location of the event; 
d.  Times during which the event will be held; 
e.  The alcoholic beverage caterer's license number; 
f.  Any other information requested by the City of Dallas, Georgia related to the event. 
(3)  All event permit applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable event permit fee. Event permit fees are not printed herein, but shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the City of Dallas, Georgia clerk and may be amended from time to time as needed, by the mayor and city council. 
(4)  In order to be eligible for issuance of an event permit, caterers must have the following licenses: 
a.  A resident caterer must possess an alcoholic beverage caterer's license issued by the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
b.  A nonresident caterer must possess an alcoholic beverage caterer's license from a local political subdivision or municipality other than the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(5)  The City of Dallas, Georgia marshal shall review the application and may either grant or deny the permit application. The City of Dallas, Georgia marshal may deny the permit based upon the applicant's failure to adequately address public safety concerns. If granted, the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal may place reasonable restrictions upon the permit to address public safety concerns such as traffic management, noise abatement, crowd control, fire safety, or building code compliance. 
(d)  Original event permit. The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function. 
(e)  [Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer.] A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or otherwise dispense only that type of alcohol which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell or dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(f)  Resident caterer. Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages by a resident caterer as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(g)  Nonresident caterer. Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverage drinks served by a nonresident caterer in the amounts set forth in article V of this chapter and shall be paid within 30 days after the conclusion of the catered event or function. 
(h)  Written Licenses and event permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained the licenses and an event permit as required by this chapter. 
(i)  Violation of restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the restrictions of an event permit or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages except as authorized by the event permit. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Secs. 4-101-4-103. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-104. - Wine tasting. 
(a)  A request to conduct a wine tasting may be approved in writing by the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal when such request is made in writing on an application furnished by the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal, and a non-refundable fee as provided for in the schedule of fees is submitted. If issued, the wine tasting shall be conducted under the following conditions: 
(1)  A wine tasting must comply with all local and state laws and regulations pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state and the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(2)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in the unbroken package or container at retail. 
(b)  A bona fide non-profit charitable and civic organization that seeks to conduct a wine tasting shall comply with all requirements set forth in O.C.G.A.  3-9-3, 3-9-4, and 3-9-5 and must make application 25 days prior to the proposed event on forms supplied by the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(c)  A for-profit organization that seeks to conduct a wine tasting and is not licensed shall comply with all requirements set forth in O.C.G.A.  3-6-20 and must make application 25 days prior to the proposed event on forms supplied by the City of Dallas, Georgia, and shall obtain the wine secured for the wine tasting through a wholesale dealer possessing a valid license to distribute wine issued by the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-105. - Home brew special events. 
(a)  Home brewed malt beverages for purposes of this section shall be limited to malt beverages produced by an individual(s) pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A.  3-5-4 and any applicable rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(b)  A home brew special event may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed under this chapter for the sale, storage, or distribution of alcoholic beverages by the package or for consumption on the premises, or may be conducted at locations not otherwise licensed under this chapter. 
(c)  All applications shall be submitted in writing to the City of Dallas, Georgia marshal, or his designee, on forms provided by the City of Dallas, Georgia, along with a payment of a non-refundable fee as outlined in the schedule of fees. 
(d)  At a minimum, applicants shall provide the following information in their application: 
(1)  Name, address, and contact number of the applicant; 
(2)  Location of the event; 
(3)  Date and times at which the event will be held; 
(4)  Estimated number of participants in the event. 
(e)  Home brew special events shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Events shall only be held during legal hours for drinking on premises as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages at the event shall be limited solely to home brewed malt beverages produced pursuant to O.C.G.A.  3-5-4. Consumption of other alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Consumption of home brewed malt beverages shall be limited solely to participants in and judges of the special event. For the purpose of this section participants shall be either individuals submitting home brewed malt beverages to the event or individuals admitted to the event by the sponsor without having to submit a home brew. 
(4)  At the event, home brewed malt beverages shall not be sold, offered for sale, or made available for consumption by the general public. 
(5)  A home brew special event permittee shall not allow any person to take an open container of alcoholic beverage from the designated event area. 
(f)  A home brew special event permittee shall be subject to all laws, rules and regulations of the City of Dallas, Georgia and state, including the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue and shall be subject to permit revocation for violation thereof. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Secs. 4-106-4-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-110. - Measurement of distances. 
(a)  All measurements to determine distances required by this chapter shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  In a straight line from the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  To the front door of the building of a church, government-owned treatment center or a retail package store; or 
(3)  To the nearest property line of the real property being used for school or educational purposes or property that is owned or operated by a housing authority. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-111. - Grandfather provision for distance requirements. 
    If the sale of alcoholic beverages was lawful at a location during the 12 months immediately preceding an application for renewal or a new application for an alcoholic beverage license, the premises shall be grandfathered in regarding any distance requirements as outlined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 4-112. - Sales on election day. 
    No malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits will be sold within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. As used in this section, the term "day" means that period of time beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-113. - Responsibility of licensees and employees. 
(a)  No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages in the City of Dallas, Georgia nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Knowingly furnish or cause to be furnished or permit any other person in his employ to furnish any minor alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Knowingly sell alcoholic beverages to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(3)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(4)  Permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practice on the licensed premises. Such misconduct shall be immediately reported to the City of Dallas, Georgia police department. 
(5)  Sell, offer for sale, possess, or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic beverages, the sale, possession or consumption of which is not authorized under his license. 
(6)  Add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  Sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages by use of vending machines. 
(c)  Receive or cause to be delivered at the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages by any means other than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a license from the City of Dallas, Georgia to make such deliveries. Transportation of alcoholic beverages by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of all licenses concerned. 
(d)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to the general public use is prohibited, except that private parties and conventions, or a properly permitted wine tasting, which have been scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms, and provided further that this prohibition shall not apply at private clubs hereunder, nor to the sale for consumption hereunder to the registered guests of any hotel or motel in their designated rooms. 
(e)  All alcoholic beverages shall be stored only on the premises for which the license is issued. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-114. - Financial interest prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hold an alcoholic beverage license (package or consumption) who also has any direct financial interest in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any alcoholic beverage license (package or consumption) to or accept or receive financial aid or assistance from the holder of any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's or wholesale dealer's license. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-115. - Employment of minors. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises. 
(b)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to sell or take orders for any distilled spirits in the unopened package. 
(c)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 16 years of age to sell or take orders for any malt beverages or wine in the unopened package. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-116. - Regulations involving minors. 
(a)  The following regulations involving minors shall apply: 
(1)  No person knowingly, by himself or through another, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in his employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(3)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(4)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his age, identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and to be furnished with proper identification in order to verify the age of such person; and the failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact of any court of jurisdiction in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly. 
(c)  For purposes of this chapter, "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A.  40-5-100 et seq. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(d)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a) above shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state. 
(2)  At a religious ceremony. 
(3)  In the home of the minor with the consent of said minor's parent or legal guardian. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-117. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provision of this chapter shall be punished as a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-03, 11-2-2015 ) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
[1] 
Footnotes: 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned animal means any animal which has been: 
(1)  Placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for; or 
(2)  Placed upon the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the property and is left unattended or uncared for; or 
(3)  On the property of the owner or custodian of such animal for more than 36 hours unattended and without food and water. 
    Animal means any type of domestic animal commonly kept as a pet including, but not limited to, dogs and cats. 
    Animal establishment means any pet shop, kennel, grooming shop, auction, performing animal exhibition or other facility engaged in the handling of animals, excluding licensed veterinarians and veterinary clinics and hospitals. 
    Animal shelter means any facility operated by any governmental entity, humane society, or other organization for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
    At large. An animal is considered at large when it is not under control as provided in this chapter. 
    Auctions means any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. Individual sales of animals by owners are not auctions as defined in this chapter. 
    Cruelty means every act, omission or neglect whereby unjustifiable pain, suffering, maiming or death may be caused or permitted to any animal as defined in this section. 
    Fenced enclosure means an enclosure made of wire, wood, stone or other materials which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against the passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. An "invisible fence" is not an acceptable fenced enclosure for an animal. 
    Hobby breeder means a person who offers for sale one litter of animals during a 12-month period per household. A household which sells two litters during a 12-month period, even if the litters are produced from different animals, will not be considered a hobby breeder and will be subject to the registration procedures applicable to animal establishments and breeders as designated in this chapter. 
    Humane manner means care of an animal to include, but not to be limited to, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome fresh food, and access to fresh, clean, wholesome water at all times, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
    Kennel means any premises where any person who engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling animals, excluding licensed veterinarians and veterinary clinics and hospitals and facilities owned and/or operated by government entities. 
    Neutered means incapable of sexual reproduction. 
    Nuisance means an animal shall be considered a nuisance if it: 
(1)  Damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property (other than the property of the owner of the animal), or public property and recreational areas; 
(2)  Causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions; 
(3)  Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noise making; 
(4)  Molests, attacks or interferes with persons on public or private property, unless the animal is a guard dog actively performing its duties while confined to the property of the owner or responsible person; or 
(5)  Chases vehicles or attacks other animals. 
    Owner means any person who has title to or the right to possession of an animal, including, but not limited to, the caretaker or custodian of any animal or person harboring or having control of an animal. An animal is deemed in a person's possession if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more. 
    Pet shop means any person engaged in the business of buying or selling two or more species of live animals with the intent that they be kept as pets. 
    Spayed means incapable of sexual reproduction. 
    Under control means any animal shall be considered under control if it is on the property and/or premises of its owner, or is secured by a leash, chain, or lead of sufficient strength to prevent it from escaping from its owner when away from the premises of the owner. 
    Unsanitary means and involves conditions such as, but not limited to, filth and bacteria, which endanger the health of humans and/or animals. 
    Veterinary clinic and hospital means a clinic or hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
    Vicious animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of one or more documented unprovoked attacks or threats of attack of such severity as to cause physical injury, or significant mental trauma to the victim. An animal is also considered to be vicious if it makes an unprovoked attack on other animals or on physical property. Animal attacks shall be documented by reporting such attacks to the county animal control office. If the animal attack involves the biting of a person or another animal, the attack shall also be reported to the county animal control office. 
    Wild and exotic animals means any monkey or other nonhuman primate, such as raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, ferret, bear, llama, wild rabbit, tarantula, wild rodent, and reptiles, including, but not limited to, crocodiles, alligators, poisonous snakes, caiman, and gavial, and any other animal so designated by the animal control department. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, O.C.G.A.  4-11-2 
Sec. 6-2. - Scope of chapter. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal, or state law. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-3A. - Enforcement responsibility. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the animal control department, the City of Dallas Marshal's Bureau, and the City of Dallas Police Department. Persons in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the municipal court of the City of Dallas. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-3B. - Animal control department. 
    The county animal control department shall be a division of the county marshal's office and shall be under the supervision and control of the chief marshal. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-4. - Interference. 
    No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the animal control department or any other officer in the performance of his duties. No person shall seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control department, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-5. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The animal control officers, City of Dallas Marshal's, City of Dallas Police Officers, and other enforcement officers of the county are hereby authorized to enter upon any premises or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animal found therein or thereon to be in violation of this chapter, including, but not limited to, an animal that has bitten a person within ten days of the biting incident. 
(b)  The animal control department may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle between the dates of May 1 and September 13. The operator of the vehicle will be charged with cruelty to animals as defined in this chapter. No injunction or claim for damages may be placed against the animal control department or its officers for this action. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-6. - Summons. 
    Representatives of the City of Dallas Marshal's Bureau and officers of the City of Dallas Police department are hereby authorized to issue a citation and summons to any person for violation of any provision of this chapter. The citation and summons shall be in a form approved by the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia, shall designate the offense charged and shall require the person so charged to appear before the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia with jurisdiction on a date certain to answer all charges therein. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-7. - Equipment. 
    The animal control department is authorized to employ any equipment it deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, humane wire box traps, and the animal control department may, subject to conditions it may determine, lend such traps or other equipment to private persons for the purpose of preventing nuisances resulting from animals at large. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-8. - Penalties for violations. 
    Any violation of this chapter 6 shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-9. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into its custody. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-10. - Maintenance of premises. 
    An animal owner's premises shall be maintained in such a manner as not to constitute either a private nuisance to the adjoining property owners or a nuisance to the public generally. Pens in which animals are confined or maintained shall be cleaned regularly so that they are kept free from offensive odors which would disturb any person residing or operating a business within 50 feet of the premises. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-11. - Confinement of animals. 
    It shall be the duty of any animal owner to ensure an animal is under control of its owner and to prevent the animal from having access to the property of another person. An animal may leave the property of the animal owner, but the animal owner must have the animal under control and must prevent the animal from having access to the property of another person without the permission of that person, or from attacking, threatening or harassing other persons, or from damaging other persons' property. No animal shall be allowed to roam free and when not on the property of its owner must be on a leash, or similar physical control device, and in the control of a person. 
    Any owner of a domestic animal will confine that animal inside a building or fenced enclosure. No animal shall be tied as a permanent measure of restraint, nor left unattended on a chain, lead, runner, cable, rope, leash, or similar tethering device in an unfenced area where people or other animals can wander into the tethered animal's proximity. Any animal owner restraining an animal without the use of a fenced enclosure will be in violation of this chapter. Animals who are tied on a chain, lead, runner, cable, rope, leash or other similar tethering device as a temporary measure of restraint within a building or fenced enclosure shall not be tethered more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period. 
    Persons who permit their animals to defecate on public or private property other than their own property are required to immediately pick up the feces, bag the feces, and properly dispose of the feces. Such animal waste shall be removed by placing said matter in a closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in the animal owner's or public trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit or other closed or sealed refuse container. This paragraph shall not apply to: 
(1)  Persons using guide dogs or assistance dogs; 
(2)  Hunting dogs being used in a legal hunt with permission of the property owner; or, 
(3)  Law enforcement officers working police trained dogs. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-12. - Restraint. 
    It shall be the duty of any animal owner to restrain his animal in such a manner as to prevent the animal from attacking, threatening, or harassing any person on the public right-of-way of the roads, streets, highways and sidewalks in the city. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-13. - Vicious animals. 
    Any owner of a vicious animal shall confine it within a building or secured enclosure (sufficient to prevent the animal from escaping and to prevent a person or another animal from entering the enclosure) and will not remove it from such building or fenced enclosure unless it is securely muzzled and under restraint by a person who is at least 18 years of age or older. Any vicious animal not secured as provided in this chapter shall deemed to be a nuisance when City of Dallas Municipal Court and/or any court of competent jurisdiction so determines and may be impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or confined by the animal control department for a period of 30 days for the protection of the general public, provided that, an action is brought in any court of competent jurisdiction concerning the attack or attempt to attack by such animal, the period of confinement may be extended within the discretion of the animal control department, until the entry of a final order of disposition by the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia, and/or any court of competent jurisdiction in such action. Further, in any prosecution of an owner or a responsible person of any vicious animal for any violation of this chapter, the court may, upon conviction entered against the owner or responsible person, order that the animal be humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-14. - Animal noises. 
(a)  Generally. An owner of an animal shall not permit such animal to make frequent or continuous unnecessary noises or sounds across a residential or commercial boundary line. 
(1)  The owning, possessing or harboring of any animal which frequently, or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which annoy or disturb an ordinary reasonable person of normal sensitivities across a residential or commercial boundary line shall be considered a nuisance and violation of this article. Provided however, for the purpose of this article, "barking animal" shall mean an animal that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 15 consecutive minutes at any time of the day or night; or barks intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the animal is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that an animal shall not be deemed a "barking animal" if, at the time the animal is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon property in or upon which the animal is situated. 
(2)  Any person disturbed by such noise from a barking animal may report, submit or file a complaint with the animal control department. 
(b)  The City of Dallas, Georgia Marshal's Bureau or the City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department shall conduct an investigation of the complaint and, upon its determination that a violation has occurred, may issue a citation to the owner of such animal which citation will be heard and adjudicated by the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-15. - Rabid animals. 
(a)  Every veterinarian shall report promptly to the state department of human resources and the animal control department all cases of rabies in animals treated by the veterinarian, giving the name and addresses of the owner of any animals bitten by the rabid animal, so far as known. 
(b)  Any person who knows that an animal, domestic or wild, is rabid or suspects an animal of having rabies or knows that an animal has been bitten by a rabid animal, shall promptly report the information, to the extent known, to the state department human resources and the animal control department. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner, the health department, physicians, hospitals or other person or agency gaining information that any domestic animal or person has been bitten or is probably infected with rabies, to incarcerate or impound the animal in the facility of a competent veterinarian or animal shelter within this county, where the animal shall be held for observation for any period of time as may be reasonably necessary to determine whether the animal is infected with rabies. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-16. - Cruelty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person by commission or omission to: 
(1)  Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill needlessly, carry or confine in a vehicle in an inhumane manner, or otherwise mistreat any animal; 
(2)  Fail to provide any animal they own or provide care for with proper food and veterinary care; 
(3)  Fail to provide any animal they own or provide care for with access to adequate shelter to protect it from all types of weather, 24 hours daily; 
(4)  Fail to provide any animal they own or provide care for access to good and wholesome fresh water at all times; 
(5)  Intentionally poison any domestic animal; 
(6)  Allow or permit any fight between animals, or to allow or permit a fight in or upon any premises in that person's possession or under that person's control; 
(7)  Allow an animal they own or provide care for to be kept in unsanitary conditions; 
(8)  Keep or confine any animal in other than a humane manner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to release any animal on any property with the intent to abandon the animal. Each person who does abandon, knowingly or willingly permits such abandonment or aids in the abandonment of any animal, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-17. - Vaccination, proof required. 
(a)  Any animal owner within the county shall have their animals over three months of age, including but not limited to dogs and cats, inoculated for the prevention of rabies in a manner preapproved in writing by the county health department or by a licensed veterinarian in a manner consistent with state law and county department of health policies and regulations. Animal owners must be able to provide satisfactory documentation to animal control representative in the event that the animal: 
(1)  Has been impounded by an animal control employee, 
(2)  Is in the care and custody of animal control after being identified as a stray or abandoned animal, 
(3)  Has been found to be the cause, source or is otherwise identified as being involved in a violation of any other county ordinance or state law, 
(4)  Has bitten or scratched a human, 
(5)  Has bitten or scratched another animal, 
(6)  Has been in contact or otherwise exposed to a suspected rabid animal, 
(7)  Is being walked in a public area. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, satisfactory documentation shall include at least one of the following: 
(1)  A current rabies vaccination tag identifying the name or otherwise identifying title of the animal in question which also displays a state-issued rabies vaccination control number, 
(2)  A copy of the paid invoice from a veterinarian's office, indicating that the animal in question was administered a rabies vaccination, 
(3)  A letter or form from a veterinarian's office, stating that the office records indicate that the animal in question was administered a rabies vaccination; and that such vaccination is currently effective, 
(4)  A letter or form from the county health department, stating that the office records indicate that the animal in question was administered a rabies vaccination; and that such vaccination is currently effective. 
(b)  The animal control department may adopt any other rabies control regulations as it deems necessary for the protection of the public health and safety. 
(c)  All rules and regulations of the county board of health and the state department of human resources presently existing or as adopted in the future pertaining to rabies control and vaccination are incorporated in this chapter by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Secs. 6-18-6-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-40. - Special permit required. 
    No person shall own or harbor, upon any property within the incorporated city limits, more than three dogs of six months of age or older or more than one litter of pups, or more than three cats of more than six months of age or more than one litter of kittens on any parcel of land zoned as one of the applicable "residential" zoning categories, including, R-1, R-2 ,R-3 without having obtained a special permit from the City Marshals Department of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-41. - Permit required. 
    No person shall operate an animal establishment without first obtaining a permit from the Community Development Department of the City of Dallas, Georgia, in compliance with this chapter, nor may any person operate an animal establishment in a manner in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-42. - Duration, renewal. 
    The period of a permit issued under this article shall begin with the first day of the calendar year and run for one year. Renewal application for permits shall be made 30 days prior to and up to 60 days after January 1 of each year. Application for a permit for a new establishment under the provisions of this chapter shall be made within 60 days of the start of business or operation. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-43. - Separate facilities. 
    Every facility regulated by this article shall be considered a separate enterprise requiring an individual permit for each separate facility at different locations but owned by the same person shall be considered as two animal establishments. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-44. - Action on application. 
    The community development department of the City of Dallas, Georgia, shall either issue or decline to issue a permit required by this article to the applicant. If a permit is not granted, it shall notify the applicant in writing of the reason for denial. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-45. - Delay for reapplication upon denial. 
    Any animal establishment denied a permit under this article may not reapply for a period of at least 30 days. Each application shall describe any previous denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-46. - False information in application. 
    If an applicant for a permit required by this article is shown to have withheld or falsified any material information on any application, the community development department may refuse to issue or is entitled to revoke any permit. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-47. - Revocation of permits or denial of permits. 
(a)  After a hearing and notice of such hearing is provided to the permit holder, the community development department of the City of Dallas, Georgia, may revoke any permit if the person holding the permit refuses or fails to comply with this chapter, or any other law or regulation governing the protection and keeping of animals, including refusal to allow inspection of the animal establishment as provided in this section. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is revoked for cause, or pending any proceeding to contest such action, the community development department of the City of Dallas, Georgia, shall have the power of entry to inspect all premises where the animals are being kept and shall notify the owner in writing as to the period of time that reasonably shall be allowed for removal of animals from the premises and shall state the specific reasons for revocation. If any owner shall fail to remove the animals as directed, the City of Dallas may direct the Paulding County animal control department to impound the animals pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Any denial or revocation of any such permit by the community development department of the City of Dallas, Georgia, may be appealed in writing to the Mayor and Council of the City of Dallas, Georgia. within 30 days from the date of a final decision on any such revocation or denial. Any final decision on any appeal by the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia, may be appealed to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia, in writing within 30 days of the date of such final decision. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-48. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
(a)  An animal establishment shall not sell, trade or give away any dog or cat over three months of age unless the dog or cat has been vaccinated as required by this chapter. 
(b)  Building temperature shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for every species of animal kept in the kennel. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained. 
(c)  Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down, and turn around without touching the sides or top of cage, excluding tails. 
(d)  Cages are to be of material and construction that permit cleaning and sanitizing. 
(e)  Cage floors shall be of concrete, unless radiantly heated, and shall have a resting board or some type of bedding. 
(f)  Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the weather. Runs shall have an impervious surface. 
(g)  All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean and in a sanitary condition. 
(h)  The food shall be free from contamination, and shall be wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal. 
(i)  All animals shall have fresh water available at all times. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-49. - Hobby breeder. 
    A person shall be considered a hobby breeder if they offer for sale or donation no more than one litter of animals during a 12-month period per household. A hobby breeder will not be subject to the registration procedures applicable to animal establishments and breeders as designated in this article. Hobby breeders shall only distribute such animals through private residences and may not be affiliated with any pet shop, breeder or animal establishment. Under this definition, a household which sells or donates two litters during a 12-month period, even if the litters are produced from different animals, will not be considered a hobby breeder and will be subject to the registration procedures applicable to animal establishments and breeders as designated in this article. Hobby breeders shall be required to register themselves as a "hobby breeder" with City of Dallas Community Development Department, provided however, that there shall be no cost to the hobby breeder to register. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-50. - Pet distribution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, or gratuitously distribute any animal, fowl or reptile in a public place without an appropriate permit or license. This prohibition shall include, but not be limited to, such distribution in commercial areas and along public roadways. Hobby breeders are also prohibited from distributing or selling animals along public roadways and in commercial areas and are restricted to distributing and selling animals from private residences. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit that gratuitous distribution of pets in private residential areas. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Secs. 6-51-6-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PET SHOPS 

Sec. 6-66. - Compliance with chapter. 
    All pet shops, including pet shops operated in conjunction with another holding facility, shall in addition to the other requirements of this chapter comply with the minimum standards of this section. 
    Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a permit. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-67. - Water. 
    There shall be available hot water at a minimum temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit for washing feed and water bowls and disinfection, and cold water easily accessible to all parts of the pet shop. Fresh water for consumption shall be available to all species of animals at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-68. - Room temperature. 
    The room temperature of the pet shop shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for every species of animal kept in the shop. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-69. - Cages and enclosures. 
    All cages and enclosures in pet shops are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will have room to stand, turn and stretch out to the animal's full length. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Secs. 6-70-6-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-86. - License required. 
    No person or business shall own, harbor or permit to be kept or harbored a wild or exotic animal within the City of Dallas, other than those persons who have received a written license to harbor and/or own a wild or exotic animal, as described in this division, and those licensed animal establishments which have received approval in writing by the community development department as a license for such animal. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-87. - Licensing. 
    Licenses required by this division may be granted upon presentation of evidence satisfactory to the community development department that appropriate safeguards for the protection of the public are maintained and that the state department of natural resources has been properly notified of the proposed harboring of such wild and/or exotic animal and have not objected to harboring of such animal. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-88. - Public notice. 
    All persons and or businesses which have received a license to harbor, keep and/or own a wild or exotic animal, as described in this division, shall at all times conspicuously post on the premises where the wild and/or exotic animal is harbored, kept, housed, or sheltered, a notice in form and substance approved by the community development department which states that a wild and/or exotic animal is kept on the premises. In addition, the person and or business which has received a license to harbor, keep and/or own a wild or exotic animal, as described in this division, shall at all times conspicuously post on the premises where the wild or exotic animal is harbored, kept, housed, or sheltered, a copy of the written license to harbor, keep and/or own a wild or exotic animal. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-89. - Sales. 
    Any animal establishment approved by the community development department for offering for sale any wild and exotic animal shall post conspicuously at the place of sale or display a notice in form and substance approved by the community development department which no person may lawfully own, keep, harbor or permit to be kept or harbored, any wild and exotic animal within the City of Dallas, without obtaining a written license and approval for such animal. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-90. - Impoundment. 
    The City of Dallas may direct the Paulding County animal control department to impound any wild or exotic animal that is owned or harbored in violation of this chapter, and may destroy or rehabilitate any such animal upon conviction of its owner or other responsible person for a violation of this section, notwithstanding the impoundment provisions of this chapter. Any wild or exotic animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall remain impounded or confined by the Paulding County animal control department until a final order of disposition is entered by a court of competent jurisdiction with respect to the violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Secs. 6-91-6-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT AND ADOPTION 

Sec. 6-121. - Entry onto private property. 
    An animal control officer may follow an animal that has been seen by that officer running at large onto private property to capture and impound the animal. No injunction, action or claim for damages may be brought against the animal control department or its officers, agents or employees with respect to actions contemplated in this article. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-122. - Authorized. 
    Any animal at large or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be impounded in the animal shelter in a humane manner, for a period of not less than three days. If within that time an animal so impounded has not been reclaimed by obtaining a release From the City Of Dallas owner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the animal shall become the absolute property of the Paulding County animal control department, which may convey ownership of the animal to any responsible person on any conditions that the animal control department may prescribe, or the animal control department may humanely destroy the animal. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 6-123. - Appeals. 
    Any final decision by the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia, concerning any violation of this Ordinance may be appealed in writing to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia, within 30 days of the date of any such final decision. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
Chapter 7 - SPECIAL EVENTS ORDINANCE 

Sec. 7-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Dallas, Georgia "Special Events Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 7-2. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context indicates otherwise, the meaning of certain terms used in this chapter is as follows: 
    City means the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Dallas. 
    Producer means any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for planning, producing, or conducting a special event. 
    Special event means any temporary event, activity, or gathering that is made available for public attendance or participation that will occur on public property and/or on private property where the number of persons participating in the event, activity, or gathering on the property will exceed 20 or which will require or involve one or more of the following activities: closing (full or partial) of a public street; blocking or obstructing public property; the provision of merchandise, food, or beverages (whether by sale or otherwise) where not otherwise allowed; the erection, use, or installation of a tent, canopy, stage, trailer, grandstand, bleachers, or any other structure; use of any kind of pyrotechnics or sound amplification devices; or placement and use of portable toilets (except where designated for use as part of ongoing construction on the property). Examples of "special events" include, but are not limited to, fairs; festivals; "fun runs," walks, and other kinds of races, including bicycle races; parades; rallies; concerts; tours; and block parties. 
(1)  For purposes of this chapter, a special event does not include: 
a.  Gatherings or activities occurring on private property that are not open for public attendance or participation and which make no use of city streets, alleys, or rights-of-way except as otherwise permitted for lawful access or lawful parking; 
b.  Gatherings or activities occurring on city park property that are intended to be private events and do not significantly vary from the customary use of the property (e.g., family cookouts, birthday parties); 
c.  Regularly scheduled or occurring events on city park property by persons, organizations, or other entities with ongoing agreements with the city for the use of city park property; 
d.  Garage sales, estate sales, lawn sales, rummage sales, or any similar casual, sporadic sale of goods and merchandise by the owner of the property on which the event or activity is conducted; 
e.  The display of goods, merchandise, or services for sale on a public sidewalk or other public property immediately adjacent to the store or space by an ongoing, lawfully licensed business that occupies the immediately adjacent store or space, but excluding those subject to the commercial soliciting ordinance found at chapter 12, article IX of the city's Code of Ordinances, so long as such displays do not impede the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and so long as other applicable laws and ordinances that may pertain to such activity are satisfied; 
f.  Any procession conducted under the supervision and direction of a funeral director in conjunction with a funeral; and 
g.  Gatherings or activities occurring in the city's Civic Center or theater property that are scheduled by the city's Civic Center or theater department and do not involve the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Vendor means any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity that engages in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary basis on any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or private property as an authorized participant in a special event. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 7-3. - Permit required; display of permit; certain prescribed limitations. 
    Except where otherwise permitted by this chapter, it is unlawful for any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any special event in the city without having first obtained a valid special event permit from the city. The permit issued must be displayed prominently by the producer during and throughout the special event at the location of the special event or be available upon request for review and inspection. Special event permits are temporary and shall not vest any permanent property rights. Issued permits are effective only for the time period described on the permit. Special events are limited to the hours of operation specified in the permit. In no instance shall a special event be permitted to occur over the course of any more than three consecutive calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 7-4. - Application required for permit. 
    Except where otherwise permitted by this chapter, not less than 60 days nor more than 120 days prior to the special event, the producer shall apply for a special event permit and provide the following information and materials: 
(1)  The name, mailing address, email address, and telephone number of the producer of the special event and, if a corporation, partnership, or other entity, the name, address, email address, and telephone number of a person designated as responsible for compliance with all provisions of this chapter and other applicable chapters, all jointly known as the "producer." 
(2)  A description of the special event proposed. 
(3)  The date(s), location(s), and hours of operation proposed for the special event. 
(4)  A schedule, however tentative, of proposed activities, including a description of each vendor for the sale of food, food products, goods, merchandise, services, or alcohol contemplated for the special event. The city must be provided at the earliest opportunity any update to the schedule and accompanying description as the schedule of activities becomes more definite or changes. 
(5)  An estimate of the number of participants in the special event and projected attendance for the special event. The producer is required to promptly update the city on any significant changes or anticipated changes in these figures. 
(6)  A description of any services anticipated as being needed from the city. The producer is required to promptly update this description and notify the city at the earliest opportunity as any need or anticipated need for services changes. 
(7)  A description of any of the following elements contemplated for use or need in conducting the special event: closing (full or partial) of a public street; blocking or obstructing public property; the provision of (whether by sale or otherwise) merchandise, food, or beverages on public property or on private property where not otherwise allowed; the erection, use, or installation of a tent, canopy, stage, trailer, grandstand, bleachers, or other structure; pyrotechnics or sound amplification devices; placement and use of portable toilets; and signage. Use of signage is permitted and regulated only in accordance with the city's sign ordinance found in chapter 28 of the City of Dallas Code of Ordinance. 
(8)  A plan for responding to medical and other public safety incidents and emergencies occurring during the special event. 
(9)  A plan for parking along with plans for restroom facilities and the collection and removal of rubbish, garbage, and any other waste byproducts generated by the special event. An acceptable plan must provide for the immediate removal of all rubbish, garbage, and any other waste byproducts generated by the special event upon the conclusion of the special event or, for multi-day events, each day of a multi-day event. For multi-day special events, an acceptable plan must provide for removal of all rubbish, garbage, and any other waste byproducts generated each day; provided, however, that exceptions, with written approval from the city manager, may be provided for certain types of rubbish, garbage, and other waste byproducts where daily removal for a multi-day event is not reasonably practicable and the public's health, welfare, and safety would reasonably be determined not to be endangered. 
(10)  A reasonably accurate depiction of the location of the special event and its boundaries and, further, identifying all buildings, structures, parking, and curb cuts already existing on the property proposed for the special event and immediately adjacent to the property. Also identified on the depiction shall be the locations for any temporary structures, including toilet facilities, and parking to be utilized with the special event. 
    The 60- to 120-day window for applying for a special event permit is waived for special events proposed in response to immediate, current events defined as events occurring within seven days prior to the proposed special event. In such instances the producer of the special event is required to submit the application required by this section no later than 72 hours prior to the special event, and, if not practicable, the producer shall give the city manager written notice of the special event at least 24 hours prior to its commencement and provide with the notice as much of the information required in this section as is possible and practicable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 7-5. - Additional items required for consideration and issuance of a permit. 
    In addition to the information required above in an application for a special event permit, the following materials and information must be provided in support of and in addition to the application, all of which must be provided before an application will be considered: 
(1)  If the producer is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation, a representation that the corporation is qualified to do business in Georgia, and the name and address of the registered agent for service of process for the corporation in Georgia. 
(2)  A sworn declaration that the producer is in compliance with the State of Georgia SAVE and E-Verify requirements or that the producer is not subject to those requirements, describing the reason(s) for any claimed exemption with sufficient particularity to permit a determination of the bona fides of the claim. 
(3)  The producer's State of Georgia Department of Revenue sales and/or use tax registration number or an explanation describing the reason(s) for any claimed exemption with sufficient particularity to permit a determination of the bona fides of the claim. 
(4)  Identification of any location(s) within the prior 12 months where the producer conducted a similar special event. 
(5)  If the special event is to be held on private property, notarized, written permission of the property owner or his/her duly authorized representative. 
(6)  A legible copy of any current occupation tax certificate issued by a governing body in the State of Georgia. If the producer cannot produce a duly issued occupation tax certificate and is not otherwise exempted from compliance, then the producer must, as a condition for a permit, file for an occupation tax certificate from the city. If an exemption is claimed from payment of an occupation tax, the producer shall describe the exemption with sufficient particularity to determine the bona fides of such a claim. 
(7)  Copies of written notices informing residences and businesses adjacent to the event area of the intent to host a special event. If the special event involves a parade, procession, or other event without a centralized location, this notification requirement may be waived by the city manager upon request. This notification requirement may also be waived if the city manager determines it would be unreasonable and unduly burdensome in light of the number of residences and businesses to be notified. 
(8)  Proof of comprehensive liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured. To cover all claims arising from a permit issued under this chapter, such insurance must provide general liability coverage at minimums of: 
General Liability Each Occurrence [$]1,000,000 Damage to Rented Premises 
(Each occurrence) 50,000 Med Exp (any one person) 5,000 Personal & Adv Injury 1,000,000 General Aggregate 2,000,000 Products 
(Completed Operations I Aggregate products) 1,000,000  
The city manager may waive or reduce this requirement for a special event that: 
a.  Will not require or involve one or more of the following activities: closing (full or partial) of a public street; blocking or obstructing public property; the provision of merchandise, food, or beverages (whether by sale or otherwise); the erection, use, or installation of a tent, canopy, stage, trailer, grandstand, bleachers, or any other structure; use of any kind of pyrotechnics or sound amplification devices; or placement and use of portable toilets; and 
b  Is in response to an immediate, current event defined as national, state, or local event or incident occurring within seven days prior to the proposed special event; or 
c.  Is produced by an entity or organization recognized by the Federal Internal Revenue Service as satisfying the requirements of 26 U.S.C.  501(c) or a charitable organization subject to and governed by O.C.G.A.  43-17-1 et seq. Proper proof of section 501(c) status and/or registration as required by O.C.G.A.  43-17-1 et seq. is required. 
In exercising this discretion, the city manager shall consider the nature of the activities planned for the participants in the proposed special event; the risk of potential injury or harm to private property and private persons arising from the activities planned for the participants in the proposed special event; and the risk of potential injury or harm to public property arising from the activity planned for the participants in the proposed special event. 
(9)  The producer shall provide a written agreement in a form satisfactory to the city providing that the producer shall defend, pay, and hold harmless the city, its elected and appointed officials, employees, and agents from liability for all personal and property damages arising from any acts or omissions resulting from a special event, inclusive also of any claims for attorneys' fees and costs connected with such claims, except for such claims arising solely from the negligent acts of the city, its elected and appointed officials, employees, and agents. 
(10)  Such other information as may be reasonably requested by the city and reasonably related to the scope and scale of the special event, how it is to be conducted, and the other information required by this chapter to be provided. 
(11)  In addition, the producer shall confer with the appropriate city representatives and establish an acceptable plan for vehicular/pedestrian traffic, crowd and traffic control, and security for the special event proposed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 7-6. - Application fee. 
(a)  An application fee shall be paid at the time the application is filed for a special event permit to defray the city's administrative expense and costs. Fees are not printed herein, but maintained by the clerk in a separate fee schedule. The fee shall be set from time to time as determined by the governing authority. The application fee is nonrefundable. 
(b)  Exempt from payment of the application fee is any special event on behalf of or seeking to benefit wholly (1) an entity or organization recognized by the Federal Internal Revenue Service as satisfying the requirements of 26 U.S.C.  501(c) or (2) a charitable organization subject to and governed by O.C.G.A.  43-17-1 et seq. Proper proof of section 501(c) status and/or registration as required by O.C.G.A.  43-17-1 et seq. is required for this exemption. The exemption for a charitable organization subject to and governed by O.C.G.A.  43-17-1 et seq. applies only for a special event seeking to raise support for or awareness of a charitable purpose as that phrase is defined in O.C.G.A.  43-17-2(3), as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 7-7. - Permit conditions. 
    Any special event permit issued by the city is subject to the following conditions and any other conditions determined to be reasonably necessary to protect the city's public safety, health, welfare, and good order: 
(1)  The permit is limited to the specific geographic area(s) within which the event is to take place. The producer or other person designated as provided in section 7-4 is responsible for providing for security and sanitation services within the boundaries of the event until the area is cleared of all activities and structures related to the event. 
(2)  Except as needed for clearing the event area(s) of all activities and related structures, no special event shall continue beyond the time approved on the permit. 
(3)  The special event must comply with the city's noise ordinance and all other ordinances governing the conduct of the special event. 
(4)  The use of glass containers within the area designated for the special event is prohibited. 
(5)  Tents, arbors, stages, grandstands, bleachers, and other temporary facilities or structures to be constructed, erected, and used in conjunction with the special event must be approved, if applicable, by the fire marshal and building inspector. 
(6)  The city shall have the right to require immediate termination or cessation of a special event if a determination is made that the special event or aspects of the special event create or present an imminent threat to the public's safety, health, welfare, and good order. Upon being notified that the special event or an aspect of the special event must cease, it shall be unlawful for the producer and any participants to allow such activity to continue. 
(7)  To the extent signage for the special event is desired, compliance with the city's sign ordinance is required. 
(8)  A permit issued under this chapter may not be assigned or transferred. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 7-8. - Application processing and review. 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee shall determine within two business days of receipt of an application if the application is complete. If the application is incomplete, the producer shall be notified of the deficiencies. No further action will be taken in connection with the application and request for a permit until all information required by this chapter has been provided. 
(b)  Upon providing a complete application and all other information required by this chapter, the application shall be circulated within two business days to each government department whose services would be required or would reasonably be affected by the special event proposed. Each such department shall review the application and provide the city manager or his/her designee with an assessment and evaluation of the impact reasonably to be expected by the special event proposed on the factors identified in section 7-9 below. This review and provision of an assessment and evaluation shall be accomplished within seven business days of circulation absent agreement with the producer for additional time. If additional time is necessary due to the absence of one or more persons who would review the request for a permit and the producer does not agree to additional time to permit the person(s) to review the application and materials, the application may be denied for lack of appropriate review. 
(c)  Upon receiving the departmental assessment(s) and evaluation(s), the city manager may require the producer to provide additional information or response to address any concern(s) or issue(s) raised if such is reasonably necessary to address any of the factors to be evaluated per section 7-9 below. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 7-9. - Approval and revocation of a special event permit. 
(a)  Upon submission of a complete application and all information and materials required by this chapter, payment of any required fee, receipt of all information from government departments per section 7-8 above, the city manager shall, within three business days, act on the request for a special event permit unless additional time is provided by agreement with the producer. If additional time is necessary due to the absence of the city manager and the producer does not agree to additional time to permit the city manager's review of the application and materials, the application may be denied for lack of appropriate review. 
(b)  A permit shall be issued where the city manager finds that: 
(1)  The application is complete and all materials and information required in support of the application has been provided and the information provided is reasonably determined to be accurate; 
(2)  The event will not unduly inconvenience the public in using public areas normally open for general public use or the city in conducting governmental operations; 
(3)  Adequate provision is or will be made for responding to medical and other public safety incidents and emergencies occurring during the special event; 
(4)  Adequate provision is or will be made for parking, vehicular/pedestrian traffic, crowd and traffic control, and security along with plans for restroom facilities and the collection and removal of rubbish, garbage, and any other waste byproducts generated by the special event; 
(5)  The producer has paid all fees required and otherwise provided, where required, for payment of other costs and expenses otherwise necessitated by or reasonably anticipated for the event; and 
(6)  Neither any other event is scheduled elsewhere in the city nor any other objectively determined set of conditions exist whereby city resources (including, but not limited to, law enforcement or public works personnel) required for the events and circumstances are so great that deployment would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the public welfare, health, safety, or good order; 
(c)  Conditions may be imposed with issuance of a permit to reasonably address concerns described in subsection (b)(2) above. 
(d)  A special event permit may be revoked or denied by the city upon determining that: 
(1)  False or incomplete information was provided on or in support of the permit application; 
(2)  The producer has not complied with all terms and conditions of the permit and any other applicable laws, including the requirements of this or any other city ordinance; 
(3)  The fees, costs, and expenses required have not been paid or acceptable, alternative arrangements have not been made with the city and confirmed in writing by the city for payment of same; or 
(4)  There exists an emergency or exigent circumstances such as a disaster or public calamity that impacts the public safety, health, welfare, and good order to such an extent that it is reasonably prudent to revoke or deny the permit. 
(e)  If an application for a permit is denied or issued subject to additional conditions, or if a permit is revoked, the city manager shall notify the producer in writing of the action, the reason(s) for same, and the right to an appeal. If the permit is revoked, the special event may not proceed and, if revoked while ongoing, the special event must cease immediately. 
(f)  If an application for a permit is denied or issued subject to additional conditions, or if a permit is revoked, the producer may request in writing that the action be reviewed by the governing authority. Such a request must be submitted to the city clerk within five days of the action complained of and must state with specificity the grounds for the appeal. 
(1)  The hearing before the governing authority shall be scheduled for a date within 14 days of the filing of the appeal. The governing authority has the discretion, upon determining that exigent circumstances warrant, to schedule and hold an earlier meeting to consider an appeal. 
(2)  The appeal hearing shall be limited to the grounds stated in the appeal unless, for good cause shown, the governing authority determines to hear other grounds. The city manager and other persons directly affected by the decision at issue may speak and present evidence at the hearing and the parties may be represented by counsel at the appeal hearing. 
(3)  The governing authority shall issue its decision on the appeal within five days of concluding the hearing. 
(g)  A decision upholding denial, grant with additional conditions, or revocation of a permit may be appealed by way of a writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Paulding County. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 7-10. - Vendors. 
(a)  The sale of food, food products, and/or merchandise, goods, or services by vendors shall be allowed as a component of a special event, provided that each vendor is authorized in writing by the producer to participate in the event and provided further that each vendor shall be subject to all conditions and limitation imposed in writing for the special event by the producer. The written authorizations and the conditions and limitations imposed by the producer shall be submitted promptly to the city in advance of the special event. 
(b)  The producer shall be responsible for all vendors as a component of the special event and shall be responsible for designating the location and activities of vendors consistent with a special event permit and any applicable conditions. 
(c)  Authorized vendors of the producer providing food and/or merchandise for sale are not required to obtain or possess a separate vendor's permit to operate during the special event unless the vendor is a provider of alcoholic beverages as a part of the special event. (Alcohol caterers will be subject to separate permitting under section 4-48.) This provision notwithstanding, food vendors authorized by the producer are required to comply with the rules and regulations of the state and the Paulding County Health Department as to the preparation and service of food. 
(d)  The dispensing of alcoholic beverages, by sale or otherwise, as a part of the special event shall be allowed provided that each vendor is authorized to participate by the producer and, provided further, that each vendor dispensing alcoholic beverages shall have been duly licensed by the state, city, or other local governing authority to engage in off-premises dispensation and has complied with all provisions of the city's ordinances relating to the sale or dispensation otherwise of alcoholic beverages off-premises. 
(e)  Each authorized vendor shall prominently display a badge or other notification signifying the vendor's status as one authorized to participate in the special event by the producer. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized vendor to engage in any business within a distance of 100 yards of the special event from one hour before the scheduled start time for the special event until one hour after the schedule ending time for the special event. This provision does not preclude the transacting of the usual and customary business of a person or entity possessing a valid occupation tax certificate issued by the city for transacting business at a fixed location that happens to be adjacent to or within 100 yards of the property on which the special event is held. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 7-11. - City co-sponsorship of special events. 
    The city may co-sponsor a proposed special event upon a request by an applicant for a special event permit or upon acceptance by a producer of an offer for such co-sponsorship. Co-sponsorship may take the form of a monetary contribution in support of the special event, provision of services in-kind at no cost to the producer, or both. Decisions on whether to participate in the proposed special event as a co-sponsor and what will be provided as a co-sponsor are entrusted to the discretion of the governing authority for which no appeal shall be permitted. Co-sponsorship of a proposed special event is limited only to those events where the producer is an entity whose primary purpose is to promote economic development in the city or Paulding County or an entity that is a non-profit organization that seeks to promote and advance the health, welfare, or safety of the public or a segment of the public within the city or Paulding County and which has its principal place of business located in the city or Paulding County. As a part of the application process an applicant may request that the city co-sponsor the proposed special event. The request must be in writing, describe with particularity the type(s) of co-sponsorship desired, and describe how the special event proposed will enhance or promote economic development in the city or promote and advance the health, welfare, or safety of the public or a segment of the public within the city or Paulding County. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 7-12. - Compliance with additional provisions required. 
    Nothing about this chapter constitutes a waiver of the applicability of any other provision of the city's Code of Ordinances to the special event or the manner in which it will be conducted. Likewise, all provisions of any applicable state or federal law must be complied with in connection with the special event. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 7-13. - Penalty for violations. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk and the marshal's department or police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to special events are observed and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the city municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city police chief or chief marshal and their assistants to inspect all permits issued by city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the permits held is the proper one for the event to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, 8-4-2014) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2014-01, adopted June 2, 2014 , amended Ch. 8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8,  8-1-8-5, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-301-5-304; Ord. No. 93-06, adopted June 29, 1993; and Ord. No. 2010-06, adopted Aug. 30, 2010. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-11. - Codes adopted by reference. 
(a)  The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code. 
(2)  Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code. 
(3)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code. 
(4)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code. 
(5)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code. 
(6)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code. 
(7)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code. 
(8)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code. 
(9)  2006 International Property Maintenance Code (as amended by the City of Dallas, Georgia) and on file with the building department. 
(10)  2006 International Existing Building Code. 
(b)  The following appendices of said codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  International Residential Code: Appendix G (swimming pools, spas and hot tubs). 
(c)  The City of Dallas, Georgia Administration and Enforcement of Construction Codes shall be adopted and apply to the codes listed in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(10) of this section. Administration and enforcement for code subsections as defined herein. Codes listed as (a)(1) through (a)(10) are on file with the building department. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-12. - Compliance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any construction activity, whether commercial, business or residential, unless such construction is accomplished in strict compliance with the various construction codes adopted by this article. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-13. - Enforcement. 
    When reference is made to the authorities or duties of certain officials named in the various construction codes adopted by this article, the designated city official shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the enforcement of such codes. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-14. - Permit and inspection fees. 
    Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. Associated fees pertaining to the adopted construction codes listed section 8-11 shall include, but are not limited to: residential and commercial building, duct and envelope tightness verification, mechanical, heating, venting and air conditioning, plumbing, electrical, gas, energy, retaining walls, swimming pools, signs, copies of records, and penalties, as adopted by the mayor and council. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-15. - Sewer tap. 
    All builders shall obtain a sewer tap or a septic tank permit from Paulding County Environmental Health Department before issuance of a building permit by the city. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-16. - Display of building permit. 
    Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such a position as to permit the city building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. 
    The permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the city building official. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-17. - Minimum area for residential dwellings. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Conditioned space means: 
(1)  For energy purposes, space within a building that is provided with heating, and/or cooling equipment or systems capable of maintaining, through design or heat loss/gain, 50 degrees Fahrenheit (ten degrees Celsius) during the heating season and 85 degrees Fahrenheit (29 degrees Celsius) during the cooling season, or communicates directly with a conditioned space. 
(2)  For mechanical purposes, an area, room or space being heated or cooled by any equipment or appliance. 
(b)  The minimum area for a single-family unattached dwelling shall be 1,500 square feet of conditioned space. 
(c)  The minimum area for all other residential dwellings shall be 900 square feet of conditioned space. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-18. - Contractors. 
(a)  Any licensed contractor doing business in the city must obtain a permit from the city, or their designated representative, for any type of activity regulated in the codes defined in section 8-11. 
(b)  All contractors, developers and builders must have a current business license and, if their profession is regulated by the state, they must hold a valid state card. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-19. - Violations. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation that shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the City of Dallas, Georgia, be punished as a misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Secs. 8-20-8-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 8-31. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the mandatory Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for construction as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs and enforced by the City of Dallas. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction may be referred to as "the construction codes". 
(1)  Exception 1. The administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code shall be Chapter 1 of the code itself, as amended and adopted by the state. 
(2)  Exception 2. The administration and enforcement of the 2006 International Property Maintenance Code (as amended by Dallas) shall be Chapter 1 of the code itself. 
(3)  Exception 3. The administration and enforcement of the 2006 International Existing Building Code. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-32. - Code remedial. 
(a)  Generally. In general, the construction codes adopted in this article are hereby declared to be remedial, and is construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, addition, repair, removal, relocation, demolition, use, and occupancy of buildings, structures, signs, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing systems and sprinkler systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The city, nor any employee thereof, is liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-33. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Conflict with other provisions or requirements. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement is applicable. 
(2)  The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall be enforced by the city: 
a.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code. 
b.  Georgia State Minimum Standard One- and Two-family Dwelling Code. 
c.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code. 
d.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code. 
e.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code. 
f.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code. 
g.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code. 
h.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code. 
i.  2006 International Existing Building Code. 
j.  International Residential Code: Appendix G (swimming pools, spas and hot tubs). 
(3)  In addition, the 2006 International Property Maintenance Code (as amended by Dallas) shall be enforced for the regulation of all existing buildings, dwellings, structures, and signs, including their premises, equipment, sanitation, life safety, etc. 
a.  Building: The provisions of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, relocation and demolition, of every building, structure or sign or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings of structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings and their accessory structures. 
b.  One- and two-family dwellings: The provisions of the Georgia State Minimum Standard One- and Two-family Dwelling Code as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal, relocation, maintenance and demolition of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures and their accessory structure. 
c.  Fire prevention: The provisions of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings and their accessory structures. 
d.  Plumbing: The provisions of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alteration, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
e.  Mechanical: The provisions of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings and their accessory structures. 
f.  Gas: The provisions of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. 
1.  These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings and their accessory structures. 
g.  Electrical: The provisions of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including additions, alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
h.  Energy: The provisions of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code, as adopted and amended the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
1.  Any duct or envelope tightness verification or testing required by this code may be performed by the City of Dallas Building Department, for due cause the building official may hire or allow a certified/qualified outside contractor to perform such testing. If a builder, owner or contractor elects to perform (or hires a certified/qualified outside contractor to perform) any such duct or envelope tightness verification/testing, the results of such testing shall not be made mandatory upon the building official for his acceptance as meeting the requirements of this Code. 
2.  The building and/or heating and air conditioning contractor shall be charged a fee for such duct and envelope tightness verification/testing. Testing fees are not printed herein, but are maintained by the city clerk in a separate schedule as established by the city council and can be amended by the city council from time to time by motion, resolution or ordinance. 
3.  Failures in meeting the provisions the code concerning duct and envelope tightness shall result in the testing being required to be performed again, after corrections to deficiencies have been made, and a re-inspection fee paid. Re-inspection fees are not printed herein, but are maintained by the city clerk in a separate schedule as established by the city council and can be amended by the city council from time to time by motion, resolution or ordinance. 
4.  Upon request, and upon the payment of an additional fee, the building department shall schedule an analysis to attempt to determine the cause of the failure of duct tightness and/or envelope tightness tests. The additional fee is not printed herein, but is maintained by the city clerk in a separate schedule as established by the city council and can be amended by the city council from time to time by motion, resolution or ordinance. 
i.  Property maintenance: The provisions of the 2006 International Property Maintenance Code (as amended by Dallas) and listed in subsection 8-11(a)(9) of this chapter shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures (including garages, storage buildings, signs and other accessory structures as well as to pool barriers) and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes are considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard [are] enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions are enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(d)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, is responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing systems, etc. 
(e)  Building department. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in change shall be known as the building official. The governing body shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. 
(1)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee tasked with inspections under the adopted codes or this division, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-34. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Generally. Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair, or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system is made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes for new construction as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the federal, state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within the fire districts. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-35. - Building official. 
(a)  Generally. When reference is made to the authorities or duties of certain officials named in the various construction codes adopted by this article, the designated building official, shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the enforcement of such codes. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Necessary enforcement of provisions. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, sign, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  Legal authority to enter. When the building official shall have first obtained legal authority to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, sign, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice is in writing and is given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, or posted on the property. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in a case where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by Code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, sign, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not specifically covered by or the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds through an engineer's investigation and with an engineer's approval or stamp, that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-36. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  Permitting required. When required, any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any sign, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work provided the same are shown and clearly detailed on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown clearly on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, the building official may determine compliance with applicable code provisions upon inspection in the field, or may require revised plans, permits or even separate permits as necessary. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes or other city ordinances. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application is signed by the contractor or owner responsible for performing the work or their authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work is deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work shall accompany the application for a permit, including the height of any proposed structure. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information is specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal," or its equivalent, be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet or more in area. 
d.  For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(4)  Exception. In general, single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. When the building official has concerns about the structural adequacy or life safety of specific aspects of the design, an engineer or architect may be required to review and/or modify, and then approve the design of such areas, prior to the building official's acceptance. 
(5)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor, or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes, and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors or ceilings intersect the exterior walls. 
(6)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(7)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment, and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas are identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility is identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction, and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads, and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue a permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building or structure has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building or structure, or for the alteration of any building or structure where said building or structure is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley, or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has confirmed the location of the public right-of-way lines, and it is the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for by code or ordinance. 
(e)  Contractor responsibilities. It is the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler, or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before he is permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with its license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued is construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. All permits expire six months after the last required inspection that has been passed, or six months after the date of issue if no required inspections have been approved. The building official may issue a six-month extension of any permit, for due cause, if requested in writing by the permit holder prior to such a permit expiring. The extension of any permit may require the payment of a fee. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they are responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his place, a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed and approved by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance" or "approved" or similar. One set of drawings so reviewed is retained by the building official and the other set is returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings are to be kept at the site of work and open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative during all times workers are present. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the building department have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, sign, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing system, etc. before obtaining the necessary permits are subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit is paid as required at the time of filing application or once the permit is ready for issuance, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the building department. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing systems, etc. appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include the total cost of the building, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, equipment, and other systems, as required to erect and complete the building, dwelling or structure; including design fees, connection to utilities, site work necessary for foundation installation, materials, labor, overhead and profit. If any of the costs involved are discounted due to the use of used materials, or when labor and/or materials have been traded for some other goods or services (in whole or in part), the normal, undiscounted costs shall be used for the purpose of determining the cost (valuation) of construction in order to determine the permit fees. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing buildings. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing systems, etc. for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (h)(6) of this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection is made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit and work hours. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located at a prominent location, parallel to and facing the street and visible from the right-of-way. The permit shall be located such that the building official or the building official's representative shall be able to conveniently and safely access the permit and make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as may be necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
a.  Building. 
1.  Footing inspection. The footing inspection is to be made after trenches are excavated and reinforcement rods are in place. 
2.  Foundation inspection. The foundation inspection is to be made after the forms have been erected and the reinforcing steel is in place. 
3.  Underslab inspection. The underslab inspection is to be made after trenches are excavated and all electrical conduit, plumbing pipe, etc. have been installed. 
4.  Slab inspection. The slab inspection is to be made after all underslab work has been installed and backfilled and all required steel, wire and vapor/moisture barriers are in place. 
5.  Rough inspection. The rough framing inspection is to be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking, and bracing are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents are complete, before the installation of any insulation, wall membrane or other material that hides construction details from view, and after all other applicable rough inspections for other trades have been approved. Note: All trade rough inspections must be called for at one time on all one- and two-family dwelling work or additional fees may be charged. 
6.  Envelope tightness verification. The air tightness of the building, dwelling or dwelling unit(s) as required by the current Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code as amended and adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall be performed by a certified/qualified outside contractor in accordance with such code and after all rough inspections have Been approved, after the installation of the exterior doors and windows, after the installation of all exterior and interior wall coverings, and after the installation of all penetrations of the building envelope including penetrations for utilities, plumbing, electrical ventilation, combustion appliances, etc. Note: The required duct tightness and envelope tightness verifications must be met. 
7.  Final inspection. The final building inspection is to be made after the building is complete and ready for occupancy and after all other applicable final inspections for other trades have been approved. Note: All trade final inspections must be called for at one time on all one- and two-family dwelling work or additional fees may be charged. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Temporary power pole inspection. If requested, and if the appropriate fee has been paid, the temporary power pole (T-pole) inspection is to be made after the pole has been erected, the meter and all subsequent wiring and grounding has been installed, and before connection to the provider. 
2.  Underground inspection. The underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches have been excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is in place. 
3.  Underslab inspection. The underslab inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches have been excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is in place. 
4.  Rough/wall cover inspection. The electrical rough inspection is to be made after all wires, boxes, guards, conduits, etc. have been installed and before the installation of any insulation, wall membrane or other material that hides construction details from view. Note: All trade rough inspections must be called for at one time on all one- and two-family dwelling work or additional fees may be charged. 
5.  Temporary power inspection. If requested, and if approved by the building official, the temporary power inspection is to be made after the meter and all subsequent wiring has been installed up to the service panel, and at least one GFCI circuit has been installed and before connection to the utility provider. 
6.  Ceiling cover inspection. The ceiling cover inspection is to be made after all wires, boxes, guards, conduits, etc. have been installed and before the installation of any insulation, ceiling membrane or other material that hides construction details from view. 
7.  Final inspection. The final electrical inspection is to be made after the building is complete, all electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. Note: All trade final inspections must be called for at one time on all one- and two-family dwelling work or additional fees may apply. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground and/or underslab inspections. The plumbing underground and/or underslab inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. The plumbing rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and all soil, waste, vent and exhaust piping is complete, and prior to the installation of insulation, wall membrane or other material that hides construction details from view. Note: All trade rough inspections must be called for at one time on all one- and two-family dwelling work or additional fees may be charged. 
3.  Final inspection. The final plumbing inspection is to be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. Note: All trade final inspections must be called for at one time on all one- and two-family dwelling work. 
** See Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground and/or underslab inspections. The mechanical underground and/or underslab inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct, fuel piping, etc. has been installed and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. The mechanical rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting, linesets, required wiring, boxes, guards and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of insulation, wall membrane or other material that hides construction details from view. Note: All trade rough inspections must be called for at one time on all one- and two-family dwelling work or additional fees may be charged. 
3.  Ceiling cover inspection. The ceiling cover inspection is to be made after all wires, boxes, guards, ducts, equipment, linesets, etc. have been installed and before the installation of any insulation, ceiling membrane or other material that hides construction details from view. 
4.  Duct tightness verification. The air tightness of all ducts, air handlers, filter boxes and building cavities used as ducts, in all buildings, dwellings or dwelling units, as required by the current Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code as amended and adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, may be performed by the City of Dallas Building Department, for due cause the building official may hire or allow a certified/qualified outside contractor to perform such testing and in accordance with such code, this division, and after all rough-in inspections have been approved. Duct and envelope tightness verifications must be met. Certification form shall be supplied to building department prior to final inspections. Duct and envelope tightness verifications must be permanently affixed to inside cover of main electrical box. 
5.  Final inspection. The final mechanical inspection is to be made after the building is complete, all mechanical ducts, grills, registers, equipment, etc. are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. Note: All trade final inspections must be called for at one time on all one- and two-family dwelling work or additional fees may apply. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Underground and/or underslab inspections. The gas underground and/or underslab inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground gas and fuel piping has been installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in or wall cover piping inspection. The gas rough-in or wall cover piping inspection is to be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. Note: All trade rough inspections must be called for at one time on all one- and two-family dwelling work or additional fees may be charged. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Foundation inspection. The energy foundation inspection is to be made before any backfill is put in place or before any slab concrete is poured, in order to verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab or other foundation, if required. 
2.  Rough inspection. The rough energy inspection is to be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking, and bracing are in place, after the exterior wall covering, is in place, after all concealed wiring, pipes, chimneys, ducts, exhausts vents, etc. are complete, before the installation of any insulation, interior wall membrane or other material that hides construction details from view, and after all other applicable rough inspections for other trades have been approved. This inspection is to verify that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. Note: All trade rough inspections must be called for at one time on all one- and two-family dwelling work or additional fees may be charged. 
3.  Insulation inspection. The insulation inspection is to be made after all other required rough inspections have been approved, after all exterior doors and windows are in place and when all insulation that will later be concealed has been installed. 
4.  Duct and envelope tightness verification. The air tightness of the building, dwelling or dwelling unit(s) and of the duct system(s) and their current Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code as amended and adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, may be performed by the City of Dallas Building Department, for due cause the building official may hire or allow a certified/qualified outside contractor to perform such testing and in accordance with such code, this division, and after all rough-in inspections have been approved. Duct and envelope tightness verifications must be met. Certification form shall be supplied to building department prior to final inspections. Duct and envelope tightness verifications must be permanently affixed to inside cover of main electrical box. If called for separately, additional fees shall apply. 
5.  Final inspection. The final inspection for energy is to be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy, in order to verify the installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation, the correct SEER ratings on appliances, etc. When on one- and two-family dwellings, such inspection shall be done in conjunction with all other trade finals or additional fees may apply. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing system, etc. beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release is given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frame, form work, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(i)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building, dwelling or dwelling unit shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature, or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required building, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each building/floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel, or power for the purpose of testing building service systems, or for use or occupancy under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, dwelling, structure, or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property, or if such a connection first required a permit and/or inspection and such a permit or inspection was not first properly obtained. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, dwelling, structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or service system is notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It is the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor, or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations are accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed, also taking into account any concentrated loads where applicable. The computations and affidavit is filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. Signs are required in every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial, or hazardous purposes, for the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, are marked on plates or approved design which is supplied and securely affixed by the contractor/owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, must be replaced by the owner of the building. 
Exception: No posting is required for slab on grade floors. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-37. - Tests. 
    The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by the building department or by a testing laboratory or other agency as approved in advance by the building official. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-38. - Appeals. 
(a)  Powers. The Judge of Municipal Court of Dallas, Georgia, shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (b)(1)a. through d. in this section, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and to further hear appeals as defined below in subsection (b)(1)a. through d. 
(b)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, dwelling, structure, or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, dwelling, structure or service system. 
b.  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Appeals of variances. The City of Dallas, Georgia Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear appeals of all variances and when so appealed and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, dwelling, structure, or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, dwellings, structures, or service system. 
d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, dwelling, structure, or service system. 
e.  That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
1.  In granting the variance, the City of Dallas, Georgia Board of Zoning Appeals may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required is commenced or completed or both. In addition, the judge may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance is deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(3)  Notice of appeal. All notices of appeals shall be in writing and filed with either the Clerk of the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia, or the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Dallas, Georgia, within 30 calendar days (except as may be shortened according to paragraph 4 below) after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia, or the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(4)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, dwelling, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(c)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  Decisions. Any appeal shall be decided without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision concerning any appeal shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision concerning any appeal must be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision concerning any appeal shall be furnished to the appellant and a copy will be publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision concerning any appeal, shall be a final decision and shall be subject to any such further remedy available to an appellant according to the Laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Copies of all meetings and agenda of the City of Dallas, Georgia, Board of Zoning Appeals concerning any appeals shall be filed with the City Clerk of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-39. - Severability. 
    If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this [division] is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or unlawful, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this [division]. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 8-40. - Penalties. 
    Violation. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to engage in any construction activity, whether commercial, business or residential, unless such construction is accomplished in strict compliance with the various construction codes adopted by this article. Each person engaging in unlawful construction activity shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes or this division is committed or continued. Any person violating any provision of such codes or ordinance shall be punished as a misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. OA-2014-01, 6-2-2014 ) 
Secs. 8-41-8-50. - Reserved. 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Bondsmen. 
(a)  No person shall act as a bail professional bondsman in the city without having a license therefore, from the city as provided in this article. 
(b)  To qualify for a license under this article, the following certified information must affirmatively appear on, or be annexed to, the application that: 
(1)  The applicant is a citizen of the United States, and has been a bona fide resident of the State of Georgia for a minimum period of one year. 
(2)  The applicant is a natural person who has reached the age of 21 years. 
(3)  The place of business of the applicant shall be located within this state and that such applicant will be actively engaged in the bail bond business and maintain a place of business accessible to the public. 
(4)  Documentation describing the composition of the company for which the applicant is applying, whether as an individual(s), trust(s), partnership, corporation or other legal entity and setting forth the names and addresses of each individual, partner, officer, director, shareholder, trust, member or other entity composing the company. 
(5)  Applicant's employees that are qualified to sign bonds must be persons of high character and provable integrity and each shall be vouched for in writing by two other reputable citizens who are residents of Paulding County. 
(6)  Applicant must submit a complete set of fingerprints, personal information sufficient to perform a background check, and a recent credential-size, full face photograph of the applicant and each individual authorized to execute bonds on behalf of the company. The fingerprints shall be processed by the chief of police, who shall conduct a background check including, but not limited to, the submission of the fingerprints to federal, state and local authorities, and certify that the individuals are free of any record of any crime involving moral turpitude, felony or any violation of law applicable to the bail bonding business within the previous five years. Any person who has power of attorney for the purpose of writing bonds must comply with this section. 
(7)  Applicant must submit an affidavit listing all real property in which the applicant has an interest, stating the ownership of said property, all liens or encumbrances thereon and describing said property in detail including, but not limited to, the true market value of said property. Such affidavit is to be submitted according to the standards promulgated by the chief of police. 
(8)  Applicant must possess a business license from the city and pay the rate as specified in the business license schedule. 
(c)  The application fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, shall be submitted with each application to the mayor and city council. Such fee is to defray the cost of conducting the character and background investigation required by this section. 
(d)  No person shall be permitted to sign professional bonds or act as an agent or representative of a bonding company if such person: 
(1)  Has been convicted of a felony; 
(2)  Has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Has failed to meet bonding obligations in any jurisdiction; or 
(4)  Fails to qualify as a bondsman under applicable state statutes governing whom may act in such capacity. 
(e)  No person shall be permitted to write professional bonds which are prohibited as a matter of law. 
(f)  City employees are prohibited from owning, operating or acting in any capacity as an agent for a professional bonding company. Upon a violation of this paragraph, the bonding company's privileges shall be suspended and/or revoked until such person is no longer affiliated with the bonding company. 
(g)  These provisions in no way prohibit the city or its authorized agents from establishing additional standards with which bonding companies must comply, nor does it in any way limit the city's legal right to regulate the privilege of writing bail bonds. 
(h)  Applicants seeking permission to act as professional bondsmen in the city as of date referred to in section 10-11 of this chapter, must qualify as follows: 
(1)  Applicants must sign an agreement with the city providing for an escrow account in any one or more financial institutions designated as city depositories. The agreement will state the required cash bond sum that must be deposited in escrow by the company and said sum shall be determined by the chief of police. Cash bond deposit schedules for escrow are not printed herein, but are maintained by the city clerk in a separate schedule. If this escrow is encroached upon for any reason or if the city's chief of police otherwise determines that additional escrow is required to ensure the solvency or reliability of the professional bonding business, the city's chief of police may amend the escrow through written notice to the professional bonding business. 
(2)  A professional bonding business operating in the city shall provide the chief of police with the names of all partners, officers, stockholders, and any other person(s) or corporation(s) having an interest in or involved with the business of the corporation. This information shall be provided prior to the bonding company initiating business or upon the renewal of its license. The bonding company shall immediately notify the chief of police of any changes of ownership or direction. Failure of the company to comply with these provisions shall result in the immediate suspension of bonding privileges. 
(3)  All owners and/or employees of a professional bonding company must be fingerprinted and photographed by the identification division of the city police department. 
(4)  Each individual authorized to execute bonds on behalf of the company must file a properly executed power of attorney from the bonding company. 
(5)  Professional bonding companies must receive the approval of the chief of police prior to posting a bond or any combination of bonds which total $25,000.00 or more for any one individual. 
(i)  No professional bonding company may sign a bond in which another bonding company or third party receives compensation to arrange the release of an inmate from the city jail. 
(j)  All bonding companies shall file with the chief of police a monthly report. These reports will include the following information and shall be filed in the form of an affidavit: 
(1)  List by name, in alphabetical order, amount and date of bonds signed during each month. 
(2)  List by name, in alphabetical order, case or indictment number, and date of all bonds officially settled during each month. 
(3)  List by name, in alphabetical order, amount and date of bonds, all judgments rendered by the city, state and/or Superior Court of Paulding County and/or any other counties, subject to collection in the city. 
(4)  List by name, in alphabetical order, amount and date of bonds, all forfeitures pending in the City of Dallas and/or other cities or counties, subject to collection in the city. 
(5)  List all personnel in the employment of submitting bonding company. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-03, 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 10-2. - Same-Renewal of licenses. 
(a)  Any professional bonding company licensed under this chapter shall be required to renew its license before December 31 of each year. Failure to pay the license fee by January 31 of each year, shall automatically revoke the license. 
(b)  Each application for renewal of such license shall be accompanied by a certified statement from the professional bonding company that it is in compliance with all requirements of any agreements with the city and the provisions of this Code section, along with copies of the monthly reports filed each month with the chief of police as required by subsection 10-1(j) for the previous year. 
(c)  Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate of completion of eight hours of approved continuing education. 
(d)  Applicant must submit a complete set of fingerprints, personal information sufficient to perform a background check, and a recent credential-size, full face photograph of the applicant and each individual authorized to execute bonds on behalf of the company. The fingerprints shall be processed by the chief of police, who shall conduct a background check including, but not limited to, the submission of the fingerprints to federal, state and local authorities and certify that the individuals are free of any record of any crime involving moral turpitude, felony or any violation of law applicable to the bail bonding business with the previous five years. Any person who has power of attorney for the purpose of writing bonds must comply with this section. 
(e)  Applicant must submit an affidavit listing all real property in which the applicant has an interest, stating the ownership of said property, all liens or encumbrances thereon and describing said property in detail including, but not limited to, the true market value of said property. Such affidavit is to be submitted according to the standards promulgated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-03, 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 10-3. - Same-Denial; suspension; revocation; upon renewal. 
    Each year, upon application for a license under this article, the applicant shall comply with the requirements of this article, and the license shall be granted, renewed or denied in accordance with this article. The mayor and city council may deny, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any license issued in accordance with the requirements of this article for any of the following causes: 
(1)  For any cause for which issuance of the license could have been refused had it then existed and been known to the mayor and city council. 
(2)  Material misstatement, misrepresentation or fraud in obtaining the license. 
(3)  Misappropriation, conversion or unlawful withholding of money belonging to others and received in the conduct of business under the license. 
(4)  Conviction of a felony. 
(5)  Fraudulent or dishonest practices in the conduct of business under the license. 
(6)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(7)  Failure to return collateral security to the principal when the principal is entitled thereto. 
(8)  When in the judgment of the mayor and city council, the licensee has, in the conduct of affairs under the license, demonstrated incompetence or untrustworthiness, or conduct or practices rending him unfit to carry on the bail bond business, or making his continuance in such business detrimental to the public interest, or that he is no longer in good faith carrying on the bail bond business, or that he is guilty of rebating, or offering to rebate, or offering to divide his compensation, and for any or all such reasons, is found by the mayor and city council to be a source of detriment, injury or loss to the public. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-03, 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 10-4. - Same-Return of license upon termination of business. 
    Any professional bondsman who discontinues writing bail bonds during the period for which he is licensed shall notify the chief of police and the city clerk, and immediately return the license. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-03, 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 10-5. - State statutes governing professional bondsmen. 
    Bondsmen shall comply with all applicable state statutes which control bonding procedures with the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-03, 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 10-6. - Individuals other than professional bondsmen. 
    The chief of police may allow an individual property owner to sign a bail bond under the following conditions: 
(1)  The individual must own property in Paulding County, Georgia. 
(2)  The individual must prove ownership of said real property by either: 
a.  A current tax receipt; or 
b.  A copy of a warranty deed transferring full interest in a described piece of property. 
(3)  The individual must sign an affidavit that states that the equity in said property is at least twice the amount of said bail bond, excluding homestead exemption, on each bond written. 
(4)  The individual shall not receive any compensation, gift or collateral for making or signing a defendant's bond and must sign an affidavit affirming such. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-03, 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 10-7. - Forfeiture of bond; surrender of custody of defendant; procedure. 
(a)  The clerk of court shall give the surety on all appearance bonds at least 72 hours' written notice, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, before the time of the required appearance of the principal. Such notice shall not be necessary if the time for appearance is within 72 hours from the time of arrest, provided the time for appearance is stated on the bond, or where the principal is given actual notice in open court. 
(b)  On the date required for appearance of the principal, the presiding municipal judge or designee shall call the case, and if the accused is not in court and does not answer the call, and if no good and sufficient reason is given for nonappearance, the judge shall, at the end of the court day, upon the failure of the principal to appear, enter on the docket where the case is stated "bond forfeited" or similar words thereby forfeiting the bond, and order an execution hearing not sooner than 120 days, but later than 150 days after such failure to appear by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the surety at the address listed on the bond, or by personal service to the surety within ten days of such failure to appear as its home or office or to its designated registered agenda. Service shall be considered complete upon the mailing of such certified notice. 
(c)  If at the execution hearing it is determined that judgment should be entered, the judge shall so order and a writ of fieri facias shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the court where such judgment is entered. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-03, 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 10-8. - Conditions not warranting forfeiture of bond for failure to appear; remission of forfeiture. 
(a)  No judgment shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court, by the written statement of a licensed physician, that the principal on the bond was prevented from attending by some mental or physical disability. 
(b)  No judgment shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the principal on the bond was prevented from attending because he or she was detained by reason of arrest, sentence, or confinement in a penal institution or jail, or detained pursuant to court order in a mental institution. An official written notice of the holding institution in which the principal is being detained or confined shall be considered proof of the principal's detention or confinement and such notice may be sent from the holding institution by mail or delivered by hand or by facsimile machine. Upon the presentation of such written notice to the clerk of the proper court, the prosecuting attorney, and the sheriff or other law enforcement officer having jurisdiction over the case, along with a letter of intent to pay all costs of returning the principal to the jurisdiction of court, such notice and letter shall serve as the surety's request for a detainer or hold to be placed upon the principal. Should there be a failure to place a detainer or hold within 15 days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, and after such presentation of such notice and letter of intent to pay costs, the surety shall then be relieved of liability for the appearance bond without further order of the court. 
(c)  No judgment shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that prior to the entry of the judgment on the forfeiture, the principal on the bond is in the custody of the sheriff or other responsible law enforcement agency. An official written notice of the holding institution in which the principal is being detained or confined shall be proof of the principal's detention or confinement, and such notice may be sent from the holding institution by mail or delivered by hand or by facsimile machine. Upon presentation of such written notice to the clerk of the proper court, the prosecuting attorney, and the sheriff or other law enforcement officer having jurisdiction over the case along with a letter of intent to pay all of the costs of returning the principal to the jurisdiction of the court, such notice and letter shall serve as the surety's request for a detainer or hold to be placed upon the principal. Should there be a failure to place a detainer or hold within 15 days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, and after such presentation of such notice and letter of intent to pay costs, the surety shall then be relieved of liability for the appearance bond without further order of the court. 
(d)  In cases in which paragraph (c) of this subsection is not applicable, on an application filed within 120 days from the payment of the judgment, the court shall order remission under the following conditions: 
(1)  Provided the bond amount has been paid within 120 days after judgment and the delay has not prevented prosecution of the principal, and upon application to the court with prior notice to the prosecuting attorney of such application, said court shall direct remission of 95 percent of the bond amount remitted to the surety, if the surety located the principal in the custody of the sheriff in the jurisdiction where the bond was made, apprehends, surrenders, or produces the principal, if the apprehension or surrender of the principal was substantially procured or caused by the surety, or if the location of the principal caused the adjudication of the principal in the jurisdiction where the bond was made. Should the surety, within two years of the principal's failure to appear, locate the principal in the custody of the sheriff in the jurisdiction where the bond was made, or another jurisdiction causing the return of the principal to the jurisdiction where the bond was made, apprehend, surrender, or produce the principal, if the apprehension or surrender of the principal is substantially procured or caused by the surety, or if the location of the principal by the surety causes the adjudication of the principal in the jurisdiction in which the bond was made, the surety shall be entitled to a refund of 50 percent of title bond amount. The application for 50 percent remission shall be made no later than 30 days following the expiration of the two-year period following title date of judgment. 
(2)  Remission shall be granted upon condition of the payment of court costs and of the expenses of returning the principal to the jurisdiction of the surety; or 
(3)  If, within 120 days after judgment, the surety surrenders title principal to the sheriff or responsible law enforcement officer, or said surrender has been denied by the sheriff or responsible law enforcement officer, surety locates the principal in custody of another jurisdiction, the surety shall only be required to pay costs and five percent of the face amount of the bond, which amount includes all surcharges. If it is shown to the satisfaction of the court, by presentation of competent evidence from the sheriff or the holding institution, that said surrender has been made or denied or that the principal is in custody in another jurisdiction or that said surrender has been made and that five percent of the face amount of the bond and all costs have been tendered to the sheriff, the court shall direct that the judgment be marked satisfied and the writ of execution, fieri facias, be cancelled. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-03, 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 10-9. - Cancelling bond. 
    When the condition of the bond is satisfied or the forfeiture of the bond has been discharged or remitted, the municipal court judge shall make an order cancelling the bond. Conviction or acquittal of the defendant shall satisfy the terms of the bond written by any bail bondsman. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-03, 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 10-10. - Severability. 
    In the event any section, subsection, sentence, or word of this ordinance [sections 10-1 through 10-9] are declared and adjudged to be invalidated or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining portions of [these sections], which shall remain in full force and effect as if such portion so declared or adjudged unconstitutional were not originally part of this article. The city council declares that it would have enacted the remaining parts of this article if it had known that such portion thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-03, 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 10-11. - Effective date. 
    The effective date of this ordinance [sections 10-1 through 10-9] shall be June 3, 2014. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-03, 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 10-12-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2011-05, adopted June 6, 2011, repealed Ch. 10, Art. II,  10-19-10-45, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
State Law reference- Authority to impose business licenses and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A.  36-43-4. 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
    Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. 
    Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without limitation to, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" does not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Inter-organizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2); or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entitles; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
    Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation in conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
    Parttime employees shall be computed on a 40-hour basis. For example, two parttime employees with 20 hours apiece shall be computed as one employee for the purpose of this article. Four employees with 30 hours apiece shall be computed as three employees (four employees at 30 hours equals a total of 120 hours divided by 40 hours equals three equivalent employees). 
    Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 100 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
    Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who is required by state law to have state license regulating such profession or occupation. 
    Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
    Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A.  36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-20. - Occupation tax required. 
    Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation within the city, whether with a location in the city, or in the case of an out-of-state business, with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A.  48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or to any marshal or police officer of said city upon request. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-21. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated nonrefundable administrative fee of $25.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A.  48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions requiring a regulatory fee is listed in section 10-44. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-22. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A.  48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  The occupation tax schedule is based upon the number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be updated from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council of the city and kept in a schedule by the clerk. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-23. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
    Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-24. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
(a)  The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the lines of business that the business conducts. 
(b)  No business shall conduct any lien of business without first having that line of business: 
(1)  Registered with the city clerk; and 
(2)  Being noted by the city upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-25. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in city. 
    Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation taxes. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-26. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
    Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A.  48-13-9(c)(1) through (22) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 10-22; or 
(2)  A fee, to be kept and maintained by the clerk, per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service; such tax is to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the number of employees of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-27. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
    Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by: 
(1)  The United States; 
(2)  The state; 
(3)  A municipality or county of the state; 
(4)  Instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state, any state or local authorities; or 
(5)  Any nonprofit organizations; 
shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice, business or occupation. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-28. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
    The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A.  48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-29. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and if unpaid by March 1, said tax shall be assessed a ten percent penalty in addition to the amount of the occupation tax due to be paid, and shall also accrue an interest on delinquent occupation taxes, administrative fees, and/or regulatory fees at a rate of 1.5 percent per month. If the total amount of the occupation tax and late fees are not paid by April 1, then additional penalties for delinquency shall be assessed as prescribed in this article, the Charter of the city and/or general state law. 
(b)  On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a $25.00 penalty shall be imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offers to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the city municipal court judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 360 days, either or both in the discretion of the city municipal court judge. 
(c)  In addition to the remedies in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city police chief or chief marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by general state law or section for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011; Ord. No. OA-2018-11 , 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 10-30. - Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose. 
    No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 100 percent of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-31. - Display of state registration required. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state license before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-32. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
    Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-33. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
    All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-34. - Subpoena and arrest powers. 
    The city police chief or chief marshal and his duly designated officer shall be empowered with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-35. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
    The following businesses may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness; 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A.  2-10-105; 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A.  33-8-8 et seq.; 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A.  46-7-15; 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A.  48-5-355, businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls; 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A.  48-5-356; 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A.  48-6-93; 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A.  48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-36. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
    In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax, shall estimate the number of employees projected for the business and such occupational tax shall be paid for the first year that the business is in operation based on said estimation and paid prior to the commencement of the business operation. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-37. - More than one place or line of business. 
    Where a business is operated at more than one location and if the business conducts different business activities then the business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location having a different business activity and shall also pay the required occupation tax for each location having different business activities. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-38. - Returns confidential. 
    Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any office, employee, agent, or clerk of city, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of said return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States, and other local governments if allowed by the laws of the state and the United States. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-39. - Inspections of books and records. 
    The city clerk, through his officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The city clerk shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city and upon demand of the city clerk, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city, for examination by the city clerk at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of $25.00 will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-40. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 10-39. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(b)  No occupational tax certificate may be issued or renewed for any applicant that is delinquent on real property taxes, personal property taxes, or occupation taxes owing to the City of Dallas, Georgia pertaining to the business, occupation, or profession for which such application is made. This requirement shall not apply in regard to real property and/or personal property taxes if a written payment agreement is on file with the city tax clerk for payment of delinquent real property and/or personal property taxes and the applicant's payments pursuant to the agreement are current as determined by the city tax clerk. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011 ; Ord. No. OA-2015-04, 7-6-2015 ) 
Sec. 10-41. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
(a)  In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city clerk upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the Charter and ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. 
(b)  The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city marshal or the city police chief or his representative upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the Charter, ordinances of the city and laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. 
(c)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-42. - Enforcement of provisions. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk and the marshal's department or police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the city municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city police chief or chief marshal and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-43. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
    The mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupational tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-06, 6-4-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2012-06, adopted June 4, 2012, repealed  10-43, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment  10-43 pertained to "Requirement of public hearing before tax increase and/or receipt of revenues greater than year before." See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 10-44. - Regulatory fee schedule. 
(a)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A.  48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. These businesses include, but are not expressly limited to the following: 
(1)  Carnivals; 
(2)  Taxicabs and limousine operators; 
(3)  Tattoo artists; 
(4)  Shooting ranges; 
(5)  Pawnbrokers; 
(6)  Peddlers; 
(7)  Personal care homes; 
(8)  Massage parlors; 
(9)  Landfills; 
(10)  Bonding companies; 
(11)  Hotels and motels; 
(12)  Health clubs, gyms and spas; 
(13)  Fortunetellers; 
(14)  Garbage collectors; and 
(15)  Locksmiths. 
(b)  The businesses in subsection (a) of this section may be amended or additional businesses may be added or deleted by resolution of the mayor and council of the city at any official regular or special meeting. 
(c)  Regulatory fees are not printed herein, but are maintained by the clerk in a separate rate schedule. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 10-45. - Compliance standards for multifamily rental housing. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certified building inspector means a person inspecting for compliance with the various adopted codes who holds the appropriate certifications from SBCCI, International Code Council or a licensed design professional. 
    Lease means any written or oral agreement which sets forth any and all conditions concerning the use and occupancy of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units. 
    Multifamily rental dwelling means any multifamily structure, multifamily building, or other facility promised and/or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit. The term "multifamily rental dwelling" includes, but is not limited to, multiple-family dwellings, multiple-family apartment units, boardinghouses, roominghouses, group homes, flats, and extended-stay establishments. 
    Multifamily rental unit means any one area, room, structure, flat, apartment, or facility of a multifamily rental dwelling that is being leased or rented to only one tenant, group of tenants, or family under one lease, or under terms of joint and severable liability. 
    Occupancy includes all tenants, lessees and persons residing within a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit. 
    Owner means any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a premises. 
    Owner-occupied means any part of a structure used as living quarters by the owner of said structure where other parts of the structure are used as multifamily rental units. Example: two-family dwelling, owner occupies one flat; roominghouse, owner occupies one unit. 
    Premises means any lot or piece of land inclusive of the multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit. 
(b)  Fee required. 
(1)  All owners of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units within the city that receive income for use of such dwellings or units shall be subject to an occupation fee. 
(2)  The annual regulatory fees for multifamily dwellings shall be based on a fee of $100.00 for each 50 multifamily rental units. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-05, 6-6-2011) 
Secs. 10-46-10-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-62-10-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 10-81. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A.  46-5-1(b)(8) and (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11,  5-22.1, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 10-82. - Authorized designee. 
    The city manager shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A.  46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council of the city within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this division. 
(4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and division. 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonable related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11,  5-22.2, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 10-83. - Preamble to ordinance incorporated by reference. 
    The preamble to the ordinance from which this division is derived is hereby incorporated into this division as if set out fully herein. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11,  5-22.3, 12-1-2008) 
Secs. 10-84-10-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CABLE FRANCHISE 

Sec. 10-110. - Regulation of systems. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Basic service rates and charges means the basic service tier rates, and charges for related equipment, installation and services of a cable television system. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States. 
    FCC rate regulations means regulations prescribed in the report and order, in the Matter of Implementation of Sections of Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992: rate regulation, MM Docket 92-266, FCC 93-177 (released May 3, 1993). 
(b)  FCC rate regulations to apply. In order to regulate cable television within the city, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions contained in the franchise. 
(2)  In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of the interested parties. 
(3)  The mayor of the city or his designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-414(b); Ord. 93-15, 10-4-1993) 
Sec. 10-111. - Franchising of cable and other telecommunications services. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable services means as that term is defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as may be further amended from time to time (the Cable Act). In the event that the term "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, the term "cable services" means "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
    Cable system means as that term is defined in the Cable Act. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets, as hereafter defined, to provide telecommunications services. 
    Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable or telecommunications services or both, to inhabitants within the city. 
    Street means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
    Telecommunications services means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial cable, optical fiber, or satellite or microwave transmission, of one or more audio, voice or data signals. The term "telecommunications services" includes both cable services and noncable telecommunications services. 
(b)  Granting authority. 
(1)  No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article and no person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services other than cable services without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The city council may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereto. 
(3)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. 
(4)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services. 
(5)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city and for all or less than all telecommunication services, and for telecommunications services for all or less than all purposes. 
(c)  Franchise applications. 
(1)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(2)  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
a.  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant. 
b.  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
1.  The names and the residence and the business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
2.  The names, residence and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
3.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant; namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole of in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including, but not limited to, telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
4.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the city council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications or cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable or telecommunications system in the city; 
5.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
6.  A statement identifying the following: 
(i)  By place and date, any other cable system or telecommunication franchises awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; 
(ii)  The status of said franchises with respect to completion thereof; 
(iii)  The total cost of completion of such franchised cable or telecommunication systems; and 
(iv)  The amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof. 
c.  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  A description of the cable services and any other telecommunications services proposed to be provided; 
2.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be served; 
3.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other telecommunication service charges; 
4.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
5.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable or telecommunications services; and 
6.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements, and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise. 
d.  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing, between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility including, but not limited to, poles, lines and/or conduits; and 
e.  Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law. 
(d)  Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit toward any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $2,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. 
(e)  Public availability of applications. To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications, or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during normal business hours. 
(f)  Evaluation criteria. In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and the in public interest, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to be provided, including the type of telecommunications services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the granting of the franchise; 
(5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(6)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(g)  Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(1)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(2)  If the city council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider one or more applications, the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application, fixing and setting forth the day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having an interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearings in accordance with applicable law. 
(3)  The city council may authorize negotiations between the city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(4)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(h)  Terms and conditions of franchise. The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the franchise; 
(2)  The franchise area and the cable services and other telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of the franchise; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees, or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or canceled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds, or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the franchise's obligations under the franchise; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee; 
(7)  The insurance and indemnification requirements of the franchise; 
(8)  The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the franchise by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules, and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(i)  Delegation. Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to the ordinance from which this article is derived or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or franchisee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council may determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this article. 
(j)  No retroactivity to existing franchises. This article shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for cable services and other telecommunications services existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(k)  No conflict with other ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-414(c); Ord. No. 95-21, 10-2-1995) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to grant franchises, O.C.G.A.  36-34-2(7). 
Secs. 10-112-10-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 10-136. - Occupational license tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Recurring local service revenues means: 
(1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listing and joint users; 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semi-public pay station services; 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and 
d.  Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service. 
(2)  Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)  All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
(b)  Telephone companies shall pay, on or before August 31 of each year, an occupational tax for that calendar year in the amount of three percent of the recurring local service revenues received by the company from subscribers located within the city. 
(c)  The annual amount due may be computed by annualizing the taxable revenues billed during the month of June preceding the date of payment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-415) 
Sec. 10-137. - Permits for telephone and telegraph wires, cables and conduits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except a franchise, to place or maintain a telephone or telegraph wire, cable or conduit upon, under or above the right-of-way of a city street or streets without first having obtained from the city manager a permit to do so. This permit, if granted by the city, shall be in duplicate, specifying the name of the streets involved, the purpose for which the wire, cable or conduit is run, the type and length of wire, cable or conduit to be run, the extent of the construction to be performed, and the time allowed for performance of the work. 
(b)  All permits issued hereunder shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. The permit shall be renewable annually as long as the person desires to maintain the wire, cable or conduit upon, under or above the right-of-way of the streets involved. 
(c)  The fee for said permit shall be $2.00 per foot of wire, cable, or conduit occupying said streets per year. 
(d)  The installation of said telephone or telegraph wires, cables, or conduits shall be done by a licensed contractor and said work shall be done in a workmanlike manner with any specifications provided in regulations adopted by the mayor and council of the city. 
(e)  Any person who is installing an overhead wire or cable across a city street shall at all times maintain a minimum 18-foot clearance above the surface of said street. 
(f)  The permit issued above shall also specify that the permittee shall at all times be responsible to the public and hold the city harmless for any property damage or personal injury caused or occasioned by the installation, maintenance or occupancy of any wire, cable, or conduit under, upon or above a street right-of-way as permitted herein. 
(g)  The city manager shall be authorized to require a permittee hereunder to relocate their wire, cable, or conduit in the event such relocation is a public necessity. The city manager may also require an overhead wire or cable to be relocated underground if the streets involved should convert from an overhead telephone system to an underground telephone system. 
(h)  Any firm, person or corporation currently maintaining any wire, cable, or conduit under, upon or above a city street right-of-way shall be required to secure a permit by July 1, 1985, and each year thereafter. 
(i)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-415.1) 
Secs. 10-138-10-157. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INSURANCE COMPANIES 

Sec. 10-158. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A.  33-3-5. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-416(a); Ord. No. 01-20, 10-1-2001) 
Sec. 10-159. - License fees-Annual. 
    There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $50.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 10-160, which is operating on behalf of insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $50.00. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-416(a); Ord. No. 01-20, 10-1-2001) 
Sec. 10-160. - Same-For insurers with additional business locations. 
    For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $17.50 per location per year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-416(b); Ord. No. 01-20, 10-1-2001) 
Sec. 10-161. - Same-For independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
    There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 10-159, in the amount of $50.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-416(c); Ord. No. 01-20, 10-1-2001) 
Sec. 10-162. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
    There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A.  33-8-8-1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means the term "gross direct premiums" as used in O.C.G.A.  33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 10-159. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-416(d); Ord. No. 01-20, 10-1-2001) 
Sec. 10-163. - Gross premiums tax levied upon all other insurers. 
    There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A.  33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 21/2 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A.  33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means the term "gross direct premiums" as used in O.C.G.A.  33-8-8.2(a). 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-416(e); Ord. No. 01-20, 10-1-2001) 
Sec. 10-164. - Due date for license fees. 
    License fees imposed in sections 10-159, 10-160 and 10-161 shall be due and payable on January 1. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-416(f); Ord. No. 01-20, 10-1-2001) 
Secs. 10-165-10-181. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 10-182. - Business license tax. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A.  48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, state building and loan associations and federal savings and loan associations, a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions. The term "gross receipts" means gross receipts as that term is defined in O.C.G.A.  48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-417(a)) 
Sec. 10-183. - Each depository financial institution to file a gross receipts return. 
    Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A.  48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-417(b)) 
Secs. 10-184-10-204. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXCISE TAX ON ROOMS, LODGING, AND ACCOMMODATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , adopted August 3, 2009, amended article VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article VII,  10-205-10-218, pertained to rooms, lodgings and accommodations, and derived from Ord. No. OA-2008-01,  5-430.1-5-430.14, 4-7-2008. 

Sec. 10-205. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is declared the purpose and the intent of the City of Dallas, Georgia that an excise tax be levied upon any room or rooms, lodgings and accommodations furnished for value within the City of Dallas, Georgia and that said funds be made available for the purpose of promoting, attraction, stimulating and developing tourism within the City of Dallas, Georgia and for the provision of other city services. 
(b)  The City of Dallas, Georgia does hereby levy and impose an excise tax of five percent upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the City of Dallas, Georgia for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground or any place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 10-206. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
    City means the City of Dallas, Georgia, and variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the City of Dallas, is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. 48-13-50 et seq. 
    City clerk means the duly appointed city clerk of the City of Dallas, Georgia or the clerk's designee. 
    Due date means from the 20 th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
    Estimated tax liability means the operator's prospective tax liability based upon tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
    Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es) and the method(s) of payment. 
    Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
    Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truck stop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
    Monthly period means the calendar month of any year. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession of any guestroom or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
    Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guestroom in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement or otherwise. 
    Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
    Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Tax means the tax imposed by this article, as provided by O.C.G.A. 48-13-50 et seq. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 10-207. - Tax rate. 
    There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guestroom in any hotel in the City of Dallas, Georgia, a tax at the rate of five percent of the amount of any rent unless an exemption is provided under section 10-210. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 10-208. - Collection of tax by operator. 
    Every operator renting guestrooms in this city shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 10-210. The operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the operator at the same time that the rent is collected. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 10-209. - Proceeds of the tax. 
(a)  The proceeds of the tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(b)  Expenditure of proceeds. 
(1)  A portion of the taxes collected shall be paid to the Paulding County, Georgia Chamber of Commerce or any other entity or organization allowable under O.C.G.A. 48-13-41 and as may be amended in the future pursuant to a contract with same, and expended for the purposes of promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows. In this regard, the Paulding County, Georgia Chamber of Commerce must spend such monies on planning, conducting or participating in programs of information and publicity designed to attract or advertise tourism, conventions or trade shows. The portions to be paid to the Paulding County, Georgia Chamber of Commerce shall be as follows: 
(i)  An amount equal to the amount by which the total taxes collected under this ordinance exceed the taxes which would have been collected at a rate of three percent; 
(2)  Prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the Paulding County, Georgia Chamber of Commerce shall provide to the city council a budget detailing the proposed expenditure of the funds provided under this ordinance. Such budget, after being approved by the city council, shall be made a part of the budget for the city. 
(3)  The Paulding County, Georgia Chamber of Commerce shall provide to the city council audit verification that the chamber has made use of the funds in conformity with the proposed budget and the general purpose of this article. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 10-210. - Exemption. 
    No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official of employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat exempted by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 10-211. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
    Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the city clerk, on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that this article becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business of intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 10-212. - Determination generally; returns, payments. 
(a)  Due dates of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20 th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for each monthly period after the 20 th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. An operator who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made with ten days of the due date, such may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; operators required to file; contents. On or before the 20 th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such operator shall file an estimated return and remit not less the 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20 th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20 th day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the operator. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. An operator granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 10-213. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any operator, the clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the clerk's possession or that may come into the clerk's possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination as provided by section 10-212. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the operator written notice of the clerk's determination. The notice served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20 th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 10-214. - Determination if no return made; unsatisfactory return. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the operator failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 10-213(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 10-212. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 10-215. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fee and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Operator selling or quitting business. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the governing authority. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the governing authority, the excess amount paid to the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 10-216. - Administration of article; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribed, and in such form as the clerk may require. Said records shall at times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Application for sales tax audit reports. Each year, in the month of January, the city clerk shall request in writing from the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue any reports of sales tax audits conducted of hotels in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 10-217. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
( Ord. No. OA-2009-02 , 8-3-2009) 
Secs. 10-218-10-244. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2012-05, adopted May 7, 2012, repealed Ch. 10, Art. VIII,  10-245-10-250, its entirety an enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Art. VIII, pertained to "Adult Entertainment". See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL REGULATION OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-245. - Findings; public purpose. 
    Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas and Garden Grove, California, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the City of Dallas, Georgia; and based on the documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by a law enforcement professional and an expert in economic development, both of whom are familiar with conditions resulting in other localities, at the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia's hearing on May 3, 2012; and based on the evidence and testimony of persons who have appeared before the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia on other occasions including the public hearing and meeting of the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia conducted on May 7, 2012 and on documentary evidence and the study submitted to the Mayor and City Council of Dallas, Georgia by Scott Halter, Chief of Police of the City of Dallas, Georgia takes note of the well-known and self evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
    It is the finding of the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment," (whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not) begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or video graphic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
    Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or video graphic adult entertainment are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or video graphic adult entertainment are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. The mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the city, as well. 
    Furthermore, it is the finding of the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia that other forms of adult entertainment, including, but not limited to, adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in surrounding communities. 
    The mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia finds that the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments upon the City of Dallas, Georgia are similar whether the adult entertainment establishment features live nude dancing or sells video tapes depicting sexual activities. In addition, the City of Dallas has investigated Gwinnett County, Georgia's experience with the adult bookstore located within Gwinnett County, Georgia which revealed that a substantial amount of activity at a bookstore located within that county involved booths which an individual could enter, view videos depicting sexual activity, and sexually interact with a bookstore patron in an adjoining booth through a hole strategically placed in the wall of adjoining booths. 
    The mayor and the city council of Dallas, Georgia, therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment. The mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions and further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, this article is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-246. - Definitions. 
    Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. 
    Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which more than ten square feet of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale of any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. For purposes of this section, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors. 
    Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult entertainment establishment shall be defined to include the following types of business: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein; 
(2)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities," as defined herein; 
(3)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) herein; 
(4)  Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" as defined herein or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or having a segment or section comprising more than ten square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; 
(5)  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
(6)  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined herein; 
(7)  The definition of "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or mainstream theater, which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution, or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. Performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise at least 80 percent of all annual performances or showings. 
    Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
    Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 20 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
    Premises means the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult entertainment is performed. 
    Licensing and revenue manager means and as stated herein is the city manager of the City of Dallas, Georgia or his/her designee. 
    Specified sexual activities shall be defined to mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
    Specified anatomical areas shall include the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the tope of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Children's day care facility shall be defined as a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article the term "children's day care facility" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten, "play school," or "pre-school." 
    City shall be defined as the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Mayor and council shall be defined as the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-247. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the incorporated area of the city an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article without first procuring an annual license to do so except as provided in section 10-249(d) when the licensing and revenue manager fails to approve or deny an application for an adult entertainment license within 30 days as required by this article. The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. No annual license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued by the city if the premises to be used, also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within the City of Dallas, Georgia. Regulatory fees for adult entertainment establishments are not printed herein, but are maintained by the clerk in a separate rate schedule to which this type of business and regulatory fee will be added. The amount of the annual regulatory fee shall be as established by the city council and can be amended by the city council from time to time by motion, resolution or ordinance. At the time of the adoption of this ordinance, the regulatory fee shall be in the amount of $1,000.00. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the licensing and revenue manager of the City of Dallas, Georgia within ten days after the licensing and revenue manager approves the initial application for an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal thereof. In any event, no adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. All license granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the licensing and revenue manager of the City of Dallas, Georgia on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal application received after November 30 shall pay, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs as hereinafter set forth in this article will be assessed. All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-248. - On-premises operator required. 
    An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-249. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)  Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the unincorporated areas of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall make application to the licensing and revenue manager of the city. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Dallas, Georgia, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name(s) of the operator(s) as defined herein and of the owner(s) as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee payable in cash or by certified check in the amount of $750.00 shall be paid to the licensing and revenue manager of the City of Dallas, Georgia to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The licensing and revenue manager shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The application for license does not authorize the operation of, engaging, in conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), are at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The operator(s) height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the operator(s) at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension; 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the city clerk of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(10)  The names and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  With respect to the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), all convictions, (excluding misdemeanor traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past five years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department; 
(12)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operator(s); 
(13)  If the person or business entity on whose behalf application for a license is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(14)  At least three character references for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or any operator(s) or owner(s) and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted. The City of Dallas, Georgia shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s), who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(15)  The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(16)  A plat by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any residential area, church, school, public park or children's day care facility, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine or other adult entertainment establishment; 
(17)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(a)  If application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual; 
(b)  If application is made on behalf of a partnership, by a general partner; 
(c)  If application is made on behalf of a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
(d)  If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(c)  Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the licensing and revenue manager and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(d)  Investigation; standards for granting of license. The city shall have 30 days from the date of actual receipt of the application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s). The licensing and revenue manager of the city shall stamp the date of actual receipt of each application on the first page thereof and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within five business days of actual receipt of such application. The licensing and revenue manager of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall approve or deny any application for an adult entertainment establishment license within 30 days of actual receipt of such application. The application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be granted if the licensing and revenue manager finds: 
(1)  The required $300.00 investigative fee has been paid; 
(2)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(3)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of a "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A.  42-1-12 within a period of five years. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his first offender treatment; 
(4)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit revoked for cause by this city or any other city or municipality located in or out of this state prior to the date of application within the preceding five years; 
(5)  The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(6)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(7)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an operator(s) as defined herein on the premises at all times during which the business is open; 
(8)  The proposed premises will be located at least the minimum distances set forth in this article from any residential use, church, school, public park or children's daycare facility or establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, or another adult entertainment establishment; and 
(9)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of and will not be in conflict with this article or any other law, ordinance or regulation, of the City of Dallas, Georgia, the state or the United States. 
    The licensing and revenue manager of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment license if the application fails to meet any requirement contained in the City of Dallas, Georgia's ordinance regulating adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-250. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Location. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of the boundary of any parcel of land that falls within any of the following zoning districts: R-1, R-2 and R-3 as defined by the Zoning Ordinances of the City of Dallas, Georgia and Paulding County, Georgia. 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of the boundary of any parcel of land on which a church, school, college campus, public park, children's day care facility or the Silver Comet Trail is located; 
(3)  Within 500 feet of the boundary of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is located; 
(4)  In any zoning district other than a H-1 with a Special Provision Permit; or 
(5)  Within 1,000 feet of the boundary of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
    For purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest points on the property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishment employees . 
(1)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No employees employed as an adult entertainer shall have been convicted of an offense described in section 10-249(d)(3) (including pleas of nolo contendere) of this article within five years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment. Any adult entertainer who is convicted of any such crimes while employed as an adult entertainer shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "licensed premises" shall mean the premises where an adult entertainment establishment for which a license is obtained pursuant to this article operates, conducts or carries on its business. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Permit for employment. Before any person may work as an adult entertainer on a licensed premises, as defined in subsection (1), he or she shall file a notice with the City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department of his or her intended employment on forms supplied by the City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department and shall receive a permit for such employment from the City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department. The prospective employee shall supply a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department. The prospective employee shall also provide a list of all of his or her convictions of offenses described in section 10-249(d)(3) herein (including pleas of nolo contendere) within the past five years. The City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department shall approve or deny the permit within 15 days of the application. If the prospective employee is found to meet the requirements of subsection (b), and upon payment of the permit fee, the City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department shall issue a permit approving such employment within 48 hours. Upon receipt of a permit, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department shall provide the prospective adult entertainer the reasons for the denial and the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, appeal to the Mayor and Council of the City of Dallas, Georgia which shall uphold or reverse the decision within 30 days of such appeal. If the City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department does not approve or deny an application for a license within 45 days of the date such application was received by the City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department, then on the expiration of the 45th day: (1) the application shall be approved and the City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department shall immediately issue the license for which application was made, and (2) the applicant shall have the right to begin operating in the manner allowed by the license for which application was made. The annual permit fee shall be $25.00. 
(3)  Suspension/revocation of permit; procedure . Violation by an adult entertainer of the provisions of this article and/or conviction of an offense described in section 10-249(d)(3) (including pleas of nolo contendere) of this article shall subject an adult entertainer to suspension or revocation of the permit for employment. Whenever the licensing and revenue manager finds that reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a permit for employment issued hereunder, the licensing and revenue manager shall schedule a hearing before the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia to consider such action and shall notify the employee at least 20 days prior to the hearing of the time and place of the hearing and the proposed action and grounds therefore. The employee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses with or without legal counsel. The mayor and city council of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the employee promptly in writing. In the event that a permit for employment is suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council of the City of Dallas, Georgia, a $50.00 appeal cost shall be assessed against the permit holder. Any employee, whose permit for employment has been suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council of the City of Dallas, Georgia may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate petition for writ of certiorari or an appeal to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia within 30 days of such revocation or suspension. 
(4)  Independent contractors . For the purpose of this article, independent contractors working as adult entertainers shall be considered as employees and shall be required to satisfy the provisions of this article relating to employees of adult entertainment establishments, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  Hours of operation . An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday and cannot be open on Sunday. 
(d)  Display of licenses . An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this article. 
(e)  Performance area . All dancing by adult entertainers at adult entertainment establishments shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(f)  Lighting . All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to a 25 watt clear glass electric light bulb per square foot. 
(g)  Covering of windows and doors . All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this article shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-251. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  Advertising without license. No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employee or contract with a person under the age of 18 years or an adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Sale, consumption of alcohol. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(d)  Contact between patrons, employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(e)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  Public indecency prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A.  16-6-8. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-252. - Penalty for violation and disclosure of lines of business. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each day of operation in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Any business or person who is required to pay occupational tax as defined by Part II, Chapter 10, Businesses, Article II, Licensing, sections 10-20 and 10-21 and any business or person who is required to register and identify with the clerk of the City of Dallas, Georgia each line of business that such business conducts as required by Part II, Chapter 10, Businesses, Article II, Licensing, section 10-24 shall also be required to file, in writing, within 30 days of beginning any business within the city limits of Dallas, Georgia an additional registration with the clerk of the City of Dallas, Georgia which accurately, truthfully and completely identifies any and all lines of business that such business conducts and the exact location of such business. Such registration must also be filed with the clerk of the City of Dallas, Georgia yearly by any such business or person on or before March 1 of each consecutive year thereafter. Any such changes to the location of such business or any such changes or additions to the lines of business which each such business conducts, must also be registered with the clerk of the City of Dallas, Georgia as an amendment in writing to such registration within 30 days of any such changes or additions. The failure to file such registration/registrations or amendments in a timely manner and/or the failure to accurately, completely and truthfully file such registration/registrations or amendments and the failure to accurately, completely and truthfully disclose any information required by this article by any person or business are violations of this article. 
    (These requirements of this subsection 10-252(b) of this Part II, Chapter 10, Businesses, Article VIII, Adult Entertainment Establishments Ordinance are to provide the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia and the City of Dallas Police Department with a means of determining whether or not such business is required to also obtain a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment and to truthfully, accurately and completely disclose all information in order to comply with the requirements of Part II, Chapter 10, Businesses, Article VIII, Adult Entertainment Establishments.) 
    For any violation of this Part II, Chapter 10, Businesses, Article VIII, Adult Entertainment Establishments Ordinance, the City of Dallas Georgia shall have the right to petition the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia in order to restrain and enjoin any person or business from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on any business within the city limits of Dallas, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-253. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance upon the determination and adjudication that such is unlawful and a public nuisance by the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia or any other court having jurisdiction and venue to determine that such is unlawful and a public nuisance. The City of Dallas, Georgia, may in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-254. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  Cleaning of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city and state. 
(b)  Inspection of licensed premises. An inspector designated by the City of Dallas, Georgia shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments, to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes of the city. 
(c)  Inspection for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The City of Dallas, Georgia Police Department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-255. - Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. 
(1)  A license may be denied to persons or entities that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements of the City of Dallas, Georgia's ordinance regulating adult entertainment establishments found at sections 10-245 through 10-249 of this Code. 
(2)  Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license: 
a.  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
b.  Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this article; 
c.  With respect to the applicant, operator(s) and owner(s), conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license under section 10-249(d)(3) above. 
(b)  Denial; procedure . Within 30 days of actual receipt of an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the licensing and revenue manager must make a decision as to whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application. In no event shall the licensing and revenue manager of the City of Dallas, Georgia's decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be withheld for more than 30 days after actual receipt of the application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than 30 days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The clerk of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the clerk of the City of Dallas, Georgia of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than 30 days following actual receipt of the application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by this sentence shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations contemplated by the application, the clerk of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the licensing and revenue manager of the City of Dallas, Georgia denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five business days of such denial. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, its officials, employees or agents pursuant to this article, may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia or any other court of competent jurisdiction including, but not limited to, a mandamus petition pursuant to O.C.G.A.  9-6-20 through 9-6-28. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, its officials, employees, or agents pursuant to this article may also seek review of such decision by filing a petition for writ of certiorari or an appeal to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia within 30 days of such decision. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation; procedure . Whenever the mayor and city council of the City of Dallas, Georgia finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia shall schedule a hearing to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefore. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The mayor and city council of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five business days of the decision. Any licensee, person, or entity whose license has been suspended or revoked by the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia may appeal such decision by filing a petition for writ of certiorari or an appeal to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia within 30 days of such decision. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-256. - Miscellaneous. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-257. - Severability. 
    If any portion or subsection of this article or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-258. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
    Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued ceased to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-259. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
    All resolutions or ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 10-260. - Physical layout of establishment. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access . Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type of view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be lighted by a minimum of a 100 watt clear glass electric light bulb at all times. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
DIVISION 2. - VIDEO STORES 

Sec. 10-261. - Regulation. 
(a)  Findings. Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to Houston, Texas, Tucson, Arizona, Chattanooga, Tennessee, Minneapolis, Minnesota, Dayton, Ohio, and Gwinnett County, Georgia, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the City of Dallas, Georgia, and based on the study submitted to the Mayor and City Council of Dallas, Georgia by Scott Halter, Chief of Police of the City of Dallas, Georgia and based on documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by law enforcement personnel during the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia's public hearing and regular meeting on May 7, 2012, the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia takes note of the opportunity for unlawful sexual activities including, but not limited to, masturbation and oral and anal sex to occur at video stores which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films or videos depicting nudity, and for sexually transmitted diseases to spread as a result of the unhealthy conditions and unlawful activities associated with such booths, and the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia further notes that persons frequent such video viewing booths for the purpose of engaging in sexual activities within such video viewing booths, and bodily fluids, including semen, urine and feces are found in such video viewing booths. 
The mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia finds that removal of doors on such video viewing booths and prohibiting holes between such booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in such booths. The mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia therefore finds that it is in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the community to require that doors or other partitions on video viewing booths in video stores be removed and that no holes be allowed to exist between adjoining booths. The mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing unlawful sexual activities and unhealthy conditions in video viewing booths found in video stores. The mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia further finds that these regulations will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
(b)  Requirements. Any video store having available for customers, patrons, or members, any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any video or motion picture must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access: Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the video store, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction: Every booth, room, or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms, and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall have at least one side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the video store is located. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room, or cubicle when not in use shall lighted by a minimum of a 100 watt clear glass electric light bulb at all times. 
(3)  Occupants . Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room, or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room, or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room, or cubicle. 
(c)  Definition of video store . "Video store" means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade which includes videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent or more of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos. The term "video store" shall include adult video stores as defined in section 10-246 of this Code. 
(d)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section may, in addition to any criminal remedy available, be enforced through an action for abatement of a nuisance in the manner provided by law. The City of Dallas, Georgia may apply to a court with jurisdiction to grant equitable relief to abate or remove private video viewing booths and to restrain or enjoin any person from operating or engaging in conduct contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-05, 5-7-2012) 
Secs. 10-262-10-278. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - POOL ROOMS, BILLIARD HALLS AND SNOOKER PARLORS 

Sec. 10-279. - Determination of pool room status. 
    When one or two pool tables are included within other businesses, such as a bowling alley, the mayor and council shall, by majority vote, determine if the provisions set forth in this article shall apply. The sole criteria for consideration of the issue of defining pool rooms shall be whether the public welfare and public interest are best served by the enforcement of the provisions set forth in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1308) 
Sec. 10-280. - Juveniles prohibited from visiting or entering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any child less than 18 years visit or enter upon the premises of any pool room, billiard hall, or snooker parlor unless and until that child has the written consent of his parent or guardian, and this written consent must plainly and fully set forth that the child has the permission of his parent or guardian and must be carried on the person of the child whenever visiting or in any pool room, billiard hall, or snooker parlor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1301) 
Sec. 10-281. - Owner, operator, licensee or employee prohibited from allowing juveniles therein. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, licensee, or employee of any pool room, billiard hall, or snooker parlor to permit any child less than 18 years of age to visit any pool room, billiard hall, or snooker parlor or to allow any child to enter upon those premises in any manner whatsoever unless and until the child has exhibited to the owner, operator, licensee or employee the written consent of the parent or guardian or the child. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1302) 
Sec. 10-282. - Gambling or side bets prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, and it shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, licensee or employee to allow any gambling of any kind or any side bets of any nature whatsoever on any game in any pool room, billiard hall, or snooker parlor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1303) 
Sec. 10-283. - Hours of operation of pool rooms, billiard halls, and snooker parlors. 
(a)  The hours of operation of pool rooms, billiard halls and snooker parlors shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. (24 hours per day) for persons 18 years of age and over. 
(b)  For all persons under the age of 18 years, the hours of operation shall be 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight (18 hours per day). 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1304; Ord. No. 00-18, 10-2000; Ord. No. OA-2016-05 , 8-29-2016) 
Sec. 10-284. - Revocation of business license for violation. 
    In addition to the other penalties prescribed and provided for in this chapter, any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, have his license to do business in the city revoked. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1305) 
Sec. 10-285. - Punishment. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, in addition to other penalties prescribed and provided for in this chapter, be tried in the mayor's court (municipal court) of the city, and upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1306) 
Sec. 10-286. - Business license fee. 
    The owner of any pool room, billiard hall, or snooker parlor shall pay to the clerk of the city, a business license fee as determined by the council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1307) 
Chapter 12 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. 
    Functions includes, without limitation: 
(1)  Firefighting services; 
(2)  Police services; 
(3)  Communications; 
(4)  Protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons; 
(5)  Evacuation of persons from stricken areas; 
(6)  Emergency welfare services; 
(7)  Emergency transportation; 
(8)  Plant protection; 
(9)  Shelter; 
(10)  Temporary restoration of public utility services; and 
(11)  Other functions related to civilian population; 
together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the functions set forth in this definition. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-302(a)) 
Sec. 12-2. - Authorization and procedures. 
(a)  The emergency powers set forth in this section are hereby granted to the mayor of the city with the provision that said powers shall be exercised only in the event of emergency as herein contemplated, and shall be exercised only for such periods of time as the actual emergency exists and further that said powers shall only be invoked after a declaration and proclamation by the mayor that such an emergency does, in fact, exist: 
(b)  The mayor, as the official head of the city, shall have the following emergency powers: 
(1)  The mayor shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when, in his considered opinion, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
a.  There is extreme probability of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions. 
b.  Civil unrest, commotion, riot or uprising is imminent or exists. 
c.  There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. 
(2)  After declaration of such emergency, the mayor shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
a.  The power to use employees of the city to assist in the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizens of the city and the safety thereof. 
b.  The power to close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists. 
c.  The power to impose emergency curfew regulations. 
d.  The power to close business establishments within the affected area. 
e.  The power to close, to use of the general public, any and all municipally owned buildings and other facilities. 
f.  The power to do any and all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizens of the city. 
(3)  No emergency power, as set forth herein, may be effective for more than 72 hours after the declaration of an emergency by the mayor. 
(4)  No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular, special or called meeting of the mayor and council. 
(5)  The declaration of an emergency, as to a portion of the city, shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
(c)  Each violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an offense under the terms hereof and every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in the municipal court of the city as provided in the Charter of the city for punishment for violations of the ordinances of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-301) 
State Law reference- General local emergency powers, O.C.G.A.  38-3-27(b). 
Sec. 12-3. - Utilization of the county emergency management agency. 
(a)  Mayor may delegate his power to agency. Under the same powers granted to the mayor under section 12-2, the mayor may elect to delegate said powers to the county emergency management agency. Upon issuance of a declaration so delegating emergency powers to the county emergency management agency, the procedures, regulations, powers and functions set forth in this section shall be under the direction and enforcement of the county emergency management agency. 
(b)  Office of agency director. It is the desire and intent of the mayor and council of the city that the city be a part of the county emergency management agency. The emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county emergency management plan for emergency functions as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. Such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities of Dallas and Hiram therein for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activities, etc. 
(6)  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of the county and the cities of Dallas and Hiram governing officials. 
(c)  County agency established; functions. The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing city and county departments and the emergency functions described in subsection (a) of this section are assigned as follows: 
Department/Agency Functions Mayors and chairpersons, commissioners Direction and control Police and sheriff departments Communications and warnings Police services Evacuation Emergency management agency training, preliminary damage assessment and assessment, attack preparedness Public information State military support Reporting Public property and specific hazards Fire departments Search, rescue and recovery Fire service Hazardous materials Radiological protection Public works and solid fuel service Engineering Petroleum Utilities School superintendent Transportation service Food service Health department Health and medical services Clerk's office resources management Administrative service Department of family and children services Social services Shelter and temporary housing  
Note- As appropriate to the local organization, these functions can be assigned to existing departments or may be separate. Functions should be consistent with the local emergency management operations plan. 
Heads of city departments listed in this subsection are responsible for assisting county department heads in developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(d)  Powers during an emergency or disaster. In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor of the city or in his absence his legally appointed successor, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists, whether within or without the incorporated area of the city, and thereafter shall have and may exercise, for such periods as such emergency or disaster may exist, through the county emergency management agency the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and/or cities and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such properties or supplies; and 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection, and well-being of the inhabitants of the cities and county. 
(e)  Volunteers. All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  2-302) 
Chapter 14 - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 14-1. - State municipal election code. 
    All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with chapter 2 of title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia, Annotated, and the Georgia Municipal Election Code, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-301) 
Sec. 14-2. - Annexed property. 
    Any property annexed to within the municipal boundaries of the city shall be included in the election ward that it would be within if all ward boundary lines were continued in their same directions. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-302) 
Sec. 14-3. - Election superintendent. 
    Unless otherwise specified by the mayor and council, the city clerk shall be the election superintendent at all general and special elections of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-303) 
Sec. 14-4. - Chief registrar. 
    Unless otherwise specified by the mayor and council, the city clerk shall be the chief registrar and shall maintain the official registration list for all city elections. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-304) 
Sec. 14-5. - Polling place. 
    The city council room shall be the location of all city elections, unless some circumstance (such as remodeling, fire, etc.) should prevent the election being held at that location. If another location is to be used, then the notice calling for the election shall indicate the location. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-305) 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREE PRESERVATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park tree means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
    Street tree means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying within the city rights-of-way on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-600; Ord. of 5-7-2007) 
Sec. 16-20. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to the issuance of a citation to be tried in the city municipal court. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-619) 
Sec. 16-21. - Arborists license and bond. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license. 
(b)  The license fee shall be $25.00 annually in advance; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any public utility company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public utility endeavors. 
(c)  Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $50,000.00 for bodily injury and $100,000.00 property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-617) 
Sec. 16-22. - Tree topping. 
    It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this article at the determination of the city tree commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-612) 
Sec. 16-23. - Pruning; corner clearance. 
    Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-613) 
Secs. 16-24-16-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY TREE COMMISSION 

Sec. 16-46. - Created and established. 
    There is hereby created and established a city tree commission for the city which shall consist of five members, at least three of whom shall be citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-601; Ord. No. OA-2011-01, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 16-47. - Term of office. 
    The term of the five persons to be appointed by the mayor shall be three years except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first tree commission shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first tree commission shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-602) 
Sec. 16-48. - Compensation. 
    Members of the tree commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-603) 
Sec. 16-49. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the tree commission to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the city council and, upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city. The tree commission, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-604) 
Sec. 16-50. - Operation. 
    The tree commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-605) 
Sec. 16-51. - Interference with city tree commission. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree commission, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-616) 
Sec. 16-52. - Review by city council. 
    The mayor and council of the city shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the city tree commission. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the city tree commission to the city council who may hear the matter and make a final decision. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-618) 
Secs. 16-53-16-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STREET AND PARK TREE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 16-78. - Street tree species to be planted. 
    The commission shall adopt a list of official street tree species (catalogued as small trees, medium trees and large trees) for the city. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the city tree commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-606) 
Sec. 16-79. - Spacing. 
    The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 16-78, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: 
(1)  Small trees, 30 feet; 
(2)  Medium trees, 40 feet; and 
(3)  Large trees, 50 feet; 
except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-607) 
Sec. 16-80. - Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
    The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 16-78, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: 
(1)  Small trees, two feet; 
(2)  Medium trees, three feet; and 
(3)  Large trees, four feet. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-608) 
Sec. 16-81. - Distance from street corners and fire hydrants. 
    No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fire hydrant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-609) 
Sec. 16-82. - Utilities. 
    No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in section 16-78 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-610) 
Sec. 16-83. - Public tree care. 
    The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city tree commission may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with this section and sections 16-78 through 16-82. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-611) 
Sec. 16-84. - Protection of street and park trees. 
(a)  Except as herein provided, no person: 
(1)  Except a public utility, shall: 
a.  Cut, prune, injure or remove any living tree on or in a public highway right-of-way, neutral ground, public park, public place, triangle, sidewalk, or other public property; 
b.  Cut or disturb or interfere in any way with the roots of any tree on public property; 
c.  Spray with any chemical insecticide or herbicide or other oils or whitewash any tree on public property; 
d.  Place any wire, rope, sign, poster, barricade, or other fixture on a tree or tree guard on public property; or 
e.  Injure, misuse or remove any device placed to protect any such tree; 
(2)  Shall pile building material or other material, about any tree, plant or shrub in a street row in any manner that will in any way injure such tree, plant or shrub; 
(3)  Shall pave or place gravel, soil or other such material within 12 feet of any tree on public property, unless approved by the city manager; 
(4)  Shall dump, pour or spill any oil, herbicide, insecticide or other deleterious matter upon any tree or tree space in any street or within the critical root zone of any tree, or keep or maintain upon any street row, any receptacle from which oil or herbicide, pesticide or other deleterious matter leaks or drips, or said material onto any parking or concrete gutter so as to injure any tree on any public property; 
(5)  Shall use the rights-of-way, parks, sidewalks, or public places to dump grass clippings, tree trimmings, rocks or refuse of any nature; 
(6)  Shall decorate a public tree or place advertising matter, posters or political placards on trees or in public properties. 
(b)  Any person who shall injure, damage or destroy any public tree situated upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public property within the city shall promptly notify the city manager of such fact and shall, within such reasonable time as specified by the city manager, repair or replace the same to the satisfaction of the city manager. Should the person fail or refuse to repair or replace the damaged or destroyed trees or plants within such reasonable time, the city manager shall do or cause to be done the necessary repairing or replacement, and the costs of this work shall be recovered from the person responsible for the damage or destruction by a proper action of law. In any such action, the Guide for Establishing Values of Trees and Other Plants, published by the council of Trees and Landscape Appraisers, 9th edition, by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, shall form the basis for establishing any monetary damages due for damage or destruction to the tree. In addition, the city may recover for any other damages or losses to which it is entitled by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-614; Ord. of 5-7-2007) 
Sec. 16-85. - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-615) 
Secs. 16-86-16-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GARBAGE, LITTER, ETC.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2010-02, adopted Mar. 29, 2010, repealed Ch. 16, Art. III,  16-118-16-122 in its entirety. Sections 5-800-5-813, of said ordinance, encated new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Art. III pertained to garbage and litter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

Sec. 16-118. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
a.  Applicability. This article shall apply to all public and private property within incorporated limits the city. 
b.  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
c.  Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-800, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 16-119. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
    Authorized private receptacle means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in section 30-9. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature. 
    Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A.,  16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
    Operator means the entity that has the primary day-to-day operational control of those activities at the construction site necessary to ensure compliance with erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan requirements and permit conditions. 
    Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests, any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, whether used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes, whether in use or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox or appurtenances to such structure. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage; rubbish; ashes; street cleanings; dead animals; abandoned automobiles; automobile parts; appliances; furniture; machinery of any sort; any property held for salvage purposes; solid market or industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
    Site or construction site means a facility of any type on which construction activities are occurring or are to occur which may result in the discharge of pollutants from a point source into the waters of the state. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or driven upon a highway, including services used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-801, 3-29-2010; Ord. No. OA-2014-08, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 16-120. - Prohibition against littering. 
(a)  Public or private property or waters. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the City of Dallas or any waters in the City of Dallas unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or, 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  Construction sites. Construction site operators are required to control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse water quality impacts. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-802, 3-29-2010; Ord. No. OA-2014-08, 8-4-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2014-08, adopted Aug. 4, 2014, changed the title of  16-120 from "Prohibition against littering public or private property or water" to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 16-121. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
    The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-803, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 16-122. - Litter on vacant lots. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-804, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 16-123. - Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. 
    No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-805, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 16-124. - Merchant's duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
    No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building, lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-806, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 16-125. - Litter thrown by persons in a vehicle. 
    No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place or upon private property within the city. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-807, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 16-126. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. 
    Nor shall any person drive or move any motor vehicle within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-808, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 16-127. - Litter in parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in approved public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-809, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 16-128. - Litter in lakes and fountains. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter into any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-810, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 16-129. - Throwing or depositing handbills in public places or upon vehicles. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city or upon any vehicle that is not under the ownership of the person depositing said handbill. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-811, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 16-130. - Storage of merchandise within six feet of right-of-way. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store new or used merchandise of any sort within six feet of any street or highway right-of-way except on a temporary basis. Any storage of such merchandise for a period of more than 24 hours shall be deemed to be a permanent rather than a temporary storage. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-812, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 16-131. - Violations, penalties and enforcement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(a)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon the issuance of a citation by the city manager of the city or his/her designee upon conviction by the municipal court of the city thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is removed or is ordered removed by the municipal court of the city; and 
(3)  a.  In the sound discretion of the municipal court of the city, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the municipal court of the city, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and, 
(4)  The municipal court of the city may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(c)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof including, but not limited to, the city, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, but not limited to, the city are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. OA-2010-02,  5-813, 3-29-2010) 
Secs. 16-132-16-142. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 16-143. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A.  12-7-6(b). 
    Board means the board of natural resources. 
    Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
    Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. The term "cut" is also known as excavation. 
    Department means the department of natural resources. 
    Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
    District means the: 
Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District 
700 East 2nd Avenue, Suite J 
Rome, GA 30161-3359 
Phone: 706-295-6131 
Fax: 706-802-5131 
    Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
    Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
    Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. The term "erosion and sedimentation control plan" is also known as the plan. 
    Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
    Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 16-145(6). 
    Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means: 
(1)  An announcement; 
(2)  A piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or 
(3)  A physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
    Local issuing authority means the mayor and council of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-7-8(a). 
    Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A.  12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
    Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
    Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
    Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Qualified personnel means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A.  12-7-19. 
    Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. and O.C.G.A.  12-5-30(f). 
    State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
    Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of the term "structural erosion and sediment control practices" are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A.  12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
    Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing longterm vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing shortterm vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    Wetlands means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and, that under normal circumstances do, support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The term "wetlands" generally includes swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 07-05,  II, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. OA-2010-01,  5-1702, 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 16-144. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority or the city. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority or the city shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority or the city shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority or the city shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority or the city shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority, the city or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority, the city or by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 16-147(b)(8). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. 
(2)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in the city Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. Therefore, the penalties for such violations shall be set at a minimum of $500.00 per violation and shall not exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation and every noncompliant activity on a site shall be deemed a separate offense and violation. 
(3)  Citations. The city shall issue citations as it deems necessary to property owners, permit holders, etc., to appear in municipal court to answer charges for violating this article. The citation shall state the section of this article being violated, and shall give the time and date of the hearing before the municipal court. Potential violations warranting the issuance of citations shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Continued/repeated failure to comply with a notice to comply or stop work order; 
b.  Violation of stream buffers; 
c.  Significant amounts of sediment, as determined by and in the discretion of the city community development department, local issuing authority, or by the director or his designee, are found to be leaving the development site; 
d.  Significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the city community development department, local issuing authority, or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters; 
e.  Where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained; and 
f.  Failure to obtain a land disturbance permit prior to commencing land disturbance activities. 
(Ord. No. 07-05,  VII, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. OA-2010-01,  5-1707, 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 16-145. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A.  12-4-72, mineral resources and caves act; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 16-146 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 16-146 and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A.  1-3-3; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 16-146(c)(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A.  12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority; the local issuing authority or the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A.  12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A.  36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A.  36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority or the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A.  12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 07-05,  III, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. OA-2010-01,  5-1703, 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 16-146. - Minimum requirements using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A.  12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority, the city or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority, the city or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-5-30, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  Rules and regulations governing land disturbing activities. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require the minimum protections, at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A.  12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in this subsection and subsection (16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A.  12-5-440 et seq.) shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; 
c.  Nothing contained in this article shall prevent any local issuing authority or the city from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section; and 
d.  The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," (O.C.G.A.  12-5-20 et seq.) except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer. 
(Ord. No. 07-05,  IV, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. OA-2010-01,  5-1704, 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 16-147. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority or the city that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the following: 
(1)  Chapter 44, pertaining to zoning; 
(2)  Article VI of this chapter, pertaining to stormwater management; 
(3)  Chapter 34, pertaining to subdivision; 
(4)  Chapter 18, pertaining to flood damage prevention; 
(5)  This article; and 
(6)  Other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority or the city; 
however, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 16-146(b) and (c). Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by six copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
(3)  A land disturbance fee in the amount of $100.00, plus $25.00 for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area shall be paid to the city prior to land disturbance for clearing and grubbing activities. 
(4)  A land disturbance fee in the amount of $100.00, plus $25.00 for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area (commercial/industrial land use) or $100.00, plus $25.00 for each lot (residential land use) in the project area (for commercial/industrial land use) shall be paid to the city prior to land disturbance for grading and construction activities. 
(5)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the jurisdiction; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-7-17(9) and (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(6)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 16-146(c)(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as pursuant to this article, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority or the city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(7)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority or the city may deny the permit application. 
(8)  The local issuing authority or the city may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority or the city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority or the city with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 16-146(b) and (c). Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  Data required for site plan. 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information. Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that: "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities." 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for yearround seeding. 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." 
(3)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection of any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 
Map Scale Ground Slope 
(in percent) Contour Interval 
(in feet) 1 inch = 100 feet or larger scale Flat 0-2 0.5 or 1 Rolling 2-8 1 or 2 Steep 8 + 2, 5 or 10  
f.  Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the 50-foot and 75-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from chapter 6 of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority or the city of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority or the city unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority or the city has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 16-146(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as pursuant to this article are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority or the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority or the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-05,  V, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. OA-2010-01,  5-1705, 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 16-148. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority or the city shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the city, the commission, the district or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The board shall promulgate rules and regulations setting forth the requirements and standards for certification and the procedures for decertification of a local issuing authority. The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a mayor and council's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the mayor and council. If such review indicates that the mayor and council of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the mayor and council of the county or municipality in writing. The mayor and council of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 07-05,  VI, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. OA-2010-01,  5-1706, 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 16-149. - Education and certification. 
    All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection of any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-7-20. 
(Ord. No. 07-05,  VIII, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. OA-2010-01,  5-1708, 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 16-150. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority or the city upon finding that the holder is: 
(1)  Not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(2)  In violation of permit conditions; or 
(3)  In violation of any ordinance; 
shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority or the city of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority or the city, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-05,  IX, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. OA-2010-01,  5-1709, 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 16-151. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority, the city or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 07-05,  X(C), 5-7-2007; Ord. No. OA-2010-01,  5-1710(C), 1-28-2010) 
Secs. 16-152-16-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 16-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area lying adjacent to the stream, established by section 16-174(a)(1). 
    Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
    Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that does not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
    Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
    Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
    Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
    Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 16-174(a)(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
    Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city manager or his designee may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
    Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
    Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
    Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 06-21,  3, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 16-172. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  Findings. Whereas, the city finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this article to: 
(1)  Protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; 
(2)  Minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and 
(3)  Maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
a.  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
b.  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 06-21,  2, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 16-173. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 16-171. The following requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law, and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations: 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
b.  Existing development and ongoing land disturbance activities including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Exemptions. Exemption of the activities set forth in this subsection does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. The following specific activities are exempt from this article: 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
2.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
4.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
6.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (a)(2)a of this section. 
c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. 
e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city manager or his designee on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city manager or his designee to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(b)  Prohibited activities. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 16-174(b). 
(Ord. No. 06-21,  4, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 16-174. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)  Variance procedures. Variances from the buffer and setback requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the city manager or his designee finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the board of zoning appeals of the city may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the city manager or his designee shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote by the board of zoning appeals of the city. The city manager or his designee shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city manager or his designee shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements of this article would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The longterm and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 06-21,  5, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 16-175. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
    This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 06-21,  6, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 16-176. - Additional information required for development in buffer zone. 
(a)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the city manager or his designee may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that this article is addressed in the approval process. 
(b)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 06-21,  7, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 16-177. - Responsibility. 
    Neither the issuance of a development permit or compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; or shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 06-21,  8, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 16-178. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city manager or his designee in making such inspections. The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 06-21,  9, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 16-179. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the following penalties shall not prevent such equitable relief: 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city manager or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the mayor and council of the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the actions or penalties set forth in this section may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the actions set forth in this section or imposing any of penalties set forth in this section, the city manager or his designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city manager or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The city manager or his designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city manager or his designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city manager or his designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city manager or his designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the city manager or his designee shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city manager or his designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city manager or his designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city manager or his designee or the city police department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court of the city to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 06-21,  10, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 16-180. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city manager or his designee may appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the mayor and council of the city and shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor and council of the city within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the mayor and council of the city, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-21,  11, 10-2-2006) 
Secs. 16-181-16-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-199. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    Conservation easement means an agreement between a landowner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
    Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
    Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
    Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
    Development means a land development or land development project. 
    Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
    Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
    Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
    Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
    Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
    Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
    Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
    Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. 
    Impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
    Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
    Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
    Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which, when properly recorded in the deed records, constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
    Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
    Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
    New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
    Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater by means of mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a byproduct of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
    Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
    Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
    On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
    Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
    Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person in control of the site. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
    Post-development means the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
    Predevelopment means the time period or the conditions that exist on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs, preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc., the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish predevelopment conditions. 
    Project means a land development project. 
    Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
    Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
    Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
    Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
    Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. The term "stormwater better site design" includes: 
(1)  Conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace; 
(2)  Reducing impervious cover; and 
(3)  Using natural features for stormwater management. 
    Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
    Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
    Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
    Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
    Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
    Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  2, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-200. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the predevelopment hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the longterm responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects and longterm followup. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  1(1.1), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-201. - Applicability; exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  1(1.2), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-202. - Administrator designated. 
    The city public works is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  1(1.3), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-203. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
    This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  1(1.4), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-204. - Stormwater design manual. 
    The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  1(1.6), 8-7-2006) 
Secs. 16-205-16-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MANAGEMENT PLAN; DESIGN; PERMIT; MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 16-231. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
(c)  Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 16-232; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 16-233; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 16-234, if applicable; and 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 16-235, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 16-236. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  3(3.1), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-232. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(a)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the landowner or developer shall meet with the city for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(b)  To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: 
a.  Existing and proposed topography; 
b.  Perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); 
d.  Boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and 
e.  Location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: 
a.  Preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; 
b.  Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; 
c.  Flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; 
d.  Relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and 
e.  Preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
(c)  Local watershed plans, the county greenspace projection plan, if applicable, and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  3(3.2), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-233. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 16-239. 
(b)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklists found in the stormwater design manual. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual, including: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: 
a.  A topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; 
b.  Acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; 
c.  All perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; 
d.  All existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; 
e.  Direction of flow and exits from the site; 
f.  Analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and 
g.  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: 
a.  A topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; 
b.  Total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; 
c.  Calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 16-239; 
d.  Location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; 
e.  Documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; 
f.  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 16-239 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: 
a.  A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of: 
1.  Nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head; 
2.  Inlet and outlets of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; 
b.  A narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; 
c.  Cross section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; 
d.  A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms, including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs; 
e.  Documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 16-239; 
f.  Drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catchbasins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and 
g.  Where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: 
a.  The arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; 
b.  Information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; 
c.  Descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; 
d.  Density of plantings; 
e.  Descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and 
f.  A description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. A detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include: 
a.  An inspection and maintenance schedule; 
b.  Maintenance tasks; 
c.  The parties responsible for maintenance; 
d.  Funding; 
e.  Access and safety issues; 
f.  Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program; and 
g.  The need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public rights-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided in section 16-234, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section 16-234. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and nonlocal permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  3(3.3), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-234. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(c)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(e)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 16-241. 
(f)  The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  3(3.4), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-235. - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
    Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  3(3.5), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-236. - Permit application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 16-231 (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(c)  The city shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(d)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event this subsection and subsection (c) of this section, shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city; and 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 16-240(b). 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  3(3.6), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-237. - Application review fees. 
    The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  3(3.7), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-238. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for longterm operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  3(3.8), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-239. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
    The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection (2) of this section is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (1) of this section. The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catchbasins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public rights-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and the rules for dam safety, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  4, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-240. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  5, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-241. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Longterm maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may correct the violation as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(1)  Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Routine inspections; 
b.  Random inspections; 
c.  Inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and 
d.  Joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. 
(2)  Inspections may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Reviewing maintenance and repair records; 
b.  Sampling discharges; 
c.  Surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and 
d.  Evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the owners of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  6, 8-7-2006) 
Secs. 16-242-16-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 16-261. - Violations of article or management plan. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in sections 16-263 shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  7(intro.), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-262. - Notice. 
    If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation; except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient. 
(Ord. No. 06-20, 7 (7.1), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 16-263. - Penalties. 
    In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the actions or penalties in this section may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the actions or imposing any of the penalties as set forth in this section, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described in subsections (1) through (3) of this section, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 06-20,  7(7.2), 8-7-2006; Ord. No. OA-2014-06, 6-16-2014) 
Secs. 16-264-16-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted July 10, 2006, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, inclusion as Ch. 16, Art. VI., Div. 4,  16-286-16-293 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 16-286. - Introduction. 
    It is hereby determined that: 
    Discharges to the city separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
    These nonstormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the city separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
    These nonstormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
    The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
    These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the city separate storm sewer system; 
    Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system; 
Therefore, the city adopts this division to prohibit such nonstormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the city separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Ord. of July 10, 2006, (Intro); Ord. of Oct. 2, 2006, (Intro)) 
Sec. 16-287. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This division establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this division are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this division. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this division shall apply throughout the incorporated area of the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This division is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this division. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The city manager of the city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of July 10, 2006,  1; Ord. of Oct. 2, 2006,  1) 
Sec. 16-288. - Definitions. 
    Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.  1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the city separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 16-289 of this division. 
    Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC  1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    City of Dallas, Georgia separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the City of Dallas, Georgia; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
    Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person means, except to the extent exempted from this division, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
    Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. of July 10, 2006,  2; Ord. of Oct. 2, 2006,  2) 
Sec. 16-289. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city manager of the city or his/her designee as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. of July 10, 2006,  3; Ord. of Oct. 2, 2006,  3) 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city manager of the city or his/her designee. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city manager of the city or his/her designee requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city manager of the city or his/her designee. 
(Ord. of July 10, 2006,  3; Ord. of Oct. 2, 2006,  3) 
Sec. 16-290. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city manager of the city or his/her designee prior to allowing discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. of July 10, 2006,  4; Ord. of Oct. 2, 2006,  4) 
Sec. 16-291. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
    The city manager of the city or his/her designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this division. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city manager of the city or his/her designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city manager of the city or his/her designee shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city manager of the city or his/her designee to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city manager of the city or his/her designee may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city manager of the city or his/her designee. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city manager of the city or his/her designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager or his/her designee access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the city manager of the city or his/her designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city manager of the city or his/her designee is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city manager of the city or his/her designee may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of July 10, 2006,  5; Ord. of Oct. 2, 2006,  5) 
Sec. 16-292. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
    Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city manager of the city or his/her designee within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
    In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
    Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this division. 
(Ord. of July 10, 2006,  6; Ord. of Oct. 2, 2006,  6) 
Sec. 16-293. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this division. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city manager of the city or his/her designee is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city manager of the city or his/her designee is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e). 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city manager of the city or his/her designee finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the city manager of the city or his/her designee may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this division and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the mayor and council of the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city manager of the city or his/her designee. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the mayor and council of the city shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the mayor and council of the city shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the mayor and council of the city upholding the decision of the city manager of the city, or his/her designee, then the city manager of the city or his/her designee or other representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protect to the city manager of the city or his/her designee, objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 15 days of such notice. If the property owner objects to the decision by the city manager of the city or his/her designee concerning said written protect within 30 days from such decision by the city manager of the city or his/her designee, the property owner may file a written appeal to the mayor and council of the city. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision by the mayor and council of the city on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city manager of the city or his/her designee shall deem appropriate, after the city manager of the city or his/her designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city manager of the city or his/her designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city manager of the city or his/her designee or the city police department may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city manager of the city or his/her designee, may seek cumulative remedies. 
    The city manager of the city or his/her designee, may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. of July 10, 2006,  7; Ord. of Oct. 2, 2006,  7) 
Chapter 18 - FLOOD PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2019-01, adopted June 3, 2019 , amended ch. 18 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 18 pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of  18-1-18-7, 18-33-18-35, 18-59-18-63, 18-85-18-90, 18-109, 18-110, 18-134-18-136, and derived from Ord. No. 06-17, adopted July 10, 2006. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter loadbearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
    Adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain means those areas that are at or lower in elevation than either three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc. with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation). 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the city's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The term "area of special flood hazard" includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other floodprone areas as referenced in section 18-6. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
    Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building: See "structure". 
    City shall be the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    County shall be Paulding County, Georgia. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before 11/8/1999, the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before 11/08/1999 the ordinance date from which this chapter is derived. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
    Future conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
    Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The term "future-conditions flood elevation" means the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
    Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
    Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill and excavation. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term "manufactured home" also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or continuous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced after 11/08/1999 the date of the city floodplain ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after 11/08/1999 the date of the city floodplain ordinance. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person in control of the site. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
    Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; or include the installation of streets and/or walkways; or include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; or include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. Accessory structures are not exempt from any chapter requirements. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State means the State of Georgia. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
a.  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
b.  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the city, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-3. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall be applicable to all areas within the city. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-4. - Administrator designated. 
    The City of Dallas, Georgia's Community Development Director/Building Official or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-5. - Duties and responsibilities of administrator. 
(a)  Duties of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to ensure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including, but not limited to, section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, amendment of 1972, 33 USC 1344, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to meet the provisions of article II of this chapter; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and 
(8)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps. 
(b)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the offices of the city and shall be open for public inspection. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-6. - Basis for area of special flood hazard; flood area maps and studies. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated November 8, 1999, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto including, but not limited to, the October 1978 maps on file are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any base flood study authorized by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the city. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the city. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is the city clerk's office. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-7. - Relationship to other regulations. 
    This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. Where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-8. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-9. - Statutory authority. 
    Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A.  36-1-20(a), have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Dallas, Georgia, does ordain this chapter and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction provisions for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Secs. 18-10-18-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 18-33. - Application requirements. 
    No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-34. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
(a)  An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  Location of the floodway, if applicable; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor; 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 18-86(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 18-85(3); 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structures; 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of predevelopment and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
(b)  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(c)  The failure to follow the above application requirements or to truthfully disclose any such application requirements, shall be a violation of this chapter and shall constitute the grounds to revoke any such permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-35. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(a)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the city a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. 
(b)  A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city shall review the submitted certification data referenced in this section. 
(c)  Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. 
(d)  Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Secs. 18-36-18-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-59. - Floodplain and floodway boundaries. 
(a)  Floodplain boundaries. Studied A zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the city. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(b)  Floodway boundaries. The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the city. If floodway data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-60. - General future-conditions floodplain standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided by means of bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (predevelopment) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 of a foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided by means of a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 18-61; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-61. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
    An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 18-88 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the city. Cross sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
    The failure to provide engineering study, shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be grounds to revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-62. - Floodway encroachments. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) of this section; 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the city. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-63. - Maintenance requirements. 
    The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The city may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city. 
    The failure to provide any such required maintenance, shall be a violation of this chapter and shall constitute grounds to revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Secs. 18-64-18-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION BUILDING STANDARDS 

Sec. 18-85. - All areas of special flood hazard. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 18-60, 18-61 and 18-62 have been met. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be: 
a.  Anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
b.  Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
c.  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(3)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(4)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located four feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(5)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding. 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
    If the proposed development is located in multiple-flood zones or multiple-base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future-conditions elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-86. - Structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
    The following provisions, in addition to those in section 18-85, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 18-60, 18-61 and 18-62 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 18-60, 18-61 and 18-62 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than four feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-85(3). 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 18-60, 18-61, and 18-62 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 18-60, 18-61, and 18-62 have been met, substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than four feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-85(3). 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 18-60, 18-61, and 18-62 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 18-60, 18-61, and 18-62 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than four feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-85(3). New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 18-60, 18-61, and 18-62 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvements of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 18-60, 18-61, and 18-62 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 18-60, 18-61, and 18-62 have been met, all substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-85(3). Substantial improvements that have met all of the requirements of sections 18-60, 18-61, and 18-62 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with section 18-85(3) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements of subsection (1)b of this section, pertaining to substantial improvements to residential buildings, including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  New or substantially improved manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 18-60, 18-61 and 18-62 have been met. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than four feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 18-85(5). 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-87. - Structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least four feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-85(3). 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-85(3). 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-88. - Residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
    For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), the city shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than four feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with section 18-85(3). 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-89. - Areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to four feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-85(3); 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-90. - Subdivisions. 
    In subdivisions in special flood hazard areas, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 18-34; 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(6)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities pursuant to the requirements of the city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
    The failure to adhere to these subdivision requirements, shall be a violation of this chapter and shall constitute grounds to revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Secs. 18-91-18-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 18-109. - Procedures. 
    The variance and appeals procedures of this division shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the city or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated hereinabove. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the city shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city manager. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the city manager shall have the right to appeal such decision to the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(4)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia, as provided in O.C.G.A.  5-4-1. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(7)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(8)  In reviewing such requests, the city shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the city shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors set forth in this division and the purposes of this chapter, the city may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued after the fact. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-110. - Conditions for issuance. 
(a)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(1)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)  The city shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Secs. 18-111-18-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 18-134. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and if adjudicated to be a public nuisance by the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia, may be abated by the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia unless adjudication is required to be in the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia due to a request for injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties set forth in section 18-136 shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-135. - Notice of violation. 
    If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Sec. 18-136. - Penalties. 
    In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described in subsections (1) through (3) of this section, the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall adjudicate any such violations and if found by the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia to be a violation or violations, the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. Violations of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and the city may issue a citation to the applicant or person violating this chapter or any other such responsible person, requiring such applicant, person, or such responsible person to appear in Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia or the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person or such responsible person all be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(6)  Appeal. Any appeal of the decision of the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia or the City of Dallas, Georgia, may be appealed within 30 days of such decision as allowed by O.C.G.A.  5-4-1 to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. OA-2019-01, 6-3-2019 ) 
Chapter 20 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2011-06, adopted June 6, 2011, repealed Ch. 20,  20-1-20-17, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 20 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

Sec. 20-1. - Police officers to aid. 
    The police officers/marshal or deputy marshal of the city shall render such aid and assistance to the county health department and the city manager as may be necessary to enforce all health laws of the city and the county. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-2. - Communicable diseases. 
    When there exists in any household a communicable disease, other than venereal disease or a common childhood disease, it shall be the duty of the attending physician or head of the household to immediately notify the county health department, which may make an investigation and issue quarantine orders, if necessary. It shall be unlawful for anyone to violate such quarantine orders. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-3. - Air pollution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or business to permit or cause the escape of such quantities of smoke, soot, noxious gases, or fumes as to be detrimental to or endanger the health, comfort or safety of the public or so as to cause injury or damage to property or business. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-4. - Stagnant water. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly allow any pool of stagnant water to accumulate and remain on his property. Any pool of stagnant water in the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-5. - Dead animals. 
    Any person owning or having possession of a dead animal not intended to be used for food shall immediately bury the same or dispose of such animal as the chief of police or chief marshal may direct. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-6. - Lots, premises and sidewalks. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Sidewalk includes all the ground, whether paved or not, between the property line and the curbline. 
(b)  The occupant of any building or dwelling and the owner of any lot shall keep the sidewalks before his respective building or lot clean of refuse and free of the growth of weeds. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-7. - Tampering with containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to uncover, pilfer, dig into, turn over or in any manner tamper with any refuse container belonging to another. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of public refuse containers for their intended purpose. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-8. - Unwholesome food. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any unwholesome or adulterated food or drink of any kind in the city. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-9. - Sanitary regulations. 
    All premises used in the sale or storage of food or drink intended for human consumption shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to permit any person who is afflicted with a contagious disease to handle any food or drink intended for human sale. Premises shall be kept free from flies and vermin of all kinds. All such premises must be inspected by the department of health and shall display a copy of said inspection sheet. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-10. - Watercourses. 
    It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-11. - Cemeteries. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any person within the city limits except in an established cemetery. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-12. - Premises. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit any building, structure or place to remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in any way. Any such structure, building or place is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-13. - Acts. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the public health. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-14. - Serving food. 
    Utensils for customer use in all places serving food or drink to the public shall be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized after each such usage. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-15. - Nuisances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any nuisance on any property under his control. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-16. - Spitting. 
    It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk or other public place, or on the floor or walls of any store, theater, hall, public vehicle, or other place frequented by the public or to which the public is invited. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-06, 6-6-2011) 
Sec. 20-17. - Reserved. 
Chapter 21 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 21-1-21-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 21-70. - Purpose. 
    In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural, and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, and general welfare of the people; 
    In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
    In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
    In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation, and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
    The city council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural, or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance. 
(Ord. Eff. July 12, 2005,  5-1901) 
Sec. 21-71. - Definitions. 
    All definitions contained in O.C.G.A.  44-10-2 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if written herewithin. 
    Building means a construction created principally to shelter any form of human activity. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the Historic Preservation Commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
    Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure, or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building materials and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details, or elements relative to the forgoing. 
    Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
    Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the city council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 21-73(b), of this chapter. 
    Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 21-73(c), of this chapter. 
    Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details, or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic building, structure, site, or object; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building or other construction within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps, pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
    Object means a construction primarily artistic in nature or relatively small in scale and simply constructed. Although it may be, by nature or design, movable, an object is associated with a specific setting or environment. 
    Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
    Structure means a functional construction made for purposes other than creating human shelter. 
(Ord. Eff. July 12, 2005,  5-1902) 
Sec. 21-72. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission: There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be the "DALLAS HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within the City of Dallas: The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(c)  Commission members: number, appointment, terms and compensation: 
(1)  The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. 
(2)  To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology, or related professions. 
(3)  Members shall serve three-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: two members for one year; two members for two years; and three members for three years. Members shall receive a payment per meeting attended to allow for expenses incurred in performing their duties; such payment is maintained by the clerk in a separate schedule. 
(d)  Statement of commission's powers: 
(1)  The commission shall be authorized to: 
a.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
b.  Recommend to the city council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
c.  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny the same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
d.  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure, or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed: 
e.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
f.  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A.,  44-10.1 through 44-10.5); 
g.  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
h.  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, that the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
i.  Seek out local, state, federal, or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
j.  Submit to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
k.  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program; 
l.  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission subject to city budget appropriations and city employee regulations; 
m.  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
n.  Review and make comments to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
o.  Participate in private, state, and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards: The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designation and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this chapter but shall require ratification by the council. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest: The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statues and in the City of Dallas Charter. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources: The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings: A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. Eff. July 12, 2005,  5-1903; Ord. No. OA-2011-12 , 12-5-2011; Ord. No. oa-2018-10 , 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 21-73. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the commission: 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historic resources: The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation: The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation: Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a designation report consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural, and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. contributing, non-contributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district: 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts: A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles, or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of Dallas, Paulding County, the State of Georgia, or the region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city. 
(2)  Boundaries of historic districts: Boundaries of historic districts shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the Official zoning maps of the city. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts: Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); or 
b.  Noncontributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in section 21-73(b)(1), above. 
(c)  Designation of a historic property: 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties: A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, the State of Georgia, or the City of Dallas for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example and representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style or type; 
c.  It is associated with an event or person(s) of historic or cultural significance to Dallas, Paulding County, the State of Georgia, or the region; or 
d.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the City of Dallas, Paulding County, the State of Georgia, or the region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties: 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts or properties: Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts. A historical society, neighborhood association, or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties. A historical society, neighborhood association, or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance: Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning maps of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Required public hearings: The commission and the city council shall each hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principle newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten or more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division: No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the Commission must submit the Designation Report, as required in section 21-73(a)(3), to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations: A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(6)  Dallas city council's action on the commission's recommendation: Following receipt of the commission's recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments deemed necessary, or may reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation: Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owner(s) and occupant(s) of each designated historic property and each individual property located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council. This notice shall inform said owner(s) and occupant(s) of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation: The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending: If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. Eff. July 12, 2005,  5-1904) 
Sec. 21-74. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  (1)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties: After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or noncontributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  Exemptions: The department of transportation and any contractors, including cities and counties, performing work funded by the department of transportation are exempt from this article. Local governments are exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness; provided, however, that local governments shall notify the commission 45 days prior to beginning any undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the commission an opportunity to comment. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission: An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans, and documentation required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations: In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice: The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. Any expenditure shall be subject to the city purchasing ordinance. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard: The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificates of appropriateness: 
Commission action: The commission may approve the application for a certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the application with any modifications it deems necessary, or deny it. 
(1)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, architectural or archaeological significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following actions: 
a.  Alterations or new construction: A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for alterations or new construction shall be guided by: 
1.  The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties, along with any published guidelines accompanying the standards; and 
2.  Local design guidelines adopted by the commission. 
b.  Relocation: A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure, or object contributes to its present setting; 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be; 
3.  Whether the building, structure, or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historic and architectural character of the building, structure, or object. 
c.  Demolition: A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic, architectural, or archaeological significance of the building, structure, sites, or object; 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district; 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location; 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the historic district or in the city; 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse; and 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship: When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications, or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by united states mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in appearance which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The commission and the city council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced: A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(l)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness: The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said applications. 
(m)  Acquisition of property: The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a significant historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals: Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the Dallas city council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to section 21-74(h)(1) of this chapter or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45 day period allowed for the commission action, section 21-74(h)(2) of this article. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if it finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the Superior Court of Paulding County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for city ordinance violations. 
(Ord. Eff. July 12, 2005,  5-1905) 
Sec. 21-75. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair: Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair: Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect. 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors, and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to he taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 21-76 of this chapter and, at the direction of the city council; the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes: Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. Eff. July 12, 2005,  5-1906) 
Sec. 21-76. - Penalty provisions. 
    Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of other validly enacted provisions of the city. 
(Ord. Eff. July 12, 2005,  5-1907) 
Secs. 21-77-21-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DALLAS COMMERCIAL HISTORIC DISTRICT 

Sec. 21-91 - Purpose. 
    In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
    In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
    In accordance with the ordinance to establish a Historic Preservation Commission in the city; to provide for the designation of historic properties or historic districts; to provide for issuance of certificates of appropriateness; to provide for an appeals procedure; to repeal conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes; and 
    The Dallas City Council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to designate a historic district in a geographically definable area containing buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof which has special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; represents one or more periods, styles, or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the city, the county, the state, or the region; and causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the City of Dallas. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 21-92. - Designation of historic district and boundary description. 
    There is hereby created and designated in and for the City of Dallas the Dallas Commercial Historic District with boundaries as follows: 
SEE EXHIBIT "A" ATTACHED HERETO AND IS INCORPORATED HEREIN BY REFERENCE FOR A MORE COMPLETE LEGAL DESCRIPTION [1] 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, 8-3-2009) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Exhibits "A" through "C" are attached to Ord. No. 2009-10 and are on file in the Office of the City Clerk. 

Sec. 21-93. - List of property in the historic district and ownership thereof. 
    There is attached a list of property located within the Dallas Commercial Historic District as created in section two [21-92] hereof, and the owner thereof is set forth beside the name of each property. 
SEE EXHIBIT "B" ATTACHED HERETO AND IS INCORPORTAED HEREIN BY REFERENCE FOR PROPERTY IN HISTORIC DISTRICT AND OWNERSHIP THEREOF* 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 21-94. - Commercial historic district design guidelines. 
    There is created a Commercial Historic District Design Guidelines for the Dallas Commercial Historic District. 
SEE EXHIBIT "C" ATTACHED HERETO AND IS INCORPORTAED HEREIN BY REFERENCE FOR DALLAS COMMERCIAL HISTORIC DISTRICT GUIDELINES* 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 21-95. - Historic district boundaries on the official zoning map. 
    Upon designation, the Dallas Commercial Historic District shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Dallas and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, 8-3-2009) 
Sec. 21-96. - Certificate of appropriateness. 
    Upon the effective date of this article, no material change in the appearance of any building, structure, site, object or work of art within the designated Dallas Commercial Historic District shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner of occupant thereof, unless or until an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the Dallas Historic Preservation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, 8-3-2009) 
Chapter 22 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 22-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in chapter 2 of title 8 of the O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A.  8-2-1 et seq.) as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in chapter 2 of title 25 of the O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A.  25-2-1 et seq.); and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. chapter 2 of title 8 (O.C.G.A.  8-2-1 et seq.) after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
    Closing means causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
    Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. article 2 of chapter 13 of title 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act (O.C.G.A.  13-2-1 et seq.). 
    Dwellings, buildings or structures. 
(1)  The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
(2)  The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" does not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
    Municipality means any incorporated city within this state. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
    Parties in interest means persons: 
(1)  In possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(3)  Having paid an occupational tax to the mayor and council for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Having filed a property tax return with the mayor and council as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
    Public authority means any member of a mayor and council, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
    Public officer means the officer who is authorized by O.C.G.A.  41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A.  41-2-7 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer. 
    Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
    Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1002; Ord. No. 01-17, 10-1-2001) 
Sec. 22-20. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
    It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling Act, charter, ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation or regulation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1001; Ord. No. 01-17, 10-1-2001) 
Sec. 22-21. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthy. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The mayor and council of the city shall appoint or designate the city manager, city chief marshal, city police chief and his designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure or property. 
(d)  If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property: 
(1)  Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building or structure. 
(e)  The complaint shall: 
(1)  Identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; 
(2)  Identify the owner and parties in interest; 
(3)  State with particularity the factual basis for the action; and 
(4)  Contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(f)  The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A.  41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less that 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(g)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair alter, or improve a structure may be considered income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(3)  The court, after determining at such hearing or any other subsequent hearing, that the dwelling, building or structure in question, is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, or the court determines that the owner fails to comply with the orders of the court which shall be a misdemeanor, the court shall have the authority and ability in the addition to or as part of any fine, to award judgment to the City of Dallas, Georgia, against the owner for the cost and expenses of litigation incurred by the City of Dallas, Georgia, in the enforcement or prosecution of this ordinance which shall include the ability and authority of the Judge of the court to award the City of Dallas, Georgia, its reasonable attorney's fees as part of the City of Dallas, Georgia's cost and expenses of litigation. 
Any cost and expenses of litigation, including but not limited to reasonable attorney's fees awarded pursuant to this paragraph, shall also be included as other cost necessarily associated with the abatement action in any lien allowed or provided for in this Article which shall attach to the real property as allowed and authorized in section 22-21(j). 
(h)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated and closed or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(i)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(j)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for in this article shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A.  41-2-12. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collection of real property ad valorem tax, including specifically chapter 4 of title 48 of the O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A.  48-4-1 et seq.); provided, however that the limitation of O.C.G.A.  48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the mayor and council of city. 
(2)  Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(3)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A.  41-2-7 et seq., unless such costs are waived by resolution of the board of commissioners of the county. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(4)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(5)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A.  5-3-29. 
(6)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(7)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1003; Ord. No. 01-17, 10-1-2001; OA-2015-01 ,  3- 2-2015; OA-2016-04 ,  6- 6-2016) 
Sec. 22-22. - Determination by public officer under existing ordinances that dwellings, buildings or structures are vacant; conditions of nuisances. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of: 
(1)  The occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; 
(2)  The occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or 
(3)  Other residents of the city. 
(b)  Such conditions include the following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(c)  The public officer may determine under existing ordinances, that a dwelling or building is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence that drug crimes are being committed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1004; Ord. No. 01-17, 10-1-2001) 
Sec. 22-23. - Powers of public officers. 
    The public officers designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use or are vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees, as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1005; Ord. No. 01-17, 10-1-2001) 
Sec. 22-24. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the manner set forth in this section. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service, upon each owner and party in interest, if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by this article to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the city; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of article 5, chapter 4 of title 48 of O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A.  48-4-75 et seq.); or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event that either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served. If such guardian or personal representative resides outside of the county or is a nonresident of this state he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this article, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1006; Ord. No. 01-17, 10-1-2001) 
Secs. 22-25-22-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNK VEHICLES 

Sec. 22-52. - Definitions. 
    Junk car or junked motor vehicle means a motor vehicle which does not have a valid county tag decal to allow operation of such motor vehicle on the public roads, streets, ways, or highways of the state and/or is in such a state which renders said motor vehicle incapable of being operated or driven. A motor vehicle also includes, but is not limited to, cars, trucks, vans, motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles, motor-homes, bus, limousine, scooter, moped, dune buggy, go-cart, personnel carrier, bulldozer, bobcat, earth-moving machinery, bucket or other lifts, or any other motorized machine which is capable of transporting human beings. A junked motor vehicle also includes airplanes, hang-gliders, helicopters, boats, jet-skis, or any other motorized machine which is capable of transporting human beings in the air, on the water, or on the surface of or under the earth. 
    For the purposes of this code section, "Dealer" or "motor vehicle dealer" means any natural person or entity that is engaged in the business of buying, selling, repair, or dealing in motor vehicles. Such person or entity is required to hold an occupational tax certificate as well as all other state licenses. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  5-20.1, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. OA-2018-04 , 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 22-53. - Declared nuisance. 
    No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junk car or junked motor vehicle of any kind upon any private property within any residential or commercial zoning district or within 500 feet of those zoning districts of the incorporated areas of the city for a period of time in excess of 30 calendar days. The presence of a junk car or junked motor vehicle or parts thereof on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  5-20.2, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 22-54. - Exemptions. 
    Those motor vehicles which are exempted from the provisions of this article are as follows: 
(1)  Any motor vehicles or parts thereof which are located on the premises of any licensed dealer of any motor vehicle as defined in section 22-52; 
(2)  Any motor vehicles or parts thereof which are located on the premises of any licensed junkyard operated in compliance with state and local laws relating to licensing, regulating and zoning of any such junkyards; 
(3)  Any motor vehicle enclosed within a building on private property which is not a hazard to public health, safety or welfare; 
(4)  Any motor vehicles in the process of being restored to an operable condition provided they are: 
a.  Limited to no more than one in number; 
b.  Located in the rear yard and behind the house of the owner of such vehicles; 
c.  Not visible from any public street, alley, way, road, or highway; 
d.  Must maintain a current county and/or state tag decal; and 
e.  Are enclosed or covered in such a way so as not to be an attractive nuisance to children. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  5-20.3, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. OA-2018-04 , 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 22-55. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever it comes to the attention of the mayor and council of the city and/or the marshal's department or city police department, who shall have the responsibility of the enforcement of this article, that any nuisance as stated in this article within the incorporated area of the city, a notice or citation in writing shall be served by the marshal's department or police department of the city upon the occupant of the real property within the city where the junk car or junked motor vehicle is located upon the owner of the property, and/or upon the owner of the junk car or junked motor vehicle which constitutes such nuisance, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and directing them to remove such within 30 days of this notice. In the event that such owners cannot be located, or in the event that the address of such owners is unknown, then notice shall be made to the last known address of such owners, or in the event that the identity of such owners cannot be ascertained after due investigation, such notice shall be posted in a prominent location on the premises where the junk car or junked motor vehicle is located, and upon the junk car or junked motor vehicle itself. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-02, 6-6-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2011-02, adopted June 6, 2011, repealed  22-55, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment,  22-55 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisances, generally, O.C.G.A.  41-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-56. - Responsibility for removal. 
    Upon receipt of such notice as set forth in section 22-55, the owner of the junk car or junked motor vehicle, and/or the owner or occupant of the private property within the city upon which the same is located, either, or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event that such person shall fail to remove such junk car or junked motor vehicle and thereby abate such nuisance within the 30-day time period provided in the notice set forth in section 22-55, the mayor and council of the city and/or the marshal's department or city police department shall be authorized to institute proceedings against such person as stated in section 22-55 in the city court pursuant to this article and/or ordinances of the city, and such person shall be served and notified by citation issued by the marshal's department or city police department in the same manner for service of notice of ordinance violations within the city to such person or persons of the date, time and place of the hearing scheduled before the judge of the city court not later than five days prior to the date set for the hearing. The city court shall be the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-02, 6-6-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2011-02, adopted June 6, 2011, repealed  22-56, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment,  22-56 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisances, generally, O.C.G.A.  41-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-57. - Hearing. 
(a)  At the hearing, the judge of city court shall determine the owner and/or the person who is in control or possession of the junk car or junked motor vehicle and/or the owner of the premises or real property where such junk car or junked motor vehicle is located and whether or not a nuisance as defined by this article exists. If so, the judge of the city court shall order an abatement or removal of such nuisance and/or shall impose such penalty or penalties as may be authorized by this article for failure to abate or remove such nuisance. 
(b)  In the event that the judge of the city court determines that a nuisance exists and abatement or removal the thereof is ordered, the judge of the city court shall be authorized to grant the owner and/or person who is in control or possession of the junk car or junked motor vehicle and/or the owner of the premises or real property where the junk car or junked motor vehicle is located, a period of time, not to exceed 15 days, to abate or remove such nuisance. The judge of the city court shall further include in such order provisions authorizing the marshal's department or police department of the city to abate or remove such nuisance if such nuisance is not abated or removed by the owner or person in control or possession of said junk car or junked motor vehicle and/or the owner of the premises or real property where the junk car or junked motor vehicle is located within the time period for such abatement or removal as ordered. Such order shall also include authority for the marshal's department or police department of the city or any person, persons, or entity assisting the marshal's department or police department of the city to enter upon the premises or real property upon which the junk car or junked motor vehicle is located upon which the nuisance exists and to abate or remove the same, and shall further provide that the cost incurred by the marshal's department or police department of the city of abatement or removal of the nuisance incurred by the city shall be assessed against the owner or person in control or possession of said junk car or junked vehicle and/or the owner of the premises or real property where the junk car or junked motor vehicle is located. 
(c)  In the event the judge of the city court, determines that a nuisance exists and abatement for removal thereof is ordered, or that there has been a failure by the owner or the person who is in control or possession, of the junk car or junk motor vehicle and/or the owner of the premises or real property, where such junk car or junk motor vehicle is located, to comply with the subsequent orders of the court which shall be a misdemeanor, the court shall have the authority and ability in addition to or as part of any fine, to award to the City of Dallas, Georgia, judgment against the owner or the person who is in control or possession, of the junk car or junk motor vehicle and/or the owner of the premises or real property, the cost and expenses of litigation incurred by the City of Dallas, Georgia, in the enforcement or prosecution of this ordinance which shall include the ability and authority of the Judge of the court to award the City of Dallas, Georgia, its reasonable attorney's fees as part of the City of Dallas, Georgia's cost and expenses of litigation. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-02, 6-6-2011; Ord. No. OA-2016-04, 6-6-2016 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2011-02, adopted June 6, 2011, repealed  22-57, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment,  22-57 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 22-58. - Abatement by the city. 
    In the event that the nuisance is abated or removed by the marshal's department or police department of the city pursuant to order of the judge of the city court as authorized herein, the marshal's department or police department of the city shall be authorized to abate or remove the nuisance in the following manner: 
(1)  The marshal's department or police department of the city shall acquire a wrecker service, or such other service or assistance or personnel as may be required to remove or abate the nuisance, which shall include, but be limited to, the ability to direct that the nuisance be removed or abated by removal to a local licensed junkyard or other similar storage facility. 
(2)  The marshal's department or police department of the city shall notify the owner of the premises or real property upon which the junk car or junked motor vehicle is located, and/or the person in control or possession or the owner of said junk car or junked motor vehicle within ten days of any such removal, the location of the junk car or junked motor vehicle and of the cost incurred by the marshal's department or police department of the city in connection with the abatement or removal. Such cost may include the actual cost of removal of the junk car or junked motor vehicle and any storage charges, if applicable. 
(3)  In the event that the owner of the premises or real property upon which the junk car or junked motor vehicle is located and/or the person in control or possession or the owner of such junk car or junked motor vehicle does not pay all of the costs incurred and/or storage charges as stated in subsection (2) of this section in order to recover or obtain the junk car or junked motor vehicle within 30 days from any such removal as allowed by this article, the mayor and council of the city shall be authorized to dispose of such junk car or junked motor vehicle in any manner as may be authorized and allowed by the laws of the state and/or the ordinances of the city in order to recover the costs incurred and/or storage charges as allowed by this article. 
(Ord. No. OA-2011-02, 6-6-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2011-02, adopted June 6, 2011, repealed  22-58, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment,  22-58 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisances, generally, O.C.G.A.  41-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-59. - Failure to abate. 
    The failure to abate or remove such nuisance as required by his article shall allow the judge of the city court to enforce such failure as a misdemeanor as defined by O.C.G.A.  41-1-6 and/or as a violation of the ordinances of the city and issue such fines or other enforcement as allowed by the Charter of the city for the enforcement of violations of city ordinances and the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  5-20.8, 4-7-2008) 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisances by judge, O.C.G.A.  41-2-1. 
Sec. 22-60. - Appeal/certiorari. 
    Any persons or other entity found to be in violation of this article by order of the judge of the city court shall have the right to appeal and/or request certiorari of any such order within 30 days, in writing, to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  5-20.9, 4-7-2008) 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES AND MUNICIPAL COURT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Unnecessary noise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continue any excessive or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-103) 
Sec. 24-2. - Throwing of missiles. 
    No person in the city shall throw any stone, snowball, or any other missile upon or at a vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place or enclosed or unenclosed ground. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-104) 
Sec. 24-3. - Discharging firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to discharge any firearms including, but not limited to, rifles, pistols, shotguns, pellet guns, dynamite caps or other explosives within the corporate limits of the city unless: 
(1)  In defense of person, property or habitation; 
(2)  By any police officer engaged in the discharge of his official duties; 
(3)  By persons engaged in military duties or exercises; 
(4)  With written permission of the mayor and council of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-109) 
Sec. 24-4. - Unlawful purchases for minors. 
    No person in the city shall procure for any minor any article which the minor is forbidden by law to purchase for himself. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-110) 
Sec. 24-5. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
    No person in the city shall leave or permit to remain outside any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended, or discarded refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing said door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from said refrigerator or container. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-111) 
Sec. 24-6. - Public drunkenness. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear in an intoxicated condition on any public or private street or highway within the city or within the yard of any private residence not in the exclusive possession of the person so intoxicated or at the fairgrounds, ball grounds, show grounds, park, recreation center, place of business open to the public or at any other place of public gathering or assembly or place accessible to or visible to the community. Said intoxication may be caused by the excessive use of intoxicating wines, beers, liquors, or opiates, or narcotics or other dangerous or hazardous drugs, and must be made manifest by boisterousness or by indecent condition or actions or by vulgar, profane, or unbecoming language, or loud and violent discourse of the person or persons so intoxicated, and further a person may be deemed intoxicated within the meaning of this section where his excessive use of intoxicants produces such a material change in his normal mental status that his behavior becomes unpredictable and uncontrolled, and as a result, either: 
(1)  Slight irritations, real or imaginary, cause outbursts of anger that find expressions in acts of physical violence against another person, either police officer or citizens; or 
(2)  The accused becomes unable to exercise any care for his own safety. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-112; Ord. No. OA-2018-01 , 3-5-2018) 
Sec. 24-7. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to engage in any conduct declared by the provisions listed in subsection (b) of this section to be disorderly conduct, and any person convicted of engaging in such conduct as hereinafter specified shall be guilty of disorderly conduct and punished as set out hereafter. 
(b)  Disorderly conduct shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Any person who assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device, or trick, to obtain any thing of value from any place or from any person in the city, or who shall aid and abet therein. 
(2)  Any person who shall accost or attempt to force his company upon any person of the opposite sex, or who attempts to "pick up" any person of the opposite sex. 
(3)  Any person who frequents any place where illegal gaming or gambling takes place or the illegal sale or possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed, or tolerated. 
(4)  Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another person's pursuit of such other person's lawful occupation. 
(5)  Any person who shall congregate with one or more people or who places himself in or on any public way or sidewalk so as to halt the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and who refuses to clear such public way so that traffic can pass unimpeded, when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority. 
(6)  Any person invading the playing area of any athletic contest or exhibition, except participants and officials. 
(7)  Any person attending an athletic contest or exhibition or show, who casts, throws, hurls, or flings any bottle, can, receptacle or any other object which does or could cause injury or damage to persons or property either in the spectator area or elsewhere within the facility where the contest or exhibition is taking place. 
(8)  Any person causing an unreasonably loud, boisterous and unseemly noise or disturbance, unnecessarily and unreasonably annoying or offending the sense of decency or property of the nearby residents. 
(9)  Any person urinating on the streets of the city or of the sidewalks of the city, or in or upon any public property or place accessible to or within the view of the members of the community, except in a flush toilet connected with the city sewerage system or an approved septic tank system or in a sanitary privy, out of public view. 
(10)  Any person acting in a violent, turbulent, boisterous, indecent, or disorderly manner or using profane, vulgar or obscene language in a public place, thereby disturbing the good order, peace, tranquility, and dignity of the city and the inhabitants thereof. 
(11)  Any person shooting a firearm at another person in any public or private place within the city limits without lawful authority or legal jurisdiction. 
(12)  Any person setting a bed, drapes, furniture, or house on fire by smoking or by means of lighted cigarettes or cigar or pipe or materials used to light the same. 
(13)  Any person disturbing or destroying any carved pumpkins or jack-o-lanterns or other holiday decorations that is upon the property of another. 
(14)  Any person expectorating or spitting on the sidewalks of the city or on the floors of any publicly owned building. 
(15)  Any person appearing in any place open to, accessible to, or within the view of the public, not properly clothed or garbed, by which is meant with the genitalia and buttocks of such person not completely covered by a fully opaque garment, or in the case of females, with the breast uncovered. 
(16)  Any person standing or loitering upon any sidewalk, street, avenue, alley, or public highway or grounds within the limits of the city or on private property without the express consent of the owner thereof, for the purpose of "thumbing," requesting, asking, or soliciting a ride from the operator of any motor vehicle. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(d)  Each violation of a part of this section shall be a separate violation, and any person convicted of violating more than one part thereof shall be guilty of more than one separate offense, and may be punished separately for each offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-113) 
Sec. 24-8. - Bird sanctuary; nuisance birds; penalty. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of city shall be, and the same is hereby designated as, a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests; provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities, those authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, bird club, garden club or Humane Society, or as many of said clubs as are to be found in the city, after having given clubs at least three days actual notice of the time and place of said meeting to the representative of said clubs. 
(c)  If, as a result of said meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then said birds may be destroyed in such manner and in such numbers as is deemed available by said health authorities under supervision of the chief of police of the city. 
(d)  Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-114) 
Sec. 24-9. - Theft by shoplifting. 
(a)  The city municipal court, hereinafter referred to as the court, is granted jurisdiction to try and dispose of cases in which a person is charged with a first or second offense of theft by shoplifting when the property which was the subject of the theft was valued at $300.00 or less and if the offense occurred within the corporate limits of the city. The jurisdiction of such court within the county having jurisdiction to try and dispose of such cases (O.C.G.A.  36-32-9 and 16-8-14 are hereby incorporated herein by reference thereto). 
(b)  A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when he, alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereon, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; 
(4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or 
(5)  Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
(c)  A person convicted of the offense of theft by shoplifting, as provided herein in subsection (a) of this section when the property which was the subject of the theft is $300.00 or less in value shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; provided, however, that: 
(1)  Upon conviction of a second offense by shoplifting, where the first offense is either a felony or a misdemeanor, as defined in this section, in addition to or in lieu of any imprisonment which might be imposed, the defendant shall be fined not less than $250.00 and the fine shall not be suspended or probated; 
(2)  Upon conviction of a third offense for shoplifting, where the first two offenses are either felonies or misdemeanors, or a combination of a felony and a misdemeanor, as defined by this section, in addition to or in lieu of any fine which might be imposed, the defendant shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than 30 days or confinement in the "special alternative incarceration-probation boot camp," probation detention center, diversion center, or other community correctional facility or the department of corrections for a period of 120 days or shall be sentenced to monitored house arrest for a period of 120 days and, in addition to either such types of confinement, may be required to undergo psychological evaluation and treatment to be paid for by the defendant; and such sentence of imprisonment or confinement shall not be suspended, probated, deferred, or withheld. 
In all cases involving theft by shoplifting, the term "value" means the actual retail price of the property at the time and place of the offense. The unaltered price tag or other marking on property, or duly identified photographs thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of value and ownership of the property. 
(d)  Subsection (c)(1) of this section shall in no way affect the authority of a sentencing judge to provide for a sentence to be served on weekends or during the nonworking hours of the defendant as provided in O.C.G.A.  17-10-3 which is incorporated herein by reference, relative to punishment for misdemeanors. 
(e)  All finds and forfeitures arising from the prosecution of such cases in the municipal court of the city shall be retained by the city and shall be paid into the treasury of the city. 
(f)  Any person convicted under this section shall have the right to appeal such conviction, in writing within 30 days to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-05, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 24-10. - Riding, operating or using bicycles, skateboards, rollerblades, etc., and/or motorized or nonmotorized transportation units other than such units which are used by disabled persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to ride, operate, or use bicycles, unicycles, skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, pedal cars, scooters, motorcycles, mopeds, cars, trucks battery operated cars, and/or motorized or nonmotorized transportation units other than such units which are used by disabled persons on any property owned or maintained by the city including, but not limited to, the Courthouse Square Area or any sidewalks which are within a radius of 2,000 feet of the Historic Paulding County Courthouse Building other than within the right-of-way of any public street, road, or highway or within any area clearly marked by the city for parking, loading, unloading or other specific designated use. 
(b)  It shall be further unlawful to park, load, or unload, any cars, trucks, bicycles, unicycles, skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, pedal cars, scooters, motorcycles, mopeds, battery operated cars, and/or motorized or nonmotorized transportation units other than such units which are used by disabled persons on any other property owned or maintained by the city, including, but not limited to, the Courthouse Square Area or any sidewalks, which are within a radius of 2,000 feet of the Historic Paulding County Courthouse Building other than in areas clearly marked by the city for parking, loading, or unloading. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-116; Ord. No. 98-17, 11-1998; Ord. No. 06-25, 7-10-2006; Ord. of 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 24-11. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  The city municipal court has jurisdiction to try and dispose of cases in which a person is charged with the offense of criminal trespass if the offense occurred within the corporate limits of the city. The jurisdiction of the municipal court shall be concurrent with the jurisdiction of other courts within the county having jurisdiction to try and dispose of such cases. O.C.G.A.  36-32-10.1 is hereby incorporated herein by reference for reference purposes. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he intentionally damages any property of another without consent of that other person and the damage thereto is $500.00 or less or knowingly and maliciously interferes with the possession or use of the property of another person without consent of that person. 
(c)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he knowingly and without authority: 
(1)  Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person for an unlawful purpose; 
(2)  Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant that such entry is forbidden; or 
(3)  Remains upon the land or premises of another person or within the vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person after receiving notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant to depart. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, permission to enter or invitation to enter given by a minor who is or is not present on or in the property of the minor's parent or guardian is not sufficient to allow lawful entry of another person upon the land, premises, vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft owned or rightfully occupied by such minor's parent or guardian if such parent or guardian has previously given notice that such entry is forbidden or notice to depart. 
(e)  A person who commits the offense of criminal trespass shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(f)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he intentionally defaces, mutilates or defiles any gravemarker, monument, or memorial to one or more deceased persons who served in the military service of this state, the United States of America or any of the states thereof, or the Confederate States of America or any of the states thereof, or a monument, plaque, marker, or memorial which is dedicated to, honors, or recounts the military service of any past or present military personnel of this state, the Untied States of America or any of the states thereof, or the Confederate States of America or any of the states thereof if such grave marker, monument, memorial, plaque, or marker is privately owned or located on land which is privately owned. 
(g)  Any person convicted of any provision of this section shall be punished as a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 12 months in the county jail, or a combination of both. O.C.G.A.  16-7-21 which is incorporated herein by reference for reference purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01,  6-117, 2-2-2009) 
Secs. 24-12-24-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES IN MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 24-39. - Warrants. 
    Any person having knowledge of the commission of an ordinance violation may file a written verified complaint with the court. If the court is satisfied that the violation has been committed and that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the defendant committed the violation, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-201) 
Sec. 24-40. - Forfeiture of bond. 
    If a defendant under bond does not appear when his name is called, and no continuance has been granted, then his bond shall be forfeited as allowed under O.C.G.A.  36-32-4. Whether or not the defendant has been released on his own recognizance, a warrant of arrest may be issued. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-202) 
Sec. 24-41. - Persons under 17 years of age. 
    Upon the arrest of any child, as defined in O.C.G.A.  15-11-2, the city police department shall immediately place said child in the custody of the county juvenile court. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-203) 
Sec. 24-42. - Acceptance of pleas. 
    Before accepting a plea to an offense charged, the court shall in all cases, in language in which defendant can understand, inform him of the nature of the charge against him and the penalty which may be imposed upon conviction, and shall inform the defendant of his fundamental constitutional rights. The fundamental constitutional rights should include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  He is not required to make any statement and that anything said by him may be used against him; 
(2)  He may have a lawyer; 
(3)  He may have his case delayed to give him sufficient time to be advised by a lawyer; 
(4)  He may have a lawyer present during any questioning and proceeding; 
(5)  If he is without means to employ a lawyer, his case will be bound over to the appropriate authority that has the means to appoint a lawyer for his behalf; 
(6)  He may or may not testify in his own behalf; 
(7)  He may appeal any final decision rendered by the court; 
(8)  A record of any conviction will become a part of his permanent record; 
(9)  He may be admitted to bail in appropriate cases; 
(10)  He may have a trial by jury (if hereafter applicable); 
(11)  He is innocent until proven guilty; 
(12)  He may have the complaining or material witness present and the right to cross examine; 
(13)  He may bring witnesses in his own behalf. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-204) 
Sec. 24-43. - Indigent defendants. 
    The defendant may, at any time, request the court to appoint an attorney. In such case, the court shall determine whether the defendant is able to afford an attorney. In making this determination, the court has the authority to put the defendant under oath and require him to testify as to his employment, his family, the net worth of his possessions and other such matters. If the court determines that the defendant is indigent, then his case may be bound over to the appropriate court that has the authority to appoint an attorney to represent the defendant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-205) 
Sec. 24-44. - Plea. 
(a)  The defendant shall enter one of the following pleas: 
(1)  Guilty. 
(2)  Not guilty. 
(3)  Nolo contendere. 
(b)  If the defendant refuses to enter a plea, the court shall enter a plea of not guilty for him and set the case down for trial. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-206) 
Sec. 24-45. - Court cases-Disposition. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, all prosecutions docketed at a designated session of court shall be disposed of during that particular session. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-207) 
Sec. 24-46. - Same-Continuance. 
    Only the municipal court judge or other officer presiding shall have the authority to continue the case. No continuance shall be allowed except for good cause. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-208) 
Sec. 24-47. - Appearance of complaining witnesses. 
    A material or complaining witness in any contested prosecution shall appear at the session at which the prosecution is docketed. The prosecution may be dismissed if the material witness fails to appear. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-209) 
Sec. 24-48. - Rules of evidence. 
    The general rules of evidence shall be applicable in the trial of all cases. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-210) 
Sec. 24-49. - Dismissals. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, by section 24-47 or by other ordinance, no prosecution shall be dismissed except upon motion, granted by the municipal court judge or other officer presiding. The reason for every dismissal shall be set forth in the order, which must be entered upon the court record. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-211) 
Sec. 24-50. - Judgment and sentences. 
    Upon a verdict or plea of guilty and after announcing the judgment, the court shall impose sentence. The court may: 
(1)  Impose a fine, with or without a commitment for confinement; 
(2)  Commit such person for confinement; 
(3)  Sentence such person to community service work; 
(4)  Suspend the execution of the sentence in whole or in part; 
(5)  Defer the execution of the sentence or any portion or portions thereof to one or more fixed dates in the future. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  6-212) 
Secs. 24-51-24-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANTI-GRAFFITI 

Sec. 24-101. - Definitions. 
    Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or other devise capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface. 
    Private contractor means any person with whom the city shall have contracted to remove graffiti. 
(Ord. of Feb. 6, 2006,  I) 
Sec. 24-102. - Findings/nuisance. 
    The city council of the city further finds and declares that: 
(1)  Criminal street gang activity is present within the city and such presence creates a serious and continuing public safety concern to the citizens of the city; 
(2)  Criminal trespass and criminal damage to property in the second degree caused by graffiti being placed unlawfully upon private property are crimes frequently associated with criminal street gang activity; and 
(3)  It is in the public interest, not only in the pursuit of justice but also as a means of combating such criminal street gang activity and of contributing to the general public welfare by improving the esthetics of public views, to compensate as provided in this article those private property owners who are the innocent victims of such criminal trespass or criminal damage to property in the second degree by using inmate labor to remove or obliterate graffiti unlawfully placed on the private properties when such graffiti is visible from public roads or other public property. 
    The city council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the rights and values of public and private property located in the city. The city council is enacting this article to help prevent the spread of graffiti and to establish a program for the removal of graffiti from public and private property. The city council for the city is authorized by its' charter and its' other enacted ordinances to enact such an ordinance as this to provide for the removal of such graffiti. Unless the city acts quickly to remove graffiti from public and private property, the graffiti tends to remain. 
    The city council of the city further finds that there are buildings and other improvements within the city limits of the city upon which graffiti has been recently placed. The city council of the city also finds that the placing of graffiti on property, buildings and improvements within the city causes such neighborhoods and locations to become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the city. Further, the city finds that rapid or prompt removal serves as a deterrent to future placement of graffiti and such graffiti is less likely to reappear. 
    The city council intends through the adoption of this article to provide for additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of graffiti. The city of council does not intend for this article to conflict with any existing state laws concerning graffiti. 
(Ord. of Feb. 6, 2006,  II) 
Sec. 24-103. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to write, mark, etch, spray, draw, paint, or engrave on otherwise affix to any surface of real property or improvements including but not limited to any wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate, signage, other structure of any kind, tree, or other real or personal property, either publicly or privately owned, within the city limits. Which also includes but is not limited to any drawing, inscription, figure, painting, writing, picture, name, phrase, design, insignia, statement, questions, memo or mark which is known and defined as "graffiti", to the extent that such graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface. Such acts are further deemed to be a public nuisance by the city. 
(Ord. of Feb. 6, 2006,  III) 
Sec. 24-104. - Violations. 
    The placement of graffiti within the city limits is unlawful and is further a criminal trespass and in violation of O.C.G.A.  16-7-21 or criminal damage to property in the second degree in violation of O.C.G.A.  16-7-23 and as these code sections may be amended in the future. 
    A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by either fine and/or incarceration in an amount and length not to exceed state law or as otherwise authorized by Section 4.13(c) of the Charter of the City of Dallas, Georgia or as these may be amended in the future. Nothing herein shall prevent the additional requirement of restitution or community service, if such is appropriate and such is allowed by the laws of the State of Georgia and the Charter of the City of Dallas, Georgia or as these may be amended in the future. 
(Ord. of Feb. 6, 2006,  IV) 
Sec. 24-105. - Rewards authorized by the city council of the city. 
(a)  The city council of the city is hereby authorized to provide for a reward as allowed by O.C.G.A. 45-12-35 and as may be amended in the future, for verified information given to the chief of police, mayor, city manager, or any member of the city council of the city by any person which leads to the detection or apprehension for the felony conviction of the crime/offense of graffiti as defined herein. 
(b)  No claim for a reward shall be allowed until such claim is requested in writing to the city manager for the city. Further, no claim for reward shall be allowed to be authorized until the city, investigates and verifies the accuracy of any such claim and determines that the requirements of this article for such claim have been satisfied. 
(c)  Any offer or payment of which reward must be authorized and approved on a per case basis after proper vote by the mayor and city council of the city as allowed by its' charter and/or ordinances. 
(Ord. of Feb. 6, 2006,  I) 
Sec. 24-106. - Removal by city. 
    Prior to removal of any such graffiti by the City of Dallas, Georgia the city shall notify the property owner of the property upon which such graffiti has been placed by certified mail and by posting such notice on the premises. The property owner shall have 30 days from the date of such notice is given to remove such graffiti. In the event that the property owner does not remove such graffiti or is financially unable to remove such graffiti, (the city manager of the city shall determine whether such property owner is financially unable to remove such graffiti) then such graffiti shall be removed according to the following: 
    Upon failure of the property owner to comply with the notice by the above designated date, then any such graffiti may be abated and/or removed by the city or by private contractor procured by the city or by inmates from penal institutions or jails located within the state, any county in Georgia, or the City of Dallas, Georgia or its private contractor or such inmates as expressly authorized to enter upon public or private property or premises for such purposes during regular business hours (8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) or at any other times which may be mutually agreeable with the property owner or occupant. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the city. If the city provides for the removal of the graffiti, it shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than the area where the graffiti is located. When graffiti is painted over, the city or its private contractor shall attempt to match the paint with the underlying color of the defected surface. Property owners in the city may consent in advance to the city entry onto private property for graffiti removal purposes but such consent is not mandatory. 
(Ord. of Feb. 6, 2006,  VI) 
Sec. 24-107. - Provisions not mandatory. 
    It is the specific intent of this chapter that neither provision nor any term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the city or any of its officers or employees, for whom the implementation and enforcement of this chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory. 
    Nothing in this chapter is intended nor shall be construed to create or form the basis of any liability on the part of the city or its officers, employees, or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any action or inaction on the part of the city related in any manner to the enforcement of this chapter by its officers, employees, or agents. 
(Ord. of Feb. 6, 2006,  VIII) 
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION 

Sec. 26-1. - Powers and duties of city manager. 
    The city manager shall conduct and supervise public playgrounds, indoor recreation centers, and other recreational facilities owned or controlled by the city. He may conduct or sponsor any form of recreational or cultural activity that will employ the leisure of the people in a wholesome or constructive manner. He may conduct such activities on properties under his control, on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof, and on private properties with the consent of the owners. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-301) 
Sec. 26-2. - Park property. 
    No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever either real or personal. 
(2)  Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and wash rooms in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(3)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(4)  Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(5)  Possess or use any type of metal detection device in the public parks of the city. No person shall excavate, dig, or remove sod, turf or soil in the public parks of the city without authority from the city to do so. Metal detection devices, unless approved by the city manager, are not permited in public parks within the City of Dallas. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-302; Ord. No. oa-2018-06 , 8-6-2018) 
Sec. 26-3. - Operating policy. 
(a)  Every park that is the property of the city shall be opened daily to the public. Any section or part of a park may be declared closed to the public by the city manager at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. 
(b)  Whenever any association or organization desires to use park facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties or theatrical or entertainment performances, a representative of the association or organization shall first obtain a permit from the city for such purposes. The city manager may adopt an application form to be used for such situations. 
(c)  The city shall grant the application if it appears that the association or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by the individual members of the public and if the association or organization meets all other conditions contained in the application. The application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the city from any liability of any kind or character and to protect city property from damage, and shall contain such a provision if a swimming pool is to be utilized by the association or organization. 
(d)  No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. 
(2)  Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(3)  Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-303) 
Sec. 26-4. - Dressing or undressing permitted in bathing houses only. 
    No person in a park shall dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-304) 
Sec. 26-5. - Speed of vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in any area in a park in excess of five miles per hour. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-305) 
Sec. 26-6. - Merchandising, advertising and signs. 
(a)  No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any article or thing. 
(2)  Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire. 
(3)  Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands, highways or roads adjacent to a park. 
(b)  Exception to this section is hereby made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and/or under the authority and regulations of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-306) 
Chapter 28 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2013-03, adopted April 1, 2013, repealed Ch. 28,  28-1-28-22, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 28 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
State Law reference- Outdoor advertising adjacent to roads that are part of the interstate and primary systems of highways within the state are regulated by, O.C.G.A.  32-6-70 et seq.; signs, signals and other devices within the right-of-way of public roads are restricted in, O.C.G.A.  32-6-51. 

Sec. 28-1. - Purpose and findings. 
    Be it ordained by the mayor and the city council of the City of Dallas that: 
(1)  The City of Dallas's population has grown substantially in recent years. With the increase in population has come a drastic and dramatic increase in the volume of traffic in the city. Uniform regulation of signage providing directional, commercial, and noncommercial information to the motoring public, to promote public safety, is essential. 
(2)  Various and diverse businesses are located within the City of Dallas. The need to advertise products and services must be balanced by the city's obligation to restrict clutter, maintain an aesthetically pleasing environment, protect property values, and enhance public safety. 
(3)  Regulation of the location, size, placement, and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities in the city without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the community, to take advantage of the beauty of the community's natural environment, and to protect property values therein. Such regulation is also necessary to facilitate and aid in the identification and location of businesses in the city in the event of police, fire, or other emergencies and to avoid confusion and delay in response to such emergencies. Accordingly, it is the intention of the city to establish regulations governing the display of signs which will: 
a.  Promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare; 
b.  Enhance the economy and the business and industry of the city by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs; 
c.  Restrict signs and lights which increase clutter or which increase the probability of traffic accidents by obstructing vision; 
d.  Promote signs which are compatible with their surroundings; 
e.  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
f.  Maintain the historical image of the city; 
g.  Promote economic development; and 
h.  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(4)  It is also the purpose of this chapter to insure proper maintenance, for safety and structural soundness, as well as the appearance and attractiveness of signs. 
(5)  Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(6)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
    Aggregate sign area shall mean the area of all signs on a parcel, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs. 
    Animated sign shall mean a sign with action, motion, or changing colors which requires electrical energy. This definition includes any signs that electronically change the sign face, whether by substitution of copy or scrolling. An electronic sign that maintains a steady sign face without change for no less than six hours is not considered an animated sign. However, any deviation from the minimum six-hour change of unchanged copy results in the sign being considered an animated sign. 
    Area of a sign sign area shall mean the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses one face of the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
    Awning sign shall mean a sign located on a roof-like cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign. 
    Billboard sign shall mean any sign with a sign area exceeding 300 square feet. 
    Building setback line means the minimum yard requirement adjacent to any public street set forth in section 44-241, pertaining to zoning, beyond which no part of a principal building or structure may be erected. 
    Bulletin board means a permanent sign which primarily displays the name of a noncommercial place of public assembly and announces the upcoming events of that organization. 
    Business sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, profession, product, service, activity or entertainment conducted, sold or offered on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
    Canopy means a sign imposed upon or painted on any roof-like structure either permanently or temporarily extended over a sidewalk or walkway, which can be mounted flush or suspended. 
    Commemorative sign means a sign that identifies an upcoming event of memorable public interest. 
    Copy area means the area of a sign that displays a message, symbol or emblem. When a sign has multiple sides or where the sign faces are paralleled or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 60 degrees or less, the copy area is the area of one face. If the two faces of a double-face sign are of unequal area, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the larger face. 
    Double-faced sign shall mean a sign which has two display areas placed back to back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
    Flag shall mean any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used to signify a government or other entity or organization. 
    Flashing sign means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effects. Illuminated signs which indicate the time, temperature or date shall not be considered flashing signs. 
    Freestanding sign shall mean a sign securely affixed to a support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, such as monument or stanchion signs. 
    Historic district means any area designated by the mayor and council of the city that has an historic value. Boundaries must b[e] well-defined by resolution of the mayor and council. 
    Identification sign means a sign indicating the name and/or number of the owner and/or premises or the accessory use of a dwelling for a home or for professional purposes, or identifying multiple-family units. 
    Illuminated sign shall mean a sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
    Instructional sign means a sign exclusive of any commercial messages that conveys directions in traffic circulation or necessary information to the public. 
    Marquee sign means a projecting business sign attached to a roofed structure of a building which may project over public or private sidewalks or rights-of-way. 
    Monument sign shall mean a freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to or be a part of or supported by the building in or to which the sign applies. 
    Non-conforming sign shall mean any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter that was legal at the time of its erection. 
    Off-premises sign means any sign used for the purpose of displaying advertising sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises where such sign is displayed. 
    Official means any sign, symbol, or device erected and maintained by a government or governmental agency for the purpose of informing or guiding the public. 
    Outdoor advertising means a large freestanding sign which directs attention to a building, profession, product, service, activity, premises upon which the sign is located, such as a billboard. 
    Parcel shall mean a separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records. 
    Permanent sign means any sign attached securely to a building, roof, wall, or canopy or the ground by means of concrete, bolts, metal braces or treated wood or cedar, and continuing in the same state or without essential change to the sign structure. 
    Playbill sign means a sign or signs announcing entertainment offered or to be offered on the site where the sign is displayed. 
    Political sign means any sign used in connection with political campaigns or civic noncommercial health, safety and welfare campaigns. The term "political sign" includes campaign signs. 
    Portable display sign means a mobile/temporary sign that is mounted on a trailer type frame or portable wood or metal frame and not permanently attached to the ground. 
    Product sign means any sign that advertises a particular product being sold on the premises. 
    Projecting sign means a sign which is attached to the building wall and which extends more than 24 inches from the face of such wall. 
    Real estate directional sign means a sign which conveys directions to a specific property for sale or lease, such as a real estate development, residential subdivision, apartment or condominium project, home for sale, apartment for rent, or any other property for sale or lease. 
    Real estate sign means a temporary sign advertising the sale, rent, or lease of the property on which it is located. 
    Roof sign shall mean a sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building which extends above the immediately adjacent roof line of the building. 
    Rotating sign means a sign which is designed to revolve by means of electrical power. 
    Shopping center means three or more commercial establishments which are planned developed and managed as a unit and which provide free parking facilities on one lot or contiguous lots. 
    Sign shall mean a device or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. A name, identification, description, display, illustration or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon the exterior of a building, structure or land in view of the general public activity, person, business, or institution are examples of a sign. 
    Stanchion sign shall mean a freestanding sign mounted on one or more steel poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertisement portion of such structure which rests upon or is supported by such poles. 
    Wall sign shall mean a sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear or side of the structure. 
    Window sign shall mean a sign installed flush with or on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
    Yard sale sign means any sign that advertises or indicates the date, time and location of the sale of used household items by one or more residents at one location. A yard sale sign may also be identified as a garage sale, basement sale, carport sale, etc. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-3. - Permits. 
(a)  All signs allowed by this chapter, except those exempted from obtaining a permit, shall require a permit issued by the city prior to posting, displaying, substantially changing, or erecting a sign in the city. 
(b)  Existing signs which conform to the provisions of this chapter that would be required to obtain a permit under the regulations of this chapter must register with the city within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. The information provided for registration will be the same information required in a permit application under section 28-4. No permit fee will be required for the registration of existing signs. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-4. - Application information. 
    Applications for sign permits required by this chapter shall be filed by the sign owner or the owner's agent with the City of Dallas Community Development Department. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and a plat map of the property, drawn to scale, showing all existing structures, including existing signage and which bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign. 
(2)  The aggregate area for all signs on the parcel. 
(3)  The name and address of all of the owner(s) of real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(4)  Consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign. 
(5)  Name, address, phone number and business license of the sign contractor. 
(6)  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected. 
(7)  The distance of the sign from the closest adjacent sign in either direction. 
(8)  The size of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-5. - Time for consideration. 
    The city shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the city's actual receipt of a completed application and accompanying sign permit fee. The city shall give notice to the applicant of the decision of the city by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by first class mail, to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the completed application and fee. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the city fails to act within the 30 business day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-6. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Procedure. The city shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, are incomplete applications, or applications containing any false material statements. Violation of any provision of this chapter will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the city shall revoke the permit. Should the city deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and mailed by first class mail or via hand delivery to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of re-submission, instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and the applicant is granted a public hearing before a hearing officer designated by the city. 
The applicant will be given ten days written notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the denial of the permit application, or the revocation of a permit. "Due cause" is the violation of the provisions of this chapter, state or federal law related to signage, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)  Appeal. An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the city council upon filing of written notice of an appeal with the city clerk within ten business days of the hearing officer's decision. such appeal shall be considered by the council at the next city council meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that notice of appeal is received a minimum of five full business days before the meeting. If the appeal is not heard at such meeting, it shall be heard at the next regular meeting of council thereafter. The council shall make a final decision no later than 30 days from the date of the hearing. 
(c)  In the event an individual whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council, he or she may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-7. - Permit expiration. 
    A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed in accordance with the permit application within six months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-8. - Fees. 
    See the Dallas Fee Book for the current sign fee schedule. The Dallas Fee Book is maintained in the Office of the Dallas City Clerk and may be amended from time to time as needed, by the Mayor and City Council of Dallas. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-9. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
(1)  Roof signs; 
(2)  Streamers and other wind actuated devices (other than the ones described in section 28-10); 
(3)  Signs on the public right-of-way other than publicly owned or maintained signs; 
(4)  Window signs which exceed 30 percent of the window area; 
(5)  Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated  16-12-80; 
(6)  Signs which simulate an official traffic control or warning sign or hide from view any traffic or street sign, signal or public service sign; 
(7)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing; 
(8)  Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic; and 
(9)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, post, curve, utility pole, or other structure except as set forth herein; 
(10)  No sign shall be allowed which rotates at a rate exceeding six revolutions per minute. 
(11)  Signs which advertise an activity which is illegal under Georgia or Federal Laws or Regulations or by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(12)  Signs which obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation, or which prevents free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof; 
(13)  No sign shall be attached in any manner to a fire escape. 
(14)  Signs that are not maintained and are not in good repair are in violation of the City of Dallas codes. Examples of signs that would be in violation are signs that contain or exhibit broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters. 
(15)  Abandoned signs. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-10. - Special use sign permits. 
    The following types of signs shall be prohibited unless authorized by a special use permit: 
(1)  Flags (used for the promotion of a business, place, event, etc.): 
a.  Displayed flags must be maintained in good condition or removed and/or replaced: 
i.  Flags must be clean and unsoiled; 
ii.  Flags must not be faded; 
iii.  Flags must not be frayed, threadbare, ragged, tattered, or worn-out; 
iv.  Flags must not have any rips, splits, holes, or tears. 
b.  Flags shall not be more than ten feet in height or more than 20 square feet in area; 
c.  The area of the flags shall be counted as part of a parcels total aggregate sign area; 
d.  Displayed flags must be spaced out at least 20 feet apart; 
e.  Flags must be on private property, with property owners' consent, flags placed in the street right-of-way will be in violation of this chapter and may be removed; 
f.  A permit for promotional flags may only be for parcels in non-residential zonings and on the private property of apartment complexes; 
g.  Displayed flags may never interfere with street visibility; 
h.  Flag condition inspections may be performed by city personnel at any time; 
i.  Either a citation will be given or a notice will be mailed, certified mail signature receipt return, to the permittee of a flag found not to be in good condition; 
j.  A flag found not to be in good condition is required to be removed by the flag permittee within ten days after notification; 
k.  Flags not removed within ten days of receipt of notice, will be removed by the city and the permittee billed for the flag removal according to the fee schedule in the Dallas Fee Book; [and] 
l.  See the Dallas Fee Book for the current sign fee schedule. 
(2)  Banners: 
a.  Displayed banners must be maintained in good condition or removed and/or replaced: 
i.  Banners must be clean and unsoiled; 
ii.  Banners must not be faded; 
iii.  Banners must not be frayed, threadbare, ragged, tattered, or worn-out; [and] 
iv.  Banners must not have any rips, splits, holes, or tears. 
b.  The area of banner signs shall be counted as part of a parcels total aggregate sign area; 
c.  Banners must be on private property, with property owners' consent. Banners placed in the street right-of-way will be in violation of this chapter; 
d.  A permit for a banner may only be for parcels in non-residential zonings and on the private property of apartment complexes; 
e.  Banner permits: (Two types): 
i.  Short-term banner permits-90-day permit for a banner. 
ii.  Long-term banner permits-Six-month or 180-day permit for a banner. 
f.  Banner condition inspections may be performed by city personnel at any time. 
g.  Either a citation will be given or a notice will be mailed, certified mail signature receipt return, to the permittee of a banner found not to be in good condition. 
h.  A banner found not to be in good condition is required to be removed by the banner permittee within ten days after notification. 
i.  Banners not removed within ten days of receipt of notice, will be removed by the city and the permittee billed for the banner removal according to the fee schedule in the Dallas Fee Book. 
j.  A new commercial development with units for lease may purchase a banner permit at the long-term banner rate and the banner may remain displayed until all units have been leased for the first time, as long as the banner remains in good condition. The banner permittee for the commercial development with units for lease will pay a banner inspection fee every 180 days per the Dallas Fee Book sign fee schedule. 
k.  See the Dallas Fee Book for the current sign fee schedule. 
(3)  Balloons or other gas or air filled figures: 
a.  Temporary special use permits for balloons or other gas or air filled figures will only be available for special events, such as the "Grand Opening" of a new business or building; 
b.  Permits for balloons or other gas or air filled figures will be a one-time only permit good for ten business days; 
c.  Balloons or other gas or air filled figures must be kept on the private property of the permittee and is only for non-residential parcels; 
d.  See the Dallas Fee Book for the current sign fee schedule. 
(4)  Animated signs and signs with series, lines or rows of electric, neon, or other lights: 
a.  Animated signs and signs with series, lines or rows of electric, neon, or other lights will not be allowed in any residential zoning, in the downtown historic district, or in the commercial neighborhood district. 
b.  A complete commercial development or project as a whole, such as a shopping center, may qualify for one animated sign or for one sign with series, lines or rows of electric, neon, or other lights. Each tenant or parcel that is part of the development or project will not qualify. 
c.  Any animated sign or sign with series, lines or rows of electric, neon, or other lights will be reviewed by the City of Dallas staff, recommendation given to the Dallas City Council, and final approval made by the Dallas City Council. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-11. - Restrictions in residential zoning districts. 
    All signs shall be located on private property and are not allowed in the street right-of-way. Other than subdivision entrance signs allowed under section 28-12, parcels located in residential zoning districts shall not contain signs having an aggregate sign area greater than 15 square feet. No individual sign shall exceed six square feet in sign area in a residential zoning district. No signs having a height greater than five feet above the grade level of the center line of the adjacent street shall be located in residential zoning districts. Signs meeting the standards of this section are exempt from permitting requirements. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-12. - Residential subdivision entrance signs. 
    Platted residential subdivisions consisting of more than two parcels may erect one monument sign at each entrance to the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed a height of five feet above the grade level of the center line of the adjacent street and shall not have a sign area greater than 30 square feet. Such entrance signs shall not count toward the maximum allowable signage on a residential parcel. Residential subdivision entrance signs must be permitted. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-13. - Illumination. 
    Illumination for signs shall not cast light on adjoining property or shine in such a manner as to cause traffic interference. Illumination shall be constant and shall not change, flash, scroll or stimulate movement. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-14. - Height requirements. 
    The following height requirements shall be applicable to signs located in non-residential zoning districts: 
(1)  No stanchion sign, on steel posts or brick columns, shall exceed 24 feet in height at the highest point on the sign. 
(2)  Monument signs in non-residential zoning shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(3)  All sign heights shall be measured from the grade level of the center line of the adjacent street to which the property on which the sign is located has access. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-15. - General size and location requirements in non-residential districts. 
(a)  All signs shall be located on private property and are not allowed in the street right-of-way. 
(b)  No freestanding sign may be located within the street right-of-way, lines extended, of an intersection. 
(c)  No sign shall be located on any building, fence or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Billboard signs. 
(1)  Billboard signs shall not exceed 672 square feet of sign area. Billboard signs shall not exceed 14 feet in height or 48 feet in length. 
(2)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(3)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels adjacent to designated state or federal highways and shall be oriented only towards those highways. 
(4)  No billboard sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of another billboard sign. 
(5)  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet of residentially zoned parcels on the same side of the street as the billboard. 
(6)  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however, that such sign may be located within 500 feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery when the sign is separated by buildings or other obstructions so that the sign located within the 500 foot zone is not visible from the public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery. 
(7)  No billboard sign shall be erected to a height in excess of 50 feet. 
(e)  Stanchion signs. 
(1)  Stanchion signs for parcels exceeding three acres shall not exceed a sign area of 150 square feet. 
(2)  Stanchion signs for parcels less than three acres, but equal to or greater than 30,000 square feet shall not exceed a sign area of 90 square feet. 
(3)  Stanchion signs for parcels less than 30,000 square feet in size shall not exceed a sign area of 70 square feet. 
(4)  Stanchion signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas and shall be limited to one such sign per parcel per street frontage. 
(f)  Monument signs. Monument signs shall not exceed 60 square feet of total area, which shall include signage and structure, and shall be limited to one such sign per parcel per street frontage. 
(g)  Wall and awning signs . 
(1)  Wall and awning signs shall not project above the parapet wall. 
(2)  Wall signs shall not project beyond the building face. Awning signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than four feet. 
(3)  Wall and awning signs shall not exceed a sign area of 300 square feet or ten percent of the wall face of the premises to which the sign relates, whichever is less, on each street facing wall. 
(4)  Wall signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(5)  Each building tenant shall be limited to one wall or awning sign on each street facing wall. 
(h)  Maximum aggregate sign area . Parcels may contain more than one freestanding sign, provided that: 
(1)  Parcels exceeding three acres shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of 300 square feet for the entire parcel. 
(2)  Parcels less than three acres but greater than 30,000 square feet shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of 180 square feet for the entire parcel. 
(3)  Parcels less than 30,000 square feet in size shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of 100 square feet for the entire parcel. 
(4)  These limits shall not include the area of any wall signs, window signs or billboard signs located on the parcel. 
(5)  These limits shall include the area of all freestanding signs, banners, and flags on the parcel. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-16. - Construction standards. 
(a)  All signs for which a permit is required under this chapter shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the city building code. 
(b)  Signs for which a permit is not required under this chapter that are constructed of degradable material may be posted for a maximum of 60 days unless replaced with another sign of the same material. Any such replacement signs may be posted for a maximum of 60 days. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-17. - Non-conforming signs. 
(a)  Non-conforming signs, which met all legal requirements when erected, may stay in place, provided that within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter the owner of the non-conforming sign or the owner's agent registers the sign with the city. Such registration shall contain the information listed in section 28-4 and shall specify the sign being registered as non-conforming and shall state that the sign was completely installed before the effective date of this chapter. The payment of a fee is not required for the registration of a non-conforming sign. 
Non-conforming signs shall be permitted until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or unsightly; or 
(2)  The sign has been damaged by circumstances beyond the control of the owner to the extent that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign; provided that signs damaged by Act of God and not due to the owner's action may be restored to their pre-damaged condition, provided that the useful life of the signs is not extended. 
(b)  No structural repairs, except those permitted pursuant to subsection (a)(2) above, no change in shape, size or design, shall be permitted except to make a non-conforming sign comply with all requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  A non-conforming sign may not be replaced by another non-conforming sign except where changed conditions beyond the control of the owner render the sign nonconforming or warrant the sign's repair. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-18. - Variances. 
    Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. A variance from compliance with the sign regulations of this chapter shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
(1)  Standards. 
a.  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the public street and within 50 feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, existing buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
b.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; and such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and the variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to traffic. 
(2)  Variance applications shall be submitted to the board of appeals and shall be heard under the same time frames and rules governing appeals under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-19. - Exemptions from permit requirements. 
(a)  The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of section 28-4 and shall not count towards the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in section 28-11 and section 28-14(h): 
(1)  Non-illuminated signs, having a sign area of less than 15 square feet, provided they are not located in the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Window signs installed for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. However, such signs shall not exceed 30 percent of the available window space. 
(3)  Numerals displayed for purposes of identifying property location and not exceeding four inches in height in residential districts and ten inches in height in nonresidential districts. 
(4)  Seasonal displays, located outside of the public right-of-way, which are erected for a maximum period of 30 days no more than twice a year. 
(b)  Every parcel may display no more than two official flags that represent a country, state, or local government that shall not count toward the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in section 28-11 and section 28-14(h) without obtaining a permit. Flagpoles in residential zoned districts shall not exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure, whichever is less. Flagpoles in commercial or industrial zoned districts shall not exceed 60 feet in height. The dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height such that the hoist side of the flag shall not exceed 50 percent of the vertical height. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-20. - Enforcement; violations; penalties. 
(a)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The city may, after due notice, issue a citation to any permittee for any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. Such due notice shall be in writing, shall specify the sign and location, and shall state that the sign has not been properly maintained. The city shall give the permittee ten days to rectify the condition or remove the dilapidated sign before issuing a citation. 
(b)  The city may issue a citation for violation of this chapter for any sign erected, altered, converted, or used in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable for a fine according to the Dallas Fee Book schedule for each violation. Each day a sign is posted in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  No person shall erect on any premises owned or controlled by that person any sign which does not comply with the standards of this chapter. 
(e)  No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the permittee of the sign, the owner of the premises, or as otherwise provided for in this article. 
(f)  Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions herein. 
(g)  Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(h)  The city shall give the permittee ten to 30 days written notice, based on the practical considerations of completing measures to comport with the standards of this chapter, to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign(s) which is in violation of this chapter. If the permittee refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the city will have the sign removed at the expense of the permittee. 
(i)  If any sign or other device covered by this chapter is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the city shall issue a citation. Additionally, the city may seek an injunction for a continuing violation or take other appropriate action to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion or use to correct or abate such violation. Any violation of this chapter shall be an offense, and the violator shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00, imprisonment for up to six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-21. - Removal of noncompliant, unlawful or dangerous signs. 
(a)  The city may order the removal of any sign in violation of this chapter by written notice to the permit holder; or if there is no permit holder, then to the owner of the sign; or if the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then to the sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. If a permit has been issued, such notice shall operate to revoke the permit. 
(b)  If the sign is not removed within the time allowed pursuant to the citation the city shall remove or cause to be removed the sign and collect the costs thereof as provided. 
(c)  The city shall have removed any sign in violation of this chapter, without giving notice to any party, if: 
(1)  Said sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property or upon the pavement of a private street or drive; or 
(2)  Said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. 
(d)  Other than signs located in a public right-of-way, a sign shall be removed by the city after a final determination by a court that the sign is unlawful and should be removed. If the permittee or owner fails to remove the sign, the sign may be immediately removed and disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-22. - Severability. 
    In the event any section, subsection, sentence, or word of this chapter is declared and adjudged to be invalidated or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect as if such portion so declared or adjudged unconstitutional were not originally part of this article. The city council declares that it would have enacted the remaining parts of this article if it had known that such portion thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Sec. 28-23. - Effective date. 
    The effective date of this chapter shall be [April 2, 2013]. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-03, 4-1-2013) 
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2016-02, adopted May 2, 2016, amended Ch. 30 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 30,  30-1-30-15, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-101, 4-102, 4-104-4-115; Ord. No. 96-22, adopted Oct. 7, 1996; and Ord. No. OA-2014-09, adopted June 16, 2014. 
State Law reference- Garbage and solid waste collection and disposal are authorized as a home rule power of local governments in, Ga. Const. art. IX,  II,  III(a)(2); the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act permits local regulations not in conflict and local actions with respect to nuisances, O.C.G.A.  12-8-30.9. 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial waste. 
    Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter in a stable, odor free humus. 
    Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
    Municipal solid waste. 
(1)  The term "municipal solid waste" means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste. 
(2)  The term "municipal solid waste" does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
    Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including any commercial or industrial solid waste including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills. 
    Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
    Refuse. 
(1)  The term "refuse" means and includes garbage, rubbish, trash, and other refuse as those terms are generally defined. 
(2)  The term "refuse" does not mean dead animals and fowl, body wastes, hot ashes, rocks, concrete, bricks, and similar materials; those things are expressly excluded therefrom. 
    Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree pruning, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 30-2. - Throwing refuse on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or throw garbage, trash, or other refuse on any street, sidewalk, public alley or other public areas of the city. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 30-3. - Refuse not acceptable for collection by city-enumerated. 
    The following shall be refuse deemed not acceptable for collection by the city: 
(1)  Dangerous materials or substances such as poisons, acids, caustics, infected materials and explosives. 
(2)  Building or construction refuse including lumber, brick, concrete, rock, plaster, mortar, roofing materials and dirt. 
(3)  Ashes containing hot embers. 
(4)  Solid wastes resulting from industrial processes. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city and yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collections system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(6)  Any other materials which have not been prepared for collection in accordance with this chapter. 
(7)  Amounts of refuse more than an equivalent of eight 30-gallon containers per week. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 30-4. - Same-Disposal. 
    All refuse not acceptable for collection by the city shall be disposed of by the owner at his own expense at a place specifically designed for disposal of refuse such as a landfill. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 30-5. - Garbage fees are mandatory unless exempted. 
(a)  Each resident or each business shall be billed garbage collection fees as a part of the water and/or sewer utility billing, subject to the billing procedures and penalties as stated in sections 40-19, 40-20, and 40-27, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  In a single-owner multifamily or multi-business location where a dumpster of adequate capacity, and at least two cubic-yard capacity is provided by a private collection service licensed by the city; or 
(2)  If an amount of $120.00, per each residence, or per each family in a multifamily situation, or per each business in a multi-business situation that desires to be exempted from the city's garbage collection service, is deposited with the city to ensure that refuse, garbage, and/or trash is not allowed to accumulate; create a nuisance; or be in violation of this chapter. Said deposit shall be used to pay the cost of removing the refuse, garbage and/or trash from that person's or the business's premises if not removed after ten days after written notice (certified mail) from the city. If the city must use said deposit to pay for the removal of the refuse, garbage and/or trash, then the balance, if any, of the deposit shall be returned to the person or business from whom it was secured and that person or business shall be subject to the garbage fees being a mandatory part of their water bill. If the cost of removing said refuse, garbage and/or trash is more than the deposit, then the resident, business or property owner, as the case may be, shall be responsible for the additional cost. 
(b)  The only purpose of the mandatory fees is to ensure that collections are made on a regular basis to prevent the unhealthy and unsightly accumulation and scattering of refuse, garbage and trash. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 30-6. - Permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person who does not possess a valid and unrevoked permit issued by the city to engage in the business of refuse collection or refuse disposal for compensation within the city. Such permits shall be limited to persons having vehicles for collecting and disposing of refuse which comply with section 30-13(d)(3)b. 
(b)  Every person desiring to engage in the collection or disposal of refuse for compensation shall make written application to the city. The application shall set forth the name of the applicant, his residence address, his business address and a description of the equipment to be used in the collection or disposal of refuse. Upon approval of the application, the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant. A permit fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the city upon the issuance of the permit. 
(c)  Such permits shall expire on the last day of the calendar year and shall be renewed annually, in the same manner and upon payment of the same annual fee as provided above. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to transfer permits from one person to another for the purpose of operating a refuse collection or disposal operation. 
(e)  Any person whose application for a permit has been denied may appeal to the mayor and council, which shall rule on such appeal. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 30-7. - Refuse for collection by city-Enumerated; schedule. 
(a)  The city shall cause to be collected all refuse which is properly stored and placed for collection as provided in section 30-9. 
(b)  The city shall not cause to be collected any refuse from any person or business within the city unless such person or business has paid his refuse collection charge in accordance with section 30-11, but the property owner shall still maintain his property free of refuse for health purposes. 
(c)  Collection shall be made regularly in accordance with an announced schedule. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 30-8. - Same-Placement. 
    All refuse acceptable to be collected by the city shall be placed as directed by the director of utilities and public works. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 30-9. - Same-Storage. 
(a)  Bulky rubbish such as cardboard boxes shall be bundled so as not to exceed four feet in length or 40 pounds in weight. 
(b)  All other refuse shall be stored in durable, watertight, rodent proof, insect proof and easily washable containers. Such containers shall have close fitting lids and adequate handles to facilitate collection. Such containers shall each have a capacity of not less or more than 95 gallons. (This maximum capacity shall not apply to larger containers which the city, or a private contractor, may now or hereafter handle mechanically.) No refuse shall be placed in a refuse container until such container has been drained free of all liquids. It shall be unlawful to permit refuse to accumulate on any premises except in the manner hereinbefore described. Such container shall be placed outside residence the evening before schedule of collection set by city. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 30-10. - Disturbing containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to uncover, pilfer, dig into, turn over or in any manner disturb any refuse container belonging to another. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of public refuse containers for their intended purpose. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 30-11. - Refuse collection tiers of service; rate schedule maintained by clerk. 
(a)  The rate of charge for the collection and disposal of refuse shall be determined utilizing different tiers of service, as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residences. 
(2)  Multifamily dwellings and apartment houses. 
(3)  Institutions, businesses, and industrial establishments. 
(b)  Refuse collection rates are not printed herein, but are maintained by the clerk in a separate rate schedule. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 30-12. - Refuse collection outside the city. 
    It shall be unlawful to use any city refuse collection vehicles or equipment to collect or dispose of refuse not within the corporate limits of the city. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 30-13. - Franchises. 
(a)  Authority. The mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia, shall have the authority to grant the right, privilege and franchise to remove and dispose of solid waste within all zoning districts within the City of Dallas, Georgia. The franchise, authority or permit granted shall extend for a period not to exceed ten calendar years. 
(b)  Fees. The grantee of a franchise to remove and dispose of solid waste shall pay to the city a fee in the amount of five percent of the total monthly billing collected. This fee shall be paid on or before the fifteenth day of each month for the collection of solid waste the preceding month. If the franchise fee shall be in arrears in whole or in part for 15 or more days, the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia, shall have the option to cancel the franchise. This franchise fee is subject to an annual increase by the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia, effective July 1 of every year. 
(c)  Records. All books and records of a grantee concerning its operations within the City of Dallas, Georgia, and the collection of bills shall be made available for inspection and audit by the administrative officer or his designee within 30 days after any request for such inspection or audit. 
(d)  Additional contract and operational requirements. 
(1)  The City of Dallas, Georgia, shall grant to companies a nonexclusive franchise contract to use the public streets, alleys, roads and thoroughfares within the City of Dallas, Georgia, for the purpose of operating and engaging in the business of collecting and disposing of solid waste; including, but not limited to, contracting with customers and providing service pursuant to the contract, placing and servicing containers, operating trucks, vehicles and trailers, and such other operations and activity as are customary and/or incidental to the business of solid waste collection and disposal. It shall be illegal and a misdemeanor for any company to operate outside the terms of this section. 
(2)  The company may collect and deliver for disposal all solid waste accumulated within the corporate limits of the City of Dallas, Georgia, by the company's customers. The company will furnish the personnel and equipment to provide the services described herein and as contracted with its customers, in an efficient and businesslike manner. 
(3)  Any company that operates in the City of Dallas, Georgia, providing solid waste collection and disposal services shall meet the following minimum requirements. 
a.  Obtain a solid waste handling permit from the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources, pursuant to O.C.G.A.  12-8-24. 
b.  Use only vehicles and containers which comply with state EPD rules. Waste collection vehicles must be compactor-type trucks, covered or enclosed vehicles, constructed to be substantially leak proof, constructed of durable metal, easily cleanable and designed to prevent litter from escaping during transport. Recycling vehicles shall not be the same ones used for waste collection. Vehicles shall also meet all safety, size and weight requirements of the state department of transportation. 
c.  Accurate monthly records shall be kept of the number of customers served and the monthly tonnage of solid waste handled, and provide a monthly report of these to the City of Dallas, Georgia Billing Clerk. The monthly reports shall also include a summary of all complaints received and resolutions of such during the reporting period. Reports should include, but not be limited to such items as new collection locations, collection locations served which do not show on the billing register, locations of new or replacement containers placed by the contractor performing curbside collection. The required reports shall be filed not later than ten calendar days after the last day of the preceding month. The final report format will be approved by the city manager of the City of Dallas, Georgia, or his designated agent. The city reserves the right to modify the report format and require more or different information throughout the term of the contract. The city reserves the right to terminate the awarded contract upon contractor's repetitive failure to comply with record keeping. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-02, 5-2-2016 ) 
Chapter 32 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2016-03,  1, adopted July 11, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 32 and enacted a new Ch. 32 as set out herein. The former Ch. 32 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2009-02,  1(1.1-9.4), adopted January 5, 2009. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Intent and purpose. 
    The City of Dallas, Georgia (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article 9, Section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. 32-4-42(6), has adopted this chapter for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-2. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    City clerk means the clerk of the city. 
    City council means the mayor and city council of the city. 
    Code of Ordinances/codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the city. 
    Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
    Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
    Director means the city manager of the city, or his or her designee. 
    Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
    Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
    Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
    Permit (i.e. construction permit/utility permit) means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code. 
    Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
    Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
    Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
    Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
    Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
    Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
    Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 32-4-32-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 32-25. - Registration required. 
    Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this chapter, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the clerk of the city within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-26. - Registration procedure. 
    The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the registrant). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner. 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times. Permits revealed to have inaccurate contact information for contacting the facilities representative(s) in an emergency may have their permit revoked and the permit holder fined. For the first offense, the registrant may be fined up to $500.00 and their permit may be revoked at the city's discretion. For the second offense, the registrant fine will double up to $1,000.00 and their permit may be revoked at the city's discretion. For the third offense, the permit holder's registration rights will be revoked and their permit revoked. Additionally, the permit holder will be liable for any associated damages or expenses that occur for the city. 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-27. - Incomplete registration. 
    If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-28. - Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. 
    Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-29. - Facilities in place without registration. 
    Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 32-30-32-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS/UTILITY PERMITS 

Sec. 32-47. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the city in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-48. - Permit procedure. 
    Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the city. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond, cash bond or other acceptable security which type of bond or security shall be selected by the city and in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-49. - Permit fees. 
    Fees for construction permits/utility permits shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule approved by the city council shall be available at the office of the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-50. - Issuance of permit. 
    If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a construction permit/utility permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this chapter; and 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-51. - Emergency situations. 
(a)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(b)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-52. - Effective period of permit. 
(a)  Each construction permit/utility permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(b)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date, unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-53. - Cancellation for cause. 
    If a utility fails to cure any default under this chapter within 20 working days after written notice is provided to the utility by the city at the address of the utility shown on application for permit, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated as an administrative decision allowed by section 32-199. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-54. - Expiration of permit. 
    If work is not begun within six months from the date the permit is issued, the permit will automatically expire. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 32-55-32-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 32-84. - Utility accommodation manual adopted. 
    The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this chapter and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city municipal equivalents. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-85. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
    Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-86. - Grading. 
    If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon at least ten business days' notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-87. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
    Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-88. - Notice, request to blast or excavate required. 
    As provided in O.C.G.A.  25-9-6, the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act, and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 72 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center (811 Call Before You Dig). The 72 hours' notice commences the next working day after the notice is provided, but excludes hours for days that are not working days. 
    The Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act (GUFPA) provides for the protection of buried utility facility infrastructure within the state. That protection is provided by requiring excavators using mechanized equipment to call for a facility locates (811 Call before You Dig), prior to excavating or blasting and requiring the facility owner/operator to locate their facilities upon request. Violations of the GUFPA are subject to a civil penalty of up to $10,000.00. State law mandates that, before beginning any mechanized digging or excavation work, you must contact Georgia 811 by calling 811 or 1-800-282-7411 at least 72 hours but no more than ten working days in advance to have utility lines marked. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 32-89-32-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 32-120. - Each utility-Responsible for cost of repair of damage. 
    Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-121. - Same-Liable for cost of damage due to construction. 
    A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. A utility that while performing construction or installation, operations, upgrades, repairs or removal of facilities and disturbs or damages as a result any street, facilities or property or structures thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto must notify the city within ten working days by written notice of any such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 32-122-32-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INSPECTION 

Sec. 32-141. - Construction site to be made available. 
    The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-142. - Director may order cessation of work. 
    At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this chapter or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-143. - Notification when construction complete. 
    When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 32-144-32-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OTHER APPROVALS, PERMITS AND AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 32-170. - Additional permits required. 
    The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to this chapter or any other city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, the utility obtaining any permit pursuant to this chapter shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in section 32-51. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 32-171-32-196. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 32-197. - Penalties; remedies. 
    Every utility convicted by the municipal court/city court of the city of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of the license, licenses, permit, or permits issued by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
    Citations for any violations for which fines are imposed or sought by the city under this chapter shall be issued by the marshals bureau of the city. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-198. - Adjudication in municipal court. 
    Any fines for violations of the provision of this chapter shall be determined and adjudicated by the municipal court/city court. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-199. - Administrative decisions; notice. 
    Any administrative decisions required by this chapter shall be made in an open meeting by the mayor and city council. 
    The mayor and city council shall provide written notice of the hearing for any administrative decision to the utility holding any license or permit under this chapter at least seven days prior to the date of any hearing of any administrative decision. The mayor and city council shall render any administrative decision under this chapter within seven days from the date of any such administrative hearing. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 32-200-32-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 32-226. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
    The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the city Charter, and under the provisions of this Code to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-227. - Compliance. 
    No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the city to enforce compliance. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-228. - Appeals. 
    All appeals of any administrative decision by the mayor and city council or any decision or adjudication by the city court/municipal court shall be made in writing to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia within 30 days from the date of any administrative decision or other decision/adjudication by the city/municipal court. Any person or entity appealing any decision or adjudication pursuant to this chapter or any fine or administrative decision pursuant to this chapter shall also furnish to the Clerk of the City of Dallas, Georgia written notice of any appeal via certified mail. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Sec. 32-229. - Chapter headings. 
    Chapter headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-03 ,  1, 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 32-230-32-255. - Reserved. 
Chapter 34 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arterial road, major, means a road intended to move through traffic to and from major areas of activity and/or as a route for traffic between communities or large areas. 
    Arterial road, minor, means a road intended to collect and distribute traffic in a manner similar to major arterial roads, except that these roads service major activity centers, and are designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the major arterials. 
    Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad, rights-of-way, shorelines, or municipal boundary lines. 
    Building codes means the minimum state and city construction and building codes as required and defined in chapter 8. 
    Building setback line means a line beyond which no foundation wall or part of the structure of any building shall project, with the exception of roof overhang and the subsurface projection of footings. 
    Collector streets means streets or roads which carry traffic from minor streets to the system of arterial streets or highways, including the principle entrance streets of a residential development and circulation streets within such subdivision. 
    Construction plans means the maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements for plat approval. 
    County means the unincorporated areas of the county. 
    County commission means the board of commissioners of the county. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated in the minimum right-of-way and paved turnaround specified in this article. Cul-de-sacs shall be no longer than 1,600 feet in length with the distance to be measured from the center point of the cul-de-sac turnaround to the nearest intersection with a through street. 
    Developer means the owner of the land proposed to be subdivided or his authorized agent or representative. 
    Development plan means the preliminary drawings, described in this article, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission for approval. 
    Easement means authorization by a property owner for the use by another for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property. 
    Final plat means a plat of a tract of land which meets the requirements of this article for recording in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county. 
    Frontage means that side of a lot measured along the street right-of-way line abutting on a street or way and ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered as the ordinary side of a corner lot. 
    Health department means the county health department. 
    Land use plan means an element of the comprehensive plan adopted for the county and the city which may consist of several maps, data and other descriptive matter for the physical development of the city and/or county or any portion thereof. The term "land use plan" includes any amendments, extensions or additions thereof recommended by the planning commission or city council indicating the general location for major roads, parks, historic districts, public spaces, public building sites, routes for utilities, zoning districts, etc. 
    Lot means a portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a road, crosswalk, or sidewalk may be included. The term "lot" includes the term "plot" or the term "parcel." 
    Lot width means the width of a lot at the building line measured parallel to the street right-of-way, or in the case of a curvilinear street, parallel to the chord of the arc between the intersection of the side lot lines and the street right-of-way line. 
    Minor commercial subdivision means a private subdivision of four lots or less which uses private streets to provide lot access for ingress or egress and intended for commercial/industrial use. 
    Minor residential city subdivision means the subdivision of a tract or parcel of land into no more than three lots for the purpose of sale, legacy, or building development intended for residential use where no new public streets are involved. 
    Owner means any person, group of persons, firm, corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under this article. 
    Planning commission means the city planning commission. 
    Private street means a drive serving as the exclusive access for lots not fronting on a city or county maintained street or road, and which is not owned or maintained nor intended to be owned or maintained by the city and lies within a right-of-way of 60 feet. Private easements cannot be used to meet this requirement. A private street must intersect with a city or county maintained street or road and must be built to prohibit through traffic. 
    Private subdivision means a development that provides for the subdivision of property and for the private ownership, operation, and maintenance of all improvements, including streets, utilities, common areas, parking areas, etc., within its defined boundaries, e.g., a mobile home park, an industrial complex, duplex rental subdivision, etc. 
    Residential or local street means a road or street intended to provide access to other roads or streets from individual properties. 
    Resubdivision means a change in the map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or areas reserved for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived; or if it increases the number of lots approved in the original plat. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a public use. 
    Single lot subdivision means the subdivision of a tract or parcel of land into two lots, of which one lot is for the purpose of sale, legacy or building development and where no new public streets or public facilities are involved. 
    Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan means as required and defined in article IV of chapter 16. 
    Street means, relates to and includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, expressways, lanes, drives, courts and ways that are on the official city and/or the state department of transportation street/road map. 
    Subdivider means any person, corporation, or duly authorized agent who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein. 
    Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development and includes all division of land involving a new street, or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within the definition of a subdivision: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the city. 
(2)  Any subdivision of land provided that no lots thereby produced contain less than five acres each; have a minimum frontage width of 200 feet or more; and where no new streets, roads, lanes, drives or other public rights-of-way, not already on the official city or county street/road maintenance map, are involved. 
(3)  A division or sale of land among heirs by judicial decree; provided, however the number of lots does not exceed the number of heirs named in the decree and where no new streets, roads, lanes, public drives or other public rights-of-way, not already on the official city or county street/road maintenance map, are involved. 
(4)  The sale or exchange of a parcel of land between owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created. 
(5)  Any subdivision of land among family members including mothers, fathers, sons, daughters, sisters, brothers and grandchildren is exempt from meeting the requirements of this article as long as the resultant lots meet health regulations, building codes, minimum lot sizes and other city codes that affect any single building lot. All such resultant lots must either front on a city or county maintained street/road or must have recorded a 30-foot private access (either in the form of an easement or fee simple title) from the nearest city or county street/road, and any structure must have a 30-foot setback from said access. 
    Zoning ordinance means the zoning regulations of the city as set forth in chapter 44. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1602) 
Sec. 34-20. - Violations, penalties, amendment and legal status. 
(a)  Violations and penalties. Any violations of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable as provided by law. 
(b)  Prosecution by city. Whenever it shall come to the attention of the city that any of the provisions of this article has been or is being violated within the city, the city will issue a citation to the violator for appearance in the city's municipal court. 
(c)  Conflict with other standards. Whenever the provisions of this article impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, ordinance or resolution, the regulations herein contained shall prevail. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, ordinance or resolution require more restrictive standards than are required herein, the requirements of such statute, ordinance or resolution shall prevail. 
(d)  Amendments and legal status provisions. 
(1)  Amendments. The city council may amend this article on their own motions or on recommendations of the planning commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the planning commission for review, comments and recommendations. Before enacting an amendment to this article, the city shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon. The public hearing shall follow the same procedures as a public hearing for a zoning ordinance amendment including legal notice. 
(2)  Repeal of conflicting regulations. All ordinances and resolutions regulating the subdivision of land adopted prior to this article are hereby repealed upon the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1607) 
Sec. 34-21. - Purpose. 
    The public health, safety, morals and general welfare require that the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within the city. In furtherance of this purpose, the regulations from which this article is derived are adopted to: 
(1)  Encourage the development of economically sound and stable communities; 
(2)  Ensure the provision of required streets, and where practical, utilities and other facilities and services to new land development; 
(3)  Ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land development; 
(4)  Ensure the provision of needed open space and building sites in new land developments, through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; 
(5)  Ensure, in general, the wise development of new areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan of the community as it now exists or may hereafter be established. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1600) 
Sec. 34-22. - Platting jurisdiction; enforcement. 
(a)  Platting authority. From and after the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the city planning commission shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of a land subdivision as defined under this article shall be entitled to be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county unless it shall have the approval of the planning commission inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the planning commission as required by this article is declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be cited as such. 
(b)  Use of plat. The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell or negotiate to sell land, by reference to or exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties imposed upon violations herewithin. 
(c)  Opening and improving public streets; installing utilities. Prior to making any improvements, or installing any utilities, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission, through the city manager, a development plan of the proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Erection of buildings. No building permit shall be issued and no buildings shall be erected on any lot in the city unless access has been established in accordance with this article. No building permits shall be issued before approval of the final plat and the final plat has been recorded. 
(e)  Suitability and character of land. Land which the planning commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, poor percolation for septic tanks, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, or other features which will be reasonably harmful to the health, safety, and/or general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the planning commission to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. If not, such land shall be set aside for such uses as shall not involve such a danger. 
(f)  Variances. Variances may be required from time to time from the requirements of this article in order to accomplish the overall aims of this article. In recognition of this fact, the following criteria are established for consideration by the developer and the city planning commission when a request for a variance arises: 
(1)  Whether the parcel is irregular, unusually narrow or shallow in shape, and the condition existed at the time of the adoption of the regulations from which this article is derived or was created by natural forces or governmental action for which no compensation was paid; 
(2)  Where financial hardship may occur due to a change of regulations during the active construction of a subdivision. Active construction is defined as actual work in the installation or construction of road base, drainage, and/or utilities. Variances for financial hardship may only be granted to that phase, section, units, etc., of the approved subdivision that is under active construction at the time of the change in regulations. 
(3)  Variances for deviations or changes in construction or building codes, utility location and installation, street preparation and construction, soil erosion and sedimentation control plans, and other technical items cannot be granted until reviewed by the city manager and recommended for approval. 
In those cases where the planning commission fails to grant the variance, then the subdivider or developer may petition the city council for an appeal of the decision of the planning commission or said subdivider or developer may ask the city council to amend this article so as not to require a variance for the circumstance involved. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1603) 
Sec. 34-23. - Procedures for development approval. 
(a)  General procedures. 
(1)  Preapplication review. Whenever a subdivision of a tract of land within the jurisdiction of this article is proposed, the subdivider is urged to consult informally with the city manager in a preapplication review. The subdivider shall submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and its vicinity, as well as the proposed layout and development of the subdivision to include streets, number of lots, lot sizes, and location to existing utilities that must be extended. 
(2)  Submit development plans. The subdivider shall submit to the planning commission development plans of the proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Submit final plat. After completion of the physical development, or proper arrangements for same, of all or part of the area shown on the development plans as approved by the planning commission, a final plat together with the required certificates shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval. This final plat, when approved by the planning commission and duly signed, shall become the instrument to be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
(4)  Subdivisions not requiring new streets, facilities. 
a.  A subdivision which does not involve the platting, construction or opening of new streets, sewer or water facilities or the improvement to same, as determined by the city manager, shall be accepted by the planning commission in the form of a final plat. 
b.  Minor residential subdivisions involving no more than four lots which do not involve the platting, construction or opening of new streets, sewer or water facilities or improvement to same, as determined by the city manager, shall be accepted by the planning commission in the form of a final plat; provided, however, that if public sewers are not available, then a certification from the health department must be on the plat showing that a private sewerage system is approved for the lots. 
c.  A single lot subdivision can be exempt from the final plat requirements upon review and approval of the city manager where there are no new public streets or other public facilities involved. Certification by the health department is required for private sewerage facilities prior to review by the city manager. 
d.  FHA approval. In the event the subdivider plans to secure approval of this subdivision layout by the Federal Housing Administration, it is suggested that such approval be secured prior to the submission of a development plan to the planning commission. 
(b)  Development plan requirements. Following the preapplication review of a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit on or before noon of the second Monday of the month, ten copies of the development plans and supporting data. The development plans, prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer, shall meet the higher minimum standards of design set forth in this article and/or those required by O.C.G.A.  44-3-3 as now or hereafter amended and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Generally. 
a.  Proposed name of subdivision. 
b.  Name and address of person to be notified of action. 
c.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plat drawing and space for revision dates. 
d.  Location sketch map showing the relationship of the subdivision to the surrounding area. 
e.  Location (land lot and district) and gross acreage of tract. 
f.  Exact boundary lines of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths and bearings. The boundary lines shall include the entire tract to be eventually subdivided and data as required herein shall apply to the entire tract. In the event that the entire tract to be developed is not submitted, the planning commission may require additional data to support immediate development in order to ensure proper overall planning. 
g.  The development plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet on a sheet or equal sized sheets. If the complete development plan cannot be shown on one sheet, then several sheets with an index map on each sheet shall be used. In no case shall sheet size be smaller than 81/2 inches by 11 inches. 
h.  Name of former subdivision if the development has been previously subdivided. 
i.  Water and sewer availability in accordance with local and state regulations. 
(2)  Existing conditions. 
a.  Topography by contours shall be required as follows: 
1.  On land with less than approximately two percent slope, show contours at intervals of not more than two feet; 
2.  On land with slopes greater than approximately two percent, show contours with an interval of not more than five feet; 
3.  Contours shall be based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey. 
b.  Zoning district classifications of land to be subdivided and classifications of adjoining properties. 
c.  Recorded deed names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
d.  In case of resubdivision, a copy of existing plat with proposed resubdivision super-imposed thereon. 
e.  Location of significant features, streams, lakes, swamps and land subject to floods, including any area having an elevation below the 100-year floodplain. Where lots contain some areas with an elevation below the 100-year floodplain, a showing of a viable home site above such floodplain elevation. Any lot having no such viable home site shall be properly filed to provide same before final plat approval and must be in accordance with U.S. Corp of Engineers' requirements. 
f.  Location of existing adjoining property lines and buildings on the property to be subdivided. 
g.  Location, names, and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads and utility lines either on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or rights-of-way and show location of poles or towers. 
h.  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts and location of easements for other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and elevations of sewers are to be shown. 
i.  The acreage of each drainage area affecting the proposed subdivision. 
j.  All elevations shall refer to the mean sea level datum where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed. 
k.  Preliminary soil erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the specifications and requirements of chapter 16, article IV, pertaining to erosion and sedimentation control, if applicable. 
(3)  Proposed conditions. 
a.  Plan and profile of streets and roads showing widths, road names, and a typical road section inclusive of sidewalks where required. 
b.  Topography by contours of proposed streets, drainage ditches and other improvements as provided in subsection (a)(1)of this section. 
c.  Layout of all lots, including building setback lines; scaled dimensions on lots; utility easements with width and use; acreage of each lot; lot numbers and block numbers; and drainage. No lot numbers shall be duplicated. 
d.  Plan of sanitary sewers (if applicable) with grade, pipe size and point of discharge. If a private on-site sewerage system is proposed for any lots, then a certification from the health department must be attached to the plan showing every lot that meets the health departments requirement for a private system. 
e.  Plan of storm sewer system with grade, pipe size and location of outlets. 
f.  Plan of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants. Water system shall be designed to furnish a minimum of 25 psi and maximum demand flow of 15 gal./min. to each building. All water mains shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter. 
g.  Designation of all land to be reserved or dedicated for private and/or public use. 
h.  Proposed phase division or stage development, if any, as proposed by the subdivision developer. 
i.  Site grading plan with soil sediment control structures, as required. 
j.  A plan of street lighting must be shown as determined by the utility power company serving the area. 
(4)  Certificates. Each development plan submitted shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped thereon as follows: 
a.  Preliminary surveying certificates. 
I hereby certify that this proposed development plan has been prepared in conformance with the City of Dallas subdivision regulations, City of Dallas Code of Ordinances, chapter 34, and correctly represents data compiled or verified through a survey completed by me on _______, 20___, of property shown and described. 
By __________________, 
Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No. ___________ Date ___________  
b.  Development plan approval certificate. 
All requirements of the City of Dallas, Georgia subdivision regulations relative to the preparation and submission of a development plan having been fulfilled, approval of this plat is hereby granted subject to further provisions of said regulations. This certificate shall expire on ___________. 
___________________ 
Secretary, Planning Commission ________ 
Date  
(5)  Development plan review and approval. Within 45 days after the submission of the development plan, the planning commission shall review and approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the plan. One copy of the plan shall be returned to the developer with notice of the approval, conditional approval or disapproval with the reasons thereof. 
(6)  Failure to act. Failure of the planning commission to act within the 45 days set forth in subsection (b)(5) of this section, shall be deemed approval and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the secretary to the planning commission upon demand; provided, however, that the applicant requesting the planning commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent in writing to the extension of such period. 
(7)  Effective period of development plan approval. 
a.  Approval of the development plan shall lapse unless a final plat of all or part of the area shown on the development plan is submitted within two years from the date of approval by the planning commission, unless an extension of time is requested by the developer and approved by the planning commission. 
b.  Approval of the development plan shall lapse and have no force and effect unless actual construction of required improvements have been commenced within 12 months of the approval by the planning commission. 
c.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, a developer operating under a previously approved preliminary plan may continue to submit final plats in conformance therewith, provided that the approved preliminary plan is an active preliminary plan. Preliminary plans may be deemed inactive if a final plat for a portion thereof has not been submitted to the planning commission within the past two years of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(8)  Hearing. No development plan shall be acted upon by the planning commission without affording a public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of said public hearing shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The developer shall also be notified of the date and time of the hearing. 
(9)  Land disturbing permit. Upon approval of the development plan by the planning commission, a land disturbing permit may be issued, upon request, by the city manager to cover the following construction phases, provided that all soil erosion and sedimentation control structures are in place: 
a.  Grading, clearing and grubbing; 
b.  Storm drainage construction; 
c.  Water and sewer line construction; 
d.  Curbing construction; 
e.  Base and paving construction. 
(10)  Restrictive covenants. If the owner places restrictive covenants on any land or use thereof within the subdivision greater than those required by the ordinances of the city, such restrictive covenants, or reference thereto, may be required to be indicated on the final plat, or the planning commission may require that the restrictive covenants be recorded with the deeds as filed with the clerk of the superior court of the county in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(11)  Filing fee. In order to process the application, a filing fee of $250.00 shall be submitted with each development plan. Said fee is to defray the cost of advertising, meetings, review process, and site visits as examples of expenses. 
(c)  Final plat requirements. 
(1)  Submission procedures. Any developer desiring approval of a final plat must submit to the city manager the original and ten copies of the final plat and other supporting data required with the approval of the development plan. The city manager shall review the final plat and data for compliance with this article, other city ordinances and any requirements placed upon the development during the approval of the development plan. If compliance is satisfactory, then the city manager will secure the city clerk's signature upon the final plat and said plat shall be ready for recording. 
(2)  Conformance and phasing. The final plat shall conform to the development plan and it may constitute only that portion of the approved development plan which the subdivider proposes to record and subdivide at this time, provided that such portion conforms to the phase established in the development plan procedure and to the requirements of this article. 
(3)  Final plat required information. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance to all applicable requirements of the development plan and subsection (b) of this section and in addition, the following information: 
a.  Final plat shall be identified in the title. 
b.  All maps or plats shall show the direction and distance from a point of reference to a point on the boundary of the individual survey, and such additional data as may be required to relocate the boundary point from the point of reference with the same degree of accuracy required of the parcel surveyed. The point of reference shall be an established, monumented position which can be identified or relocated from maps, plats, or other documents on public record. 
c.  All maps or plats of boundary surveys or subdivision surveys shall show bearings of all lines or angles at all corners and angle points of the boundary or lot lines, and distances of all boundary or lot lines, and area of the parcels expressed in acres or square feet. 
d.  All maps or plats of boundary surveys shall show the closure precision of the field surveys as the ratio of one foot to the traversed distance in which an error of one foot would occur and a statement as to the method of adjustment. The closure may be stated as follows: 
"The field data upon which this map or plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in ___ feet and an angular error of _____ per angle point and was adjusted using _____ rule." 
e.  All maps or plats of boundary surveys shall show the closure precision of the data shown on the map or plat. The closure may be stated as follows: 
"This map or plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in ___ feet." 
f.  All maps or plats shall show the width and the former widths, if pertinent, of all rights-of-way adjacent to or crossing the property or adjacent to any point of reference. 
g.  All maps or plats shall show easements and apparent encroachments, if pertinent. 
h.  Curve data shall be required for all curves of greater than ten degrees on new roads. Pertinent data including radius, central angle, and tangent distance must be given for regular curves. Chord distances and directions shall be given for irregular curves on preexisting streets or roads. 
i.  All land lot lines, land district lines, land section lines, and city/county boundaries intersection or adjacent to the surveyed property shall be indicated by lines drawn upon the map or plat with appropriate words and figures. 
j.  All corner markers and markers of pertinent reference points shall be fully described and indicated as to their material or types and shall be constructed of a permanent material such as iron, steel, concrete, or stone. When applicable, monuments that are to be placed after final street improvements shall be designated as future. 
k.  An arrow shall be shown on the map or plat to indicate the principal meridian, and a notation shall be made as to the reference of bearings to magnetic north, astronomic north, or grid north. A grid north reference shall indicate the zone. 
l.  All linear distances shown on maps or plats shall be horizontal and all dimensions to the nearest 1/100 th of a foot. 
m.  All linear distances shown on maps or plats shall be represented in degrees, minutes and seconds. All angular directions shall be referenced to the principal meridian. 
n.  A statement shall be shown on the map or plat to indicate the type of equipment used to obtain the linear and angular measurements used in the preparation of the map or plat. 
o.  All maps or plats shall show the state plane coordinates of at least two permanent monuments thereon, when a National Geodetic Survey monument is within 500 feet of any point on the property mapped or platted, or any point of reference shown thereon. 
p.  Variances, if any, and date approved by the planning commission and the mayor and city council. 
(4)  Certifications. Each final plat submitted shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped thereon as follows: 
a.  Surveyor's acknowledgment. 
I hereby certify that the final plat shown and described hereon is a true and correct survey made on the ground and has been made under my supervision, that the monuments have been placed as shown hereon, and is to the accuracy and specifications required by the City of Dallas, Georgia subdivision regulations. 
___________________ 
Georgia Registered Land Surveyor [Seal] ___________________ 
RLS Number ________ 
Date  
b.  Certificate of ownership and dedication. 
The owner of the land shown on this plat, who, in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the use of the public forever, all streets, parks, and public places, as hereon shown, for the purpose and consideration herein expressed. 
___________________ 
Authorized Signature ________ 
Date  
c.  City certification. 
It is hereby certified that the streets, utilities, easements, and other required improvements in this subdivision, have been installed in an acceptable manner or surety has been provided in an amount to ensure their installation, and that this plat meets all the requirements of the City of Dallas subdivision regulations. 
___________________ 
City Manager, City of Dallas ________ 
Date ___________________ 
City Clerk, City of Dallas ________ 
Date  
d.  Certification for surety. 
I hereby certify that a security bond, or certified check, and/or an irrevocable letter of credit from a local lending institution in the amount of $ _______ to expire on ________, 20___, has been received to ensure the completion of all required improvements in the subdivision, as shown hereon, in the event of default by the developer. 
___________________ 
City Manager, City of Dallas ________ 
Date  
e.  Health department certification. The health department must certify that the water and/or sewerage systems installed, or proposed to be installed, meet the requirements of state health standards and regulations. This certification may be submitted on a separate form as specified by the health department. The health department certification statement shall include written notice that each lot not on public sewer must have an individual septic tank permit approved before any building permit is issued. For developments with public sewerage and public water, this certification shall be omitted. 
(5)  Final plat review and approval. The city manager shall review the final plat and verify that all final plat requirements have been met. Within 30 days after submission of the final plat together with all required supporting data and certifications, the city manager shall review and approve, or disapprove, the plat and state the reasons therefore if disapproved. The developer shall have the right to appeal any disapproval of the final plat to the mayor and city council. Approval of the final plat by the city shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the city of the dedication of any street or other ground shown upon the plat. 
(6)  Failure to act. Failure of the city manager to act within 30 days of submission of the final plat to the commission shall be deemed as approval of such plat and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the city clerk upon demand; provided, however, that the applicant requesting the approval may waive this requirement and consent in writing to the extension of such period. 
(7)  Record final plat. The final plat shall be recorded by the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county within three days after the necessary signatures have been placed on it unless the developer requests an extension of time. A mylar positive of the recorded plat is retained by the city manager and the original returned to the developer, or his authorized representative. 
(8)  Sale of lots. The subdivider may begin to sell lots after recording the final plat. 
(9)  Status of streets and improvements. After approval of the final plat by the city manager and the completion of all the improvements required by this article, the subdivider may request the city to accept such streets and/or other improvements. 
(d)  Private subdivisions (nondedicated streets, utilities, etc.). 
(1)  Development plan required. Individual lots may only be sold after a development plan has been approved by the city planning commission. 
(2)  Documents required within plan. As part of any development plan, the following documents must be filed for approval with the city planning commission as a part of the preliminary development plan: 
a.  The form of all agreements between the developer and property owners relative to development standards; property ownership and common area ownership; maintenance of joint use areas and other covenants along with a written statement from the city attorney that he has reviewed the items. 
b.  The form of all agreements between and among individual property owners relative to the ownership and maintenance of privately owned properties and common areas with a written statement from the city attorney that he has reviewed this document and feels that it is protective of the owner's interests. The cost of the review by the city attorney of the documents required in this subsection and also in subsection (e)(1) of this section shall be paid by the developer. 
c.  Certification by the city manager that all improvements have been installed in accordance with the submitted plans or certification by the developer of the existence of surety in favor of the individual property owners sufficient to ensure the completion of the submitted plan. 
(3)  Compliance with city codes. All city zoning regulations, construction building codes, water and sewer regulations, sanitary and health requirements, and all other local, state or federal codes, regulations or requirements that are applicable must be complied with. 
(4)  Ingress and egress. Ingress and egress from public streets shall be minimum of 60 feet in width. 
(5)  Radius of culs-de-sac. All cul-de-sacs must be designed with a minimum 35-foot turning radius. 
(6)  Distance between buildings. For purpose of providing fire protection, at least 25 feet must be maintained between all buildings within the subdivision. 
(7)  Sign identifying private streets. A sign at the entrance to the private subdivision coming off a publicly maintained street/road which notes that the streets/roads serving the private subdivision are private streets. 
(8)  Procedures for approval of private subdivision. 
a.  Preapplication review by the city manager is required. 
b.  A development plan shall be drawn up which includes the following: 
1.  Names of the subdivision, owners, agents, developers and the registered land surveyor or engineer who did the site plan with their RLS or PE seal affixed. 
2.  North arrow and scale. 
3.  Boundary line of the tract to be developed. (drawn accurately to scale) 
4.  Location map. 
5.  Contours with a minimum vertical intervals of five feet to be shown for both existing and proposed topography. This contour requirement is only required for subdivisions consisting of more than four lots. 
6.  Utility and drainage plans in accordance with city ordinances. 
7.  Boundary development setback lines. 
8.  Location of designated common areas, if applicable. 
9.  Street design and public parking, if applicable. Label all streets as private streets on the plat. 
10.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
11.  Public and/or private supplies for water and sanitary waste disposal systems to serve the lots shall be noted on the plans. 
12.  The following language shall appear on the covenants for all private subdivision plats to be recorded: 
Required Notice to all Subsequent Property Owners 
The grantee herein recognizes that any and all means of ingress and egress to the property conveyed hereby which is provided by the grantor or his successors or assigns are considered by the governing authority of the City of Dallas, Georgia, to be private ways not maintainable by the City of Dallas. Therefore, the property owner(s) hereby agrees that he will be responsible for his share of the upkeep and maintenance of said private way, holding completely harmless the governing authority of the City of Dallas, Georgia of any necessity for such upkeep and maintenance. 
Copies of covenants shall be provided to the city attorney for review. 
13.  The application and approval process for a private subdivision shall follow all final plat procedures and schedule of approval dates. 
(e)  Procedures for approval of a minor city subdivision. 
(1)  Up to three lots shall be allowed with the approval of the health department, if applicable, and the city manager. 
(2)  The drive serving as the access to the maximum three lots is to be called a "private city street" and will be required to have a 60-foot right-of-way which meets the approval of the city manager. Said drive shall be posted with a black and white sign at its intersection with a city street denoting that it is a private street. The words "private street" will also be required to appear on the plat to designate the drive as private. 
(3)  The private street cannot serve as a connecting street between two other public or private streets/roads and must end in a cul-de-sac and shall not exceed 1,600 feet in length. At the end of each private street, a cul-de-sac of at least 35 feet radius is required. Each private street is required to intersect with a city or county maintained street/road. 
(4)  In order to request approval of a minor city subdivision, the applicant must supply the city manager with five copies of the plat along with copies of any deed restrictions or covenants and/or street maintenance agreements affecting the property to be subdivided. The plat will be required to be labeled "private city subdivision." In addition, the language in subsection (d)(8)b.1 of this section will be required in all deeds and so stated on the plat to be recorded. 
(5)  Any modifications, changes or amendments to the approved plat or document shall be submitted to the city planning commission for approval. 
(f)  Surety for completion of improvements. In lieu of completion of the required improvements in a subdivision and/or previous to the final approval of a plat, the city manager may accept security in an amount, and with surety and conditions satisfactory to him, providing for and securing to the city the estimated cost of construction and/or installation of such improvements and utilities, and within a period of time agreed to between the city and the developer as expressed specifically in the bond. In the event that the required improvements cannot be completed within the specified time period, such time period may be extended for good cause shown, if agreeable by the city. 
(1)  Requirements. To ensure the construction and installation of all required improvements, as specified in section 34-25, the subdivider shall deliver to the city a certified check, cashier's check, money order or cash (i.e., cash deposit) in such amount as is required for the estimated cost of construction and installation of all public improvements which are the responsibility of the subdivider as specified herewithin. The subdivider shall also submit a statement enumerating the cost of construction and installation of all required improvements to be reviewed and approved by the city manager. 
a.  Preconstruction surety in the city shall be 100 percent of the estimated total construction and installation costs. 
b.  Warranty surety shall be a cash deposit as stated in this subsection (f)(1) which shall be equal to 15 percent of the actual construction and installation cost and shall be held by the city for a minimum of period of 24 months. The 24-month time period shall begin after the initial acceptance of the construction and/or installation by the city or its designated agent. 
c.  If a subsequent phase of a multiphased subdivision or a new subdivision requires that construction traffic must travel through a street or streets that have been accepted by the city and released from warranty, then the cash deposit for the new phase or the new subdivision shall include an amount to repair any possible damage that may occur upon any previously accepted streets. The required cash deposit shall be based on an amount computed at a rate of $25.00 per linear foot of the existing street or streets that shall be subject to the construction traffic. 
(2)  Conditions. Cash deposits, as stated in subsection (f)(1) of this section shall be payable upon default to the city and provide that subdivider, his heirs, successors, and/or assignors and their agents or servants will comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions, and requirements of this article and any other applicable requirements; will faithfully perform and complete work constructing and installing the facilities and/or improvements in accordance with this article and any other applicable requirements; and the subdivider shall be responsible to the city for any unnecessary expense incurred through the failure of the subdivider, his heirs or successors, and assignors, or their agents or servants to complete work of the construction and installation in an acceptable manner and from any damages growing out of negligence in performing or failing to perform the construction installation. 
(3)  Duration and release. The cash deposit paid as required by this section shall be released or returned as the case may be, at such time as the facilities guaranteed hereby have been installed, maintained for a minimum of 24 months and accepted by the city, if applicable in accordance with Ordinance No. 04-08, effective August 1, 2004. Acceptance by the city shall by resolution of the mayor and council of the city and shall accurately identify the specific improvements covered. Utilities, streets, and/or other facilities shall not be accepted until they conform to the city's specifications and standards. 
(4)  Default. In the event that construction, installation and/or maintenance of any improvements or facilities for which a required cash deposit is deposited are: 
a.  Not completed within the time stipulated; 
b.  Installed, but not properly maintained or repaired under warranty; or 
c.  Not constructed or installed in accordance with applicable standards; 
the city may proceed to construct, maintain and/or repair the improvements or facilities using the cash deposited to pay for such work. Such work may be done under contract or with city employees, whichever is appropriate to the case. In the event that any portion of a required cash deposit is not depleted or used by the city, then any excess shall be rebated to the person or corporation making the cash deposit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1604; Ord. 04-08, 8-1-2004; Ord. No. OA-2009-06, 12-7-2009) 
State Law reference- Plat approval procedures for subdivisions near a part of the state highway system are regulated by, O.C.G.A.  32-6-150; standards for maps and plats recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court are set in, O.C.G.A.  15-6-67. 
Sec. 34-24. - Minimum design standards. 
(a)  Relationship to comprehensive plan for the city. In considering any development plan or final plat, the planning commission shall give consideration to the city comprehensive plan, as adopted or amended, as well as any existing land use plans that may have been approved by the mayor and city council that may affect the area in which the subdivision is to be located. 
(b)  Streets. The location and width of all streets and roads shall conform to this article, chapter 44, pertaining to zoning, the city comprehensive plan and any other adopted transportation plan that the city has adopted or will adopt in the future. All streets established in connection with the development of a subdivision shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Continuation of existing street pattern. Whenever topography will permit, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the alignment and continuation or projection of adjoining areas at the same or greater width, but in no case, less than the required minimum width. 
(2)  Access restrictions. 
a.  When a subdivision fronts on an arterial street or highway, the city manager may limit access on double frontage lots to an interior street with no access to the arterial street. The subdivider must consult and receive approval from the state department of transportation for any access upon any street or road that is on the state DOT road system. 
b.  Where, in the opinion of the planning commission, it is essential to provide for street access to an adjoining tract or parcel of land, street right-of-way shall be extended to the boundary of such tract or parcel of land. 
c.  Every lot established shall front or abut on a street which is to be dedicated to the public and/or conforms to the provisions of this article. When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots (larger than one acre), such parcels shall be arranged so as not to landlock any parcel. 
(3)  Private streets. Private streets are only permitted within a private subdivision as defined in section 34-19. 
(4)  Cul-de-sac requirements. Cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way of 100 feet in diameter and a paved turnaround with a minimum outside diameter of 80 feet. Maximum street length with a cul-de-sac shall not be greater in length than 1,600 feet from the centerline of the access street to the point of radius, unless topographic conditions necessitate no alternative for access. A variance on any additional length of a cul-de-sac must be approved by the planning commission. 
(5)  Temporary dead-end streets. Temporary dead-end streets which extend for a distance greater than the depth of one abutting lot shall be provided with a paved temporary turnaround having a diameter of 80 feet, or other suitable turnaround. 
(6)  Half streets. Half streets are prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
(7)  Split level streets and one-way streets. Streets which are construed so as to have two traffic ways, each at a different level within the right-of-way, shall provide a paved traffic surface of at least 20 feet on each level and a slope between the two traffic ways of not less than three to one (3:1). One-way streets and split level streets will be allowed when: 
a.  Topographic conditions are so that alternatives to the typical street design and construction would be more desirable; 
b.  Shape and size of the parcel could be more efficiently developed. 
In either case, approval must be obtained from the planning commission with assistance from the city manager or a qualified engineer. 
(8)  Alleys. Alleys shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. Where alleys are permitted, they shall be graded and surfaced to specifications approved by the city manager. 
(9)  Intersections. 
a.  The centerline of no more than two streets may intersect at any one point. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible to right angles (90 degrees) and no street shall intersect any other street at an angle of less than 60 degrees. The angle of intersection is to be measured at the intersection of the street centerlines. Curved streets shall have a minimum tangent of 100 feet at intersections as measured from the centerline of the cross street. 
b.  Whenever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property line at such street corners shall be round or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit sidewalk construction. 
c.  Islands at intersections shall be subject to individual approval by the city manager. In no case shall anything extend more than three feet above the back of the curb within the right-of-way of the intersecting street. 
d.  Adjoining street intersections shall be spaced at least 200 feet apart measured from edge of right-of-way to edge of opposing right-of-way. Street jogs at intersections shall have a centerline offset of not less than 150 feet. 
(10)  Street grade and curve design. Horizontal and vertical curve design shall be consistent with the city standard design specifications set forth in section 34-26. 
(11)  Street names and property address. 
a.  Streets or roads that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with, existing named streets shall bear that same name. The names of new streets and roads, except in the same subdivision, shall not duplicate or be similar in sound to existing names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, circle, way, boulevard, drive, place or court, or however otherwise designated. 
b.  All street names are subject to the approval of the city manager and/or the city post office. 
c.  Property address numbers shall be provided by the city manager and recorded on final plats. 
(12)  Additional right-of-way. Subdivisions which include an existing platted street or road that does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of this article shall provide additional width along one or both sides of such street or road so that the minimum right-of-way required by this article is established, but only if the individual lots along said right-of-way have not been constructed upon. Subdivisions abutting only one side of such a street or road shall provide a minimum of one-half measured from the center of the existing right-of-way, of the right-of-way required by this article. 
(13)  Minimum right-of-way and pavement widths. Minimum right-of-way and pavement widths shall be as follows: 
Minimum Widths 
(in feet) Street Classification Right-of-Way With Curb 
and Gutter Without Curb 
and Gutter Residential/local street 50 24(1) 60 22 Minor collector street 60 26(1) 24 Major collector street 80 30 28 Major/minor arterial 100 48 (2)  
Note- 
(1) Measured between face of the curbs. 
(2) To be determined by anticipated traffic loading. 
(14)  Preexisting right-of-way. Preexisting rights-of-way of at least 30 feet, either recorded in the county clerk's office or maintained by the city, are accepted as meeting the minimum width requirements of streets under this article. All other criteria for the roadway shall be met. This applies only to that portion of the tract from a public roadway to the main body of the property where the property on each side of the access is owned by a different individual and not the subdivider. 
(c)  Blocks. The planning commission shall examine every proposed subdivision as to its compliance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Nonresidential. Blocks for other than residential use shall be of such length and width as may be suitable for their prospective use, including adequate provision for off-street parking and service. 
(2)  Residential-Length. In order that there may be convenient access between various parts of a subdivision and between the subdivision and surrounding areas, and in order to help prevent traffic congestion and undue inconvenience, and to serve the efficient use of land or desired features of street patterns; the length of blocks hereafter established shall not exceed 1,800 feet nor be less than 600 feet; provided, however, such length requirements may be granted a variance by the planning commission when appropriate due to the topography or physical shape of the property being subdivided. 
(3)  Same-Width. The width of any residential block shall be sufficient to permit two tiers of lots of minimum depth except where prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the planning commission may approve a single tier of lots of minimum dimensions. 
(d)  Lots. All lots which shall hereafter be established in connection with the development of a subdivision, shall comply with the following design standards: 
(1)  Authority of the health department, if public sewers not available. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as preventing the health department, after a study of the conditions existing in a proposed subdivision, from requiring that all or any portion of the area of such subdivision: 
a.  Shall not be built upon; or 
b.  That the minimum lot sizes set forth in this article are inadequate and must be increased to ensure the protection of the public health. 
The developer is encouraged to consult with the health department regarding lot sizes prior to submitting a development plan. 
(2)  Building lines. All building lines and setbacks distances shall conform to chapter 44, pertaining to zoning. 
(3)  Within city limits. Lots shall not be divided by corporate boundary lines. 
(4)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently large to permit the location of buildings so as to conform with the building lines on both streets. All corner lots, regardless of zoning, shall have not less than 100 feet of road frontage on each street. The street side yard shall not be less than 25 feet measured from the street right-of-way line. No driveway shall be located within 60 feet of the street intersection. 
(5)  Side lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles (;pm;90 degrees) to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines on which the lot faces. Side lot lines shall be radial to the radius points of all cul-de-sacs. 
(6)  Minimum dimensions and area. Minimum lot dimensions and areas shall be in conformity with chapter 44, pertaining to zoning. 
(7)  Health requirements. Percolation tests and/or soil data as provided by a registered soil scientist shall be required and shall be approved by the health department, which may require additional lot area depending on soil and slope conditions. The minimum lot size for a septic tank sewer system shall be one-half acre. No septic tank sewer system will be allowed if public sewer can be made available with reasonable cost to the developer. All dwellings shall connect to public sewer if such sewer is within 300 feet of the property being subdivided. The cost of providing public sewer to the property shall be negotiated between the developer and the appropriate utility owner. 
(8)  Minimum frontage on five acre or more tracts. Lots that contain five acres or more must have a minimum frontage width of 60 feet upon a publicly maintained street or road. The city manager must certify that the topography of this 60 feet is suitable for the construction of a public road. 
(9)  Flood damage prevention. Each lot must have a suitable home site that is above the 100-year floodplain. The final plat must have a certification from the proper authority that this provision is complied with. 
(e)  Easements. Easements shall be required pursuant to the table set forth in this subsection for the following purposes: 
(1)  Utility. When it is found to be necessary and desirable to locate public utility lines in other than street rights-of-way, easements shall be shown on the plat for such purposes. The easements shall not be less than 15 feet in width and, whenever possible, shall be centered on rear and side lot lines. 
(2)  Watercourse and drainage. 
a.  Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, stream or channel, drainage easements shall be made to accommodate stormwater and drainage through and from the proposed subdivision. 
b.  Drainage easements shall conform substantially with the lines of the watercourse and shall be of sufficient width or construction to be adequate for the purpose and as necessary to accommodate future construction as recommended by the city manager. Drainage easements may be altered within the proposed site, but shall conform to points of discharge to and from the site upon approval of the city manager and the soil erosion and sedimentation plan. 
c.  Drainage easements shall be opened at the time of development to control surface water runoff. 
d.  Drainage easements off the street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the plat and deed of the individual property owner and said property owner shall keep the easement free of obstructions and maintain that part of the easement within the property owner's boundary line so that free and maximum flow is maintained at all times. 
(3)  Water and sanitary sewer. Permanent water and sanitary sewer easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be provided for necessary lines. Sewer easements shall be ten feet on each side of the sewer main. 
(4)  Overlapping. Easements for water and sanitary sewer easements and drainage purposes shall not overlap unless approved by the city manager. 
(5)  Clearing and cover. All easements shall be cleared of debris, excess dirt and other materials. The ground shall be smoothed down and grassed within ten days of completing construction work. The use of sediment control measures may be required to protect the area until a vegetative cover is obtained. 
(6)  Identified. All easements shall be noted on the development plan, preliminary and final plats. 
Easement Table Type Minimum Width 
(in feet) Purpose Utility 15 To allow for the location of public utilities out of public right-of-way Drainage-Piped 15 Surface water runoff Drainage-Open ditch 20 Surface water runoff Water/sanitary sewer 20 Elimination of septic tanks and wells  
(f)  Innovative land developments. 
(1)  General. Recognizing that beneficial change often comes from experimental design and developers' response to consumer demand, the mayor and city council and the city planning commission will consider innovative subdivision proposals which may deviate from approved subdivision regulations and standard design specifications as adopted by the city. The purpose and intent is to provide developers the flexibility of meeting consumer demand through innovative land developments and to ensure that the city remain competitive with other development markets. 
(2)  Requirements. 
a.  Preapplication review. Prior to the submittal of a development plan for an innovative subdivision, the developer shall meet with the city manager for a review of the location, scope and nature of the proposed development. The developer shall submit sketch plans showing how the property is to be developed. 
b.  Review of plats. The procedures of plat review shall be the same as outlined in this article for any development plan. 
c.  Water and sewer. All innovative land development proposals shall have public water and sanitary sewers available. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1605) 
Sec. 34-25. - Required improvements. 
(a)  Subdivider's responsibility. A well-designed subdivision means little to a prospective lot buyer until he can see actual physical transformation of raw land into lots with all necessary improvements provided. Likewise, a well-designed subdivision is not an asset to the community until the necessary improvements have been installed. In order that prospective lot purchasers may get usable products and new subdivisions may be an asset rather than a liability to the community, the subdivider shall install and/or pay for the improvements required by this article necessary to serve his subdivision. 
(b)  Monuments. Concrete monuments with aluminum or brass marking shall be placed at all corners of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision being developed and shall be set flush or up to six inches above finished grade. Existing permanent monuments which, in the professional opinion of a registered land surveyor or the city manager, are of sufficiently durable construction, may be maintained in lieu of a new concrete monument as described in this subsection. All other street or lot corners or at angle points and points of curve in each street shall be marked with an iron pipe or surveyor's marker at least 24 inches long and driven no less than one inch nor more than six inches above the finished grade. All such monuments shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time of final plat approval by the planning commission. 
(c)  Water supply. Where public water is available at the property being subdivided, the subdivider shall install water mains and fire hydrants according to plans and specifications approved by the city manager and/or other local, state, or federal regulations, specifications, or agencies. Fire protection systems shall be installed to current state insurance services office specifications and requirements. When the water main is located in the street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the abutting lot, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. 
(d)  Sanitary sewerage. Where public sewerage is available within 300 feet of the property being subdivided and the topography is such that extension is feasible, the subdivider shall install public sanitary sewers to plans and specifications approved by the city manager and/or other local, state or federal agencies. When the sewer is located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street to serve the abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line (terminating with a cleanout that will be set at finish grade upon landscaping) to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. 
(e)  Private sewer disposal systems. Prior to the construction of any private community sewage disposal system such as an oxidation pond, land application system, or other type facility, the location, size, plans and specifications must be approved by the city manager and the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
(f)  Sidewalks, curb and gutter. Sidewalks with a minimum width of five feet shall be installed on both sides of the street along all subdivision streets to provide a safe and convenient means for pedestrian movement. Developers shall also be required to construct sidewalks along existing public streets adjacent to the development property. Curbs and gutters shall be installed on all subdivision streets within the city. 
(g)  Street grading and surfacing. Streets shall be graded and surfaced according to plans and specifications approved by the city. 
(h)  Storm drainage and utilities. An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, storm sewers, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges and other necessary appurtenances shall be installed by the subdivider and shall conform to the standard design drawings and specifications as contained in this article. 
(i)  Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections within a subdivision. The location and design of such signs shall be approved by the city manager. 
(j)  Utility strips. The street right-of-way shall be graded at least six feet measured from the back of the curb or edge of pavement, on both sides of the street, to provide space for installation of utilities, to prevent the encroachment of driveways into the street surface, to provide walkways off the paved vehicular surface, and to provide space for the future installation of sidewalks; provided, however, the planning commission may waive this requirement in cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that the topography of the land being subdivided is such that compliance with this provision would be impractical. 
(k)  Street trees. The planting of street trees is not required; however, if the subdivider chooses to plant trees along the street to enhance the appearance of a subdivision, such trees shall not be planted on any street right-of-way to ensure that there will be no future conflict with utility lines either above or below the ground surface. Certain trees, however, are permitted on right-of-way subject to approval by the city manager if such species demonstrate growth characteristics which will not interfere with utilities. 
(l)  Street addresses. Numerals or letters indicating the official street address of each principal residence or business (as shown on the final plat), shall be installed by the subdividers of any subdivision either on a mailbox, mailbox post or other prominent place on the property so as to be visible to any emergency response unit trying to locate said residence or business. The numerals/letters shall be made of a durable reflective material, shall contrast in color with the background, and be at least three inches high for residences and four inches high for businesses. 
(m)  Streetlights. Prior to the sale of the first residence/business within any phase of the subdivision, there shall be street lights installed by the subdividers of any subdivision or by the electric utility company for that area, and the installation costs as well as the monthly charges shall be borne by the subdivider until 50 percent of the total residences/business within that phase have been sold. At that time the subdivider shall so notify the city manager who will in turn notify the respective electric utility company and transfer responsibility for payment to the city for that particular phase. 
(n)  Two-year warranty and final inspection. Developers of nonprivate subdivisions within the city shall provide the city with a two year warranty on the infrastructures (streets, curb and gutter, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewers, signage, etc.) that is required to be installed by this article. The developers shall be required to compensate the city for the cost of performing a final acceptance and public dedication inspection of the infrastructure improvements set forth in this article. The compensation shall be based on a fee of $50.00 per lot with a minimum fee of $2,500.00 and must be paid prior to the final acceptance and dedication inspection. The city shall have the right to use its own employees or to hire a certified engineering firm to perform the final acceptance and dedication inspection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1606; Ord. No. 96-18, 8-5-1996; Ord. No. 01-06, 3-4-2001; Ord. No. 04-08, 8-1-2004; Ord. No. OA-2017-02 , 12-11-2017) 
Sec. 34-26. - Standard design specifications for streets and storm drainage. 
(a)  Applicability. All persons proposing construction within the public rights-of-way of the city or within easements that are required to conform to city standards shall perform all construction in accordance with these specifications and standard design drawings. 
(b)  Standards incorporated by reference. Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, quantities, methods of construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction and storm drainage construction shall conform to the latest standard specifications of the state department of transportation. Design criteria and standards not specifically set forth herein shall conform to the edition of the AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, or its latest revision. Construction plans for all facilities covered by this article shall conform to article IV of chapter 16, pertaining to erosion and sedimentation control. 
(c)  Administration and enforcement. 
(1)  Permits required. All phases of construction are guided by a permit process. Before obtaining a permit for the construction phases of subdivision improvement, a development plan must have been approved by the planning commission in accordance with this article. Plans for all other construction must be approved by the city manager. Permits will only be issued to the property owner, developer, or their authorized agent. The following types of construction are required to be reviewed: 
a.  Grading and storm drainage; 
b.  Water and sewer line construction; 
c.  Curb construction; 
d.  Base and paving construction. 
One permit shall be issued at the beginning of each construction activity. After inspection and approval of each phase, the developer may proceed with each subsequent phase. 
(2)  Field inspections. 
a.  Advance notice to city for inspection. Authorized representatives of the city shall access to the work site for inspection at any time. When an inspection for approval of the work is needed, the permittee shall notify the city manager at least eight hours in advance. After notification to the city and expiration of the eight-hour period, the work may proceed with or without the inspection. However, the city reserves the right to require modifications or corrections if said work does not conform to city regulations, specifications or ordinances. 
b.  Final inspection. Each type of construction identified in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be inspected at the time of completion. In addition, each phase of construction shall be inspected before it is covered, built over, or otherwise hidden for inspection purposes by subsequent work. For example, subgrade preparation shall be inspected before any placement of base material, and base shall be inspected prior to the laying of pavement. When all construction has been completed, the developer or his agent shall meet with a representative from the city on the job site. All work will be examined at this time to ensure the work has been accepted and the construction plans checked against what has been constructed to ensure that the work is complete and proper. A final field inspection of all improvements shall be held before acceptance of the work. Nothing in this provision shall prevent the completion of a job pending inspection so long as the developer has given 24 hours' notice to the city that the work is to be completed at a given date and time. 
(3)  Letter of acceptance. If all work has been completed and is approved, a letter of acceptance will be issued by the city manager and/or the final plat be certified. Permits are not required when the work to be performed is by a city, county or state agency. 
(4)  Stop work order. Any work not having the proper permit or not conforming to the requirements of this article or any other city or state requirement must be brought into compliance. Should the work not be permitted or corrected after notification by the city manager, a stop work order shall be issued by the city manager. Further failure by the property owner or developer to comply shall make him liable for a $500.00 per day fine and charges of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Earthwork. 
(1)  Clearing and grubbing. The entire area within the typical grading section shall be cleared and grubbed of all trees, bushes, stumps and debris. Such debris shall be disposed of in a satisfactory manner. 
(2)  Grading. Grading shall be accurately done to the lines and grades shown on the approved plans. Embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed six inches and compacted to a density of 95 percent of the maximum dry weight per cubic foot as determined by an approved method. Proof-rolling shall be accomplished prior to placement of embankments to detect soft spots. 
Slopes in Cut or Fill Sections Depth of cut or fill Maximum Slopes Two feet or less 4 to 1 Two to five feet 3 to 1 Over five feet 2 to 1  
The depth of cut referenced in the table in this subsection shall be construed to be the maximum cut or fill occurring in any one section of cut or fill. The slope on cut or fill shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or fill. When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, slope may be changed to vertical slope upon the written approval of the city manager. 
(3)  Subgrade. After the earth work has been completed, all storm drainage and other underground utilities have been installed under the roadbed, and the backfill in all ditches thoroughly compacted, the subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grades and cross section shown on the plans. 
a.  If any sections of the subgrade are composed of unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the city manager and replaced with suitable, thoroughly compacted material. 
b.  When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed, a layer of No. 5 stone can be laid as a traffic surface if the developer desires under the following provisions: 
1.  This material shall not be used as part of the base material; 
2.  It may be worked into the subgrade or it shall be removed before the base course is set up for paving; 
3.  Provision shall be made to drain low points in road construction when the final paving surface is delayed. 
(e)  Storm drainage. 
(1)  Standards. The following standards are to be used in designing the system: 
a.  Stormwater discharge rate. The development shall comply with the current best management practices for stormwater management as contained in engineering standards. 
b.  Size and location of drainage structures. The sizing and location of all drainage structures shall be the responsibility of a registered professional engineer or land surveyor, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
c.  Minimum velocity. Storm drainage pipes shall be sloped so as to maintain a minimum velocity of three feet per second so that sediment will not collect. 
d.  Gauge of pipe, backfill and installation. State department of transportation standard 1030D (or most current) shall be used in determining class (concrete) or gauge of pipe under fill, method of backfilling and pipe installation, unless otherwise specified and approved by the city manager. 
e.  Drainage formula. Unless specified otherwise, the drainage formula used in determining the size of the drainage structure shall be determined by the development's engineer or surveyor. 
f.  Runoff index. Talbot's formula shall use 0.80 runoff index or the equivalent. 
g.  Rational method. The rational method shall use ten-year storm or rain as the stated frequency. 
h.  Drainage easement. The drainage easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide when used as an open ditch. Piped storm drainage shall have a minimum easement width of 15 feet. 
i.  Catchbasins. Catchbasins and/or drop inlets shall be designed in accordance with the standard design drawings specifications contained in section 34-27 and subject to final approval by the city manager. 
j.  Street water. Street water shall be limited to a maximum distance as follows: 
1.  Zero up to seven percent grade: 400 feet maximum. 
2.  Seven up to ten percent grade: 300 feet maximum. 
3.  Over ten percent grade: 250 feet maximum. 
k.  Subdrainage. Subdrainage will be installed to control the surplus groundwater by intercepting sidehill seepage or by lowering or regulating the groundwater where such conditions exist. 
l.  Bridges. Bridges shall be designed on a 50-year storm frequency. 
(2)  Cross drain pipes. 
a.  Size. Cross drain pipes shall be not less than 18 inches in diameter when under streets and not less than 15 inches in diameter when under a driveway. 
b.  Headwalls. Cross drains shall have headwalls of an approved type on inlet and outlet ends of the pipes. 
c.  Shoulder. All streets shall maintain full shoulder width across all cross drains as the minimum length. 
d.  Maximum length. Maximum continuous length of cross drains shall be 300 feet. 
e.  Junction boxes. Junction boxes having access to the cross drains shall be constructed to meet the requirements of the state DOT standard 1030D (or most current). 
(3)  Materials. 
a.  Concrete pipe. Concrete pipe shall be reinforced within the right-of-way but may be plain pipe outside the right-of-way. Flat bottom and circular pipe sections shall be laid in a prepared trench with the socket ends pointing upstream. Sections shall be joined in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
b.  High Density Polyethylene Pipe (HDPE). 
1.  Shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M294, Type S. 
2.  Pipe shall have smooth interior with annular exterior corrugations. 
3.  Joints shall be bell and spigot type and shall provide a water-tight connection. 
4.  Pipe shall meet requirements of Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, Section 550 and Section 845, and Standard Detail 1030P. Pipe shall be from an approved source listed on Qualified Products List QPL-51. 
(4)  Traffic and erosion. Before any traffic over a storm drain is allowed, the developer shall provide an adequate depth and width of compacted backfill to protect the structure from damage or displacement. Any debris or silt that constricts the flow through a pipe shall be removed by the developer as often as necessary to maintain drainage. All pipe structures shall be cleaned before the work is accepted. Any damage or displacement that may occur due to traffic or erosion shall be repaired or corrected at the developer's expense. The developer's obligation to clean and repair pipes ceases after acceptance by the city. 
(5)  Minimum clearance. Minimum clearances are one foot between the bottom of the roadway base and the exterior crown of the culvert and a minimum of one half foot between underground utilities and the exterior crown of culverts. 
(6)  Trench construction. Trench construction for storm drainage pipes shall be in accordance with the standard drawings contained herein. 
(f)  Streets. 
(1)  Street design criteria. Street design criteria for proposed streets, and the redesigning of existing streets, shall conform to the following specifications: 
a.  Minimum grade on cul-de-sasc. The minimum grade on cul-de-sacs shall be 11/2 percent to maintain one percent in curbline. 
b.  Maximum design speeds and grades. Maximum design speeds and maximum grades allowable by street classification shall be as follows: 
Street Type Maximum Grade 
(in percent) Maximum Curve 
(in degrees) Maximum Design 
Speed 
(in mph) Arterial 8 10 55 Major collector 10 15 50 Minor collector 15 20 45 Local or residential 18 25 25  
c.  Sight distance requirements. The sight distance requirements at intersections and crests of hills shall be as follows: 
Street Type Sight Distance (1) Arterial 500 feet Major collector 400 feet Minor collector 300 feet Local or residential 200 feet  
Note- (1) As measured between points four feet above the centerline of the street. 
(2)  Curb and gutter. Curb and gutter shall be required on all subdivision streets within the city as specified in section 34-25(f) and shall be a vertical or rollback type having the section and dimensions as shown in the standard drawings herewithin. 
a.  Residential curbing. Concrete shall have a minimum vertical or rollback strength of 2,500 psi at 28 days. 
b.  Industrial or commercial curbing. Concrete shall have a minimum vertical strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days (vertical faced curbing only). 
c.  Construction methods. 
1.  Line and grade shall be set by developer's engineer or surveyor. 
2.  One-half inch expansion joints of premolded bitumastic expansion joint material shall be provided at all radius points and at intervals not to exceed 50 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 
3.  Special curbing designs (center islands, etc.) shall individually be approved by the city manager. 
4.  Curb and gutter shall be set true to line and grade and finished by skilled workers to the section shown on the plans. 
5.  Inferior workmanship or construction methods resulting in unsightly curb and gutter will be cause for rejection of the finished work. 
6.  All curbing shall be backfilled and landscaped. 
(3)  Residential and industrial streets. Residential and industrial streets shall be built to the standards as shown in the standard design drawings herewithin and applicable state DOT standards. 
(4)  Roadway surfaces. After the prime has cured for 24 hours, been accepted and inspected, the roadway or street shall receive the appropriate surface course. Two inches of asphalt concrete is required on all public city streets. All asphalt concrete will be mixed in an asphalt plant which meets the latest requirements of the state department of transportation. 
(5)  Street cuts. All utility street cuts within the city shall be by permit of the city manager and shall meet all of the following standards: contained herewithin. 
a.  All trenches shall be backfilled and compacted the same day the trench is opened, or provide a steel running plate to cover the trench. 
b.  Trenches under the paving shall be returned to 95 percent compaction as determined by appropriate inspection. 
c.  Trenches elsewhere shall be returned to 90 percent compaction as determined by appropriate inspection. 
d.  See the standard drawings for detail of approved trenches. 
(6)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks, when required, will be built in accordance with the standard drawings herewithin and the following conditions: 
a.  In single-family residential areas, concrete sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide and four inches thick. In commercial areas, sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide and four inches thick. 
b.  Concrete shall be 2,000 psi at 28 days strength. 
c.  Sidewalks will normally be located on both sides of the streets. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be backfilled and landscaped. 
(7)  Street markers. Street markers shall be reflectorized green background with white legends mounted on ten-foot length posts. Developer shall supply approved markers or purchase from the city. 
(8)  Traffic signs. Traffic signs shall be supplied by the developer (may be purchased through the city) and installed as directed by the plans or the city manager. 
(9)  Underground utilities. All utilities beneath pavement shall be installed and the ditches backfilled and thoroughly compacted before any pavement or base is installed. 
a.  All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought to the finished grade within the roadway section. 
b.  All utility locations shall correspond to the typical layout as shown by the standard drawings herewithin. 
(10)  Foreign material on streets. The developer and/or builders shall be responsible for keeping dirt, mud, building materials, concrete, gravel, trash, etc. off of the pavement and curbing during construction of buildings in all developments within the city. 
(11)  Removal of trash before acceptance. Before streets are accepted by the city, all litter, construction debris, and/or trash shall be removed from the dedicated rights-of-way. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1620; Ord. No. 01-06, 3-4-2001; Ord. No. OA-2017-02 , 12-11-2017; Ord. No. OA-2018-03 , 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 34-27. - Standard design drawings. 
    A list of and corresponding graphics of the standard design drawings are as follows: 
Standard Design Drawings 

(List of Figures) Figure No. Standard and Specification 1 Residential street-Cross section 2 Surface treatment-Material specifications 3 Industrial/commercial streets-Cross section 4 Landing requirements-Street intersections 5 Residential cul-de-sac 6 Industrial cul-de-sac 7 Residential street intersection 8 Vertical street intersection 9 Obstructing visibility at intersections 10 Typical urban and industrial street intersections 11 Driveway entrance onto road or street 12 Commercial driveway requirements 13 Typical street and industrial street intersections 14 24-inch roll-over curb and gutter 15 30-inch vertical face curb and gutter 16 Sidewalk detail 17 Wheelchair access ramp curb cuts 18 Utility locations within 50 feet right-of-way street section 19 Utility locations plan view 20 Utility locations on rural residential street 21A Precast manhole details 21B Manhole casting and step detail 21C Reducer slab, base unit and flat top slab detail 21D General notes for precast manholes 22A Type "A" and "B with weir" brick drop inlets 22B Type "C" and "C with weir" brick drop inlets 22C Type "D" and "E with weir" brick drop inlets 22D Cast-iron grating, frame and hood detail 22E General design information for brick drop inlets 23A Brick manhole details, type 1 and 2 23B Brick manhole details 23C Manhole casting details for brick manholes 24A Catchbasin for 12" to 24" cross drain or longitudinal pipe-Single wing 24B Concrete slab reinforcing detail-Single wing 24C Catchbasin detail for 30" to 60" cross drain or longitudinal pipe-Single wing 25A Catchbasin detail for 30" to 60" cross drain or longitudinal pipe-Double wing 25B Concrete slab reinforcing detail-Double wing 25C Miscellaneous details for catchbasins 25D Catchbasin for 12" to 24" cross drain or longitudinal pipe-Double wing 26A Catchbasin detail 26B Catchbasin frame detail 26C Catchbasin grate detail 26D Catchbasin hood detail 27A Concrete endwalls for pipe arch culverts, 18" to 72" span-"U" type wings 27B Concrete endwalls for pipe arch culverts, 18" to 72" span-"L" type walls 27C Concrete endwalls for pipe arch culverts, 18" to 72" span-Miscellaneous details and notes 27D Concrete endwalls for pipe arch culverts, 18" to 72"-Straight walls 27E Concrete endwalls for pipe arch culverts, 18" to 72"-Additional miscellaneous details 28A Concrete headwalls for round pipe culverts-Straight headwalls 28B Concrete headwalls for round pipe culverts-"U" type wing walls 28C Concrete headwalls for round pipe culverts with 45-degree wings 28D Concrete headwalls for round pipe culverts with "L" type walls 29A Rubble masonry headwalls for pipe culverts-Single pipe headwall 29B Rubble masonry headwalls for pipe culverts-Double pipe headwall  






















































(Comp. Ords. 2005, pt. 5, ch. 16) 
Sec. 34-28. - Roadway and infrastructure project improvements. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Infrastructure project improvement means a site improvement required to provide water distribution, sewer collection, stormwater management, or street lights within a specifically identified residential development that are necessary to bring the development into compliance with the standards set forth in the City of Dallas Development Regulations. Such an improvement is intended for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the residential development alone and is not designed to provide service to the community at large. 
    Infrastructure means the water distribution, sewer collection, stormwater management, and street light systems contained within the final plat for a residential development recorded with the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Paulding County. 
    Roadway means the roadway contained within the final plat for a residential development recorded with the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Paulding County. 
    Roadway project improvement means a site improvement to a substandard roadway contained within a specifically identified residential development that is necessary to bring the roadway into compliance with the standards set forth in the City of Dallas Development Regulations. Such an improvement is intended for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the residential development alone and is not designed to provide service to the community at large. 
    System improvement means an improvement designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to a roadway project improvement or an infrastructure project improvement. 
    Vacant lot means a lot within a residential subdivision upon which no residential structure has been constructed or for which no certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to those residential developments meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  A final plat for the development has been lawfully recorded in Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Paulding County, but all or a portion of the roadways or infrastructure therein have not been accepted by the city for perpetual maintenance; 
(2)  All or a portion of the roadways or infrastructure shown on the final plat do not comply with the development regulations; and 
(3)  The bonds or other security instruments posted or which should have been posted for the residential development have failed to provide sufficient funds to the city for proper completion of the roadways and associated infrastructure within the residential development. 
(c)  Roadway and infrastructure project improvement fee. 
(1)  Where the city determines that a residential development meets the criteria set forth in subsection (b), the community development director may condition issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy for the remaining vacant lots within the development upon payment of a roadway and infrastructure project improvement fee. 
(2)  The roadway and infrastructure project improvement fee shall be determined by the community development director by dividing the anticipated costs to complete the residential development in compliance with the development regulations by the number of vacant lots existing within the residential development. Once the first roadway and infrastructure project improvement fee for a specific residential development is determined, the fee will remain constant for the remaining vacant lots within that residential development. 
(3)  No roadway and infrastructure project improvement fee may exceed $2,500.00. 
(d)  Expenditure of roadway and infrastructure project improvement fees. 
(1)  Roadway and infrastructure project improvement fees shall be used solely to pay for expenses incurred by the city in bringing the roadways and associated infrastructure of the specific residential development for which they were assessed into compliance with the development regulations. No such fees may be utilized for system improvements. 
(2)  Roadway and infrastructure project improvement fees shall be accounted for and categorized separately for each individual residential development for which they were assessed. 
(3)  Upon collection of sufficient roadway and infrastructure project improvement fees to bring the roadways and associated infrastructure of a residential development into compliance with the development regulations, the city may commence construction of the improvements; however this provision does not preclude the city from commencing such construction at an earlier date. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-05, 6-16-2014) 
Secs. 34-29-34-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION 

Sec. 34-56. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(2)  Provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(3)  Preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(4)  Permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(5)  Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(6)  Promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(7)  Promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(8)  Encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(9)  Encourage street designs to reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(10)  Promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(11)  Conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(12)  Preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(Ord. No. 06-16,  1, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 34-57. - General regulations. 
(a)  Applicability of regulations. This conservation subdivision option is available within the incorporated limits of the city as a use by right. Applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
(b)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(c)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: 
(1)  Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The 100-year floodplain; 
c.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
(2)  Yield plan. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan has to meet formal requirements for an engineered site design plan, certified by an engineer licensed by the state. 
(Ord. No. 06-16,  2, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 34-58. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, the applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
(1)  Property boundaries; 
(2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
(4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in section 34-59; 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics; 
(6)  General soil types; 
(7)  The planned location of protected open space; 
(8)  Existing roads and structures; and 
(9)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(b)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in section 34-59, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(c)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in section 34-59, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(d)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 06-16,  3, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 34-59. - Open space. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Open space means the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(b)  Standards to determine open space. 
(1)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
(2)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
a.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Buffer zones of at least 75-foot width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(3)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre of contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than an eight-inch caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(4)  Aboveground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement. Historic structures and existing trails may be counted. Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(5)  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and nonprotected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
(6)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Nonadjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(c)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
(1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(3)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(4)  Passive recreation areas; 
(5)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(6)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(7)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(8)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(9)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
(1)  Golf courses; 
(2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
(4)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(e)  Ownership and management of open space. 
(1)  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners' association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(2)  Management plan. The applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities (the plan) that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for longterm capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the city manage or his designee; and 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan by the city manager or his designee. 
(3)  Failure to maintain. In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city manager or his designee, or the state, on behalf of the city, may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowners' association or the individual property owners that make up the homeowners' association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(f)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
(1)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a.  A permanent written conservation easement recorded with the clerk of the superior court of the county in favor of either: 
1.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
2.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this article. If the entity accepting the easement is not the city then a third right of enforcement favoring the city shall be included in the recorded easement; 
b.  A permanent written restrictive covenant for conservation purposes recorded with the clerk of the superior court of the county in favor of a governmental entity; or 
c.  An equivalent written legal tool recorded with the clerk of the superior court of the county that provides permanent protection, if approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(2)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. No. 06-16,  4, 10-2-2006) 
Chapter 36 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2015-05, adopted Aug. 31, 2015, deleted the former Ch. 36,  36-1-36-6, and enacted a new Ch. 36 as set out herein. The former Ch. 36 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Comp. Ords. 2005,  3-401-3-406. 
State Law reference- Municipal taxation, O.C.G.A.  48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 36-1. - Property taxes, due date. 
    Municipal ad valorem taxes shall be due no later than December 20 of each year. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-05, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 36-2. - Rate of levy. 
    A millage rate will be set and levied by the mayor and council, upon all taxable real and personal property within the city. The rate shall be set at the next regular council meeting after receipt and verification of the county tax digest. The tax levy shall be by ordinance of the mayor and council but shall not require two readings at two separate meetings. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-05, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 36-3. - Tax assessments. 
    The city shall accept the assessments made by the county board of tax assessors on all property within the city. The county will provide the city with a tax digest each year as required by state law. The city clerk, or his agent, shall compare the tax digest with city records and notify the county tax assessors of any omissions and/or errors. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-05, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 36-4. - Appeals. 
    All appeals by dissatisfied property owners which result from an assessment made by the county shall be made to the county board of tax assessors in the manner specified by said board and by general state law. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-05, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 36-5. - Assessment of penalties; collection of delinquent property taxes. 
    The following penalties shall apply to all delinquent property (ad valorem) taxes billed by the city: 
(1)  On December 21 of each and every year, unless date is changed by a majority vote of the mayor and council of the city, all unpaid property taxes shall be declared delinquent and a penalty shall be assessed upon each and every tax bill that is unpaid; penalties imposed or due by this section are not printed herein, but shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk and may be amended from time to time as needed, by the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia. In addition, the unpaid tax shall bear interest at a rate in accordance with O.C.G.A.  48-2-40 as now adopted or hereafter amended. 
(2)  As soon as possible after the due date set forth in subsection (1) of this section, the city clerk, or his agent, shall notify, in writing, each delinquent taxpayer that their taxes have not been paid and if not paid within 30 days after the date the notice set forth in this subsection was mailed, an execution shall be issued and recorded; a tax lien shall be recorded in the county clerk's office upon the property; and an execution fee shall be added to the penalty and interest assessed in subsection (1) of this section; fees imposed or due by this section are not printed herein, but shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk and may be amended from time to time as needed, by the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia. 
(3)  If the property taxes (ad valorem) are still unpaid after 90 days from the date in subsection (1) of this section, then an additional penalty of ten percent shall be added to the amount of tax and penalties due. This additional penalty shall not apply to unpaid taxes of $500.00 or less on homestead property as defined in O.C.G.A.  48-5-40. 
(4)  If the property taxes (ad valorem) are still unpaid after 180 days, then all collection avenues allowed by state law, including, but not limited to, a tax sale of property, shall be used by the city to ensure that the taxes are paid. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-05, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 36-6. - Mayor to set and levy payment on general obligation bonds. 
    The mayor and council may set and levy the payment of principal and interest on general obligation bonds by an annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city. The tax shall become due in the same manner as provided in section 36-2. A statement of this levy shall be shown separately on tax collection bills. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-05, 8-31-2015 ) 
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 

Sec. 38-1. - Adoption by reference. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A.  40-6-1-40-6-395, except for O.C.G.A.  40-6-393 and 40-6-394 of that chapter, known as "The Uniform Rules of Road" and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A.  40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulation of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Any future amendment or repeal of a provision of this chapter or O.C.G.A.  40-1-1 shall so amend or repeal the pertinent provision, if any, of the original ordinance adopted by the city pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A.  40-6-372 without any action by the city being required. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1101) 
Sec. 38-2. - Speed limits. 
(a)  State route No. 6 (US Hwy. 278, four lane). 
(1)  From mile point 6.38 (422 feet west of C.R. No. 949, Mt. Olivet Loop, west city limits) to mile point 8.40 (S.R. No. 6, Business and S.R. No. 120, Buchanan Street), a distance of 2.02 miles, the speed limit shall be the statutory 65 miles per hour. 
(2)  From mile point 8.40 (S.R. No. 6, Business and S.R. No. 120, Buchanan Street) to mile point 12.35 (1,320 feet east of Mill Creek Tributary, east city limits), a distance of 3.95 miles, the speed limit shall be the statutory 55 miles per hour. 
(b)  State route No. 6, Business (old bypass and West Memorial to old S.R. No. 120). 
(1)  From mile point 0.00 (S.R. No. 6/US Hwy. 278 on west side of city) to mile point 0.38 (on C.S. No. 650, West Memorial Drive), a distance of 0.38 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(2)  From mile point 0.38 (C.S. No. 650, West Memorial Drive) to mile point 0.62 (Southern Railway overpass), a distance of 0.24 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
(3)  From mile point 0.62 (Southern Railway overpass) to mile point 1.55 (150 feet east of C.R. No. 710 and C.S. No. 647), a distance of 0.93 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(4)  From mile point 1.55 (150 feet east of C.R. No. 710 and C.S. No. 647) to mile point 3.64 (475 feet west of C.R. No. 842, Old Harris Road), a distance of 2.09 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(5)  From mile point 3.64 (475 feet west of C.R. No. 842, Old Harris Road) to mile point 4.19 (160 feet west of W. I. Parkway), a distance of 0.55 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
(6)  From mile point 4.19 (160 feet west of W. I. Parkway) to mile point 4.44 (east city limits), a distance of 0.25 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(c)  State Route No. 61. 
(1)  From mile point 10.01 (950 feet south of S.R. No. 6, south city limits) to mile point 10.91 (S.R. No. 6, Business), a distance of 0.90 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(2)  From mile point 10.91 to mile point 11.94, S.R. No. 61 runs common with S.R. No. 6, Business, and the S.R. No. 6, Business speed limit set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall apply. 
(3)  From mile point 11.94 (S.R. No. 6, Business, ends common mileage) to mile point 12.36 (370 feet north of C.R. No. 116, Polk Avenue), a distance of 0.42 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(4)  From mile point 12.36 (370 feet north of C.R. No. 116, Polk Avenue) to mile point 12.52 (528 feet south of C.R. No. 921, north city limits), a distance of 0.16 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(d)  State Route No. 120. From mile post 12.89 (C.R. No. 242, West Avenue, west city limits) to mile point 13.14 (S.R. No. 6/US Hwy. 278, four lane), a distance of 0.25 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(e)  City streets. 
(1)  Unless set forth in this subsection, the speed limit for all city streets shall neither be less than 30 MPH outside an urban or residential district nor less than 25 MPH within such districts. (O.C.G.A.  40-6-183(a)) 
(2)  On East Memorial Drive from its intersection with S.R. No. 6, Business to a point 400 feet north of Legion Drive (C.S. No. 610) a distance of 0.25 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(3)  From a point on East Memorial Drive 400 feet north of Legion Drive (C.S. No. 610) to the east city limits (C.R. No. 401), a distance of 1.30 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(4)  On West Memorial Drive from its intersection with S.R. No. 6, Business (Buchanan Highway) to S.R. No. 6/US Hwy. 278, a distance of 0.95 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(5)  On Hardee Street (C.S. No. 649) from its intersection with S.R. No. 6, Business on the eastside of the city to Park Street (C.S. No. 623), a distance of 0.67 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(6)  On Hardee Street (C.S. No. 649 from Park Street (C.S. No. 623) to S.R. No. 6, Business (downtown at traffic light) a distance of 0.25 mile, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1103; Ord. No. OA-2013-01, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 38-3. - School speed zones. 
    The following school speed zones are established: 
(1)  School zone on State Route No. 61. From mile point 12.11 (Herman Avenue/C.S. No. 604) to mile post 12.36 (370 feet north of Polk Avenue/C.R. No. 116), a distance of 0.25 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour on school days only, effective 30 minutes prior to commencement time to 30 minutes after commencement time in the morning and 30 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time in the afternoon. 
(2)  School zone on Hardee Street. From a point 635 feet south of C.R. No. 245 to a point 105 feet north of C.R. No. 840, a distance of 0.25 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour on school days only, effective 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time in the morning and 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time in the afternoon. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1104) 
Sec. 38-4. - Parking prohibited. 
(a)  Parking is prohibited within 20 feet of two intersecting public streets, alleys, highways or thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Parking is prohibited within ten feet of any fire hydrant or other fire appurtenances. Parking shall also be prohibited along any street, sidewalk, curbing or other areas that is identified and marked as a fire lane. 
(c)  Parking is prohibited within ten feet of any mail receptacle maintained by the U.S. Postal Service. 
(d)  Parking is prohibited within 40 feet of the entrance of any fire station which houses emergency vehicles. 
(e)  Parking regulations and prohibitions. 
(1)  General prohibitions. 
a.  Parking is prohibited on any residential street; only off-street parking shall be permitted in any residential neighborhood. This shall not hinder the temporary parking of nonresident vehicles during temporary visits to a residence which has all available treated parking spaces utilized. This section shall also apply to boats, trailers, or any other vehicle not otherwise prohibited. 
b.  For the purpose of this section, the term "residential streets" means those streets adjacent to and servicing any property zoned R-1, R-2, or R-3. 
(2)  Specific regulations and prohibitions. Parking is prohibited on the following streets and thoroughfares and will be so designated by either curbs painted a yellow color and/or signs that state "No Parking" or "Parking Prohibited:" 
a.  Both sides of Confederate Avenue from milepost 11.95, the intersection of S.R. No. 6, to milepost 12.02, the intersection of Watson Drive, a distance of 0.07 miles. 
b.  Both sides of Main St. except in marked parking space on a temporary basis on the east side from East Griffin St. to East Cooper Ave. 
c.  Both sides of East Griffin Street from Main Street, to Church Street. 
d.  The north side of Forest Avenue from Main Street to South Johnston Street, with the exception of Sundays on which parking will be allowed for church services only. 
e.  Both sides of East Spring Street, from Main Street, to Church Street. 
f.  Both sides of West Spring Street from Main Street to its intersection with South Johnston Street, with one hour temporary parking allowed for loading and unloading. 
g.  All of SR 6/Hwy. 278 aka Jimmy Campbell Parkway in its entirety inside the Dallas city limits. 
h.  The west side of Courthouse Square Street, from its intersection with West Griffin Street, to its intersection with West Memorial Drive (S.R. No. 6), except for a temporary loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers. 
i.  Both sides of Paulding Lane from its intersection with Academy Drive to the intersection of East Paulding Lane and North Paulding Lane. 
j.  Both sides of Paulding Lane from the intersection of Dallas Circle to the intersection of Paulding Lane and Hilltop Circle North. 
k.  Beginning at a point on the north side of Paulding Lane at its intersection with Hilltop Circle North and continuing west on the north side of Paulding Lane for a distance of 1,172 feet. 
l.  Beginning at a point on the north side Paulding Lane at the intersection of Hilltop Circle South and continuing west on the north side of Paulding Lane for a distance of 430 feet. 
(Ord. No. OA-2013-04, 3-4-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2013-04, adopted Mar. 4, 2013, repealed  38-4, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment,  38-4, pertained to similar provisions. See Code Comparative Table/2005 Compiled Ordinances and Code Comparative Table/Ordinances for derivation. 
Sec. 38-5. - Designated one-way streets, alleys and thoroughfares. 
(a)  First Avenue from its intersection with Hardee Street (S.R. No. 61), to its intersection with South Main Street, is hereby designated a one-way street proceeding in a Western direction. 
(b)  Foster Lake Drive from its intersection with East Foster Avenue to its intersection with By-Pass Road (U.S. Hwy. 278) is hereby designated one-way proceeding in a east direction. 
(c)  Court House Square from its intersection with Main Street (S.R. No. 61) to its intersection with West Memorial Dr. (S.R. No. 6) is hereby designated one-way proceeding in a western and northern direction. 
(d)  West Griffin Street from its intersection with Main Street (S.R. No. 61) to its intersection with South Johnston Street is hereby designated one-way proceeding in a western direction. 
(e)  Stadium Drive from its intersection with North Johnston Street to a location adjoining the South Driveway of Paulding Enterprises, Inc. is hereby designated one-way proceeding in a westerly and northwesterly direction. The remaining 530 feet of Stadium Drive from the south driveway of Paulding Enterprises, Inc. to Stadium Drive's junction with Polk Avenue shall be available for two-way traffic. 
(f)  Merritt Circle from its westerly intersection with Bethel Avenue to its easterly and southerly intersection with Bethel Avenue is hereby designated one-way proceeding in an easterly and southerly direction. 
(g)  School Avenue from its easterly intersection with Confederate Avenue to its westerly intersection with Johnston Street is hereby designated a one-way street proceeding in a westerly direction, and School Avenue from its easterly intersection with Johnston Street to its termination upon the county board of education property shall be designated a one-way street proceeding in a easterly direction. 
(h)  East Cooper Avenue from its intersection with the east right-of-way of Main Street (S.R. No. 61) to its intersection with the west right-of-way of Church Street is hereby designated a one-way street proceeding in a easterly direction. 
(i)  Forrest Avenue from its intersection with the west right-of-way of Main Street (S.R. No. 61) to its intersection with South Johnston Street is hereby designated one-way proceeding in a westerly direction. 
(j)  West Cooper Avenue from its intersection with the east right-of-way of South Johnston Street to its intersection with the west right-of-way of Main Street (S.R. No. 61) is hereby designated one-way proceeding in a easterly direction. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1106; Ord. No. 95-15, 1995) 
Sec. 38-6. - Regulations on trucks over two tons. 
(a)  Trucks with a gross vehicle weight of over two tons shall be prohibited from entering upon, passing through or stopping upon West Cooper Avenue and West Forrest Avenue Monday through Friday during the hour of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and during the hour of 11:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon. 
(b)  Commercial trucks with a gross vehicle weight of over two tons shall be prohibited from entering upon, passing through or stopping upon the following streets unless the purpose of doing so is to deliver a product or service to a residence, business or industry that is located upon that street: 
(1)  South Main Street; 
(2)  Main Street; 
(3)  Hardee Street; 
(4)  South Johnston Street; 
(5)  East and West Foster Avenue; 
(6)  Venoy Aiken Road. 
Trucks that are owned by any business that is located on the above streets shall be exempted from this section but must utilize the most direct route to the nearest state route. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1107; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-9-1995) 
Sec. 38-7. - Motarized carts and personal transportation vehicle ordinance. 
    Sec. 38-7.1. Findings; definition. 
(a)  The mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia find that certain streets and paved recreational paths located within the territorial boundaries of the city and under its jurisdiction are designed and constructed so as to safely permit their use by operators of motorized carts, electric bicycles, and low speed motor vehicle ("LSV"), except as stated elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this ordinance: 
    All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three or more low pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars for steering control. 
    Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having only two wheels which are in tandem and either of which is more than 13 inches in diameter. 
    City means the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    City clerk means the Clerk of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    City resident means a person who is a resident of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Council means the Council of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Dealer means a person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or exchanging vehicles who has an established place of business in this state. 
    Electric bicycle means a device with two or three wheels which has a saddle and fully operative pedals for human propulsion and also has an electric motor. For such a device to be considered an electric assisted bicycle, it shall meet the requirements of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, as set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571, et seq., and shall operate in such a manner that the electric motor disengages or ceases to function when the brakes are applied. The electric motor in an electric assisted bicycle shall: 
(1)  Have a power output of not more than 1,000 watts; 
(2)  Be incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than 20 miles per hour on level ground; and 
(3)  Be incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human power alone is used to propel the device at or more than 20 miles per hour. 
    Electric personal assistive mobility device or EPAMD means a self-balancing, two non-tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (one horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such propulsion system and ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds. 
    Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
    Low-speed vehicle or LSV means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards for Low-Speed Vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571.500 and in effect on January 1, 2001. 
    Mayor means the Mayor of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Moped means a motor driven cycle equipped with two or three wheels, with or without foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion, and an independent power source providing a maximum of two brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum piston or rotor displacement shall be 3.05 cubic inches (50 cubic centimeters) regardless of the number of chambers in such power source. The power source shall be capable of propelling the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour (48.28 kilometers per hour) on level road surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor, all-terrain vehicle, dirt bike, and moped. 
    Motor driven cycle means every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, every bicycle with a motor attached, and every moped. 
    Motorized cart means every motor vehicle having no less than three wheels and an unladen weight of 1,300 pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than 20 miles per hour. 
    Motorized play vehicle means a coaster, scooter, pocket bike, any other alternatively fueled device, or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled by a motor engine, gas or electric, and is not otherwise defined in this code as a "motorized cart", "low speed vehicle (LSV)", "motor vehicle", "motorcycle", "electric bicycle", motorized skateboard", "electric personal assistive mobility device" or "motorized wheelchair". 
    Motorized skateboard means a self propelled device, including Segways, that has a motor, gas or electric, a deck upon which a person may ride, not equipped with a seat, and at least two tandem wheels in contact with the ground and which is not otherwise defined in this Code as a "motor vehicle", "motorcycle", "motorized play vehicle", "motor scooter", "electric personal assistive mobility device" or "motorized wheelchair". 
    Motorized wheelchair means a self-propelled wheelchair that is used by a physically disabled person for mobility. 
    Non-resident means a person who is not a resident of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Pocket motorcycle or pocket bike means a two-wheeled vehicle other than a motor vehicle, bicycle with helper motor or a motorized scooter and which is propelled by an internal combustion engine, electric motor or other mechanical means, is capable of carrying a rider and/or passenger at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour, and is designed to replicate the general appearance of a motorcycle, regardless of the scale of the replication. 
    State means the State of Georgia or any other state in the United States of America. 
    Street means a public street within the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Sec. 38-7.2. Registration/transfer requirements. 
(a)  Motorized carts. It shall be the duty of every owner of an electric or gasoline-powered motorized cart that is operated over the recreation paths and streets and those areas accessible by the public to register the cart with the city with the city clerk within ten business days of the date of purchase or within 30 days of the effective date of this ordinance. Two numerical decals shall be issued upon registration; and a record of each motorized cart number, along with the name and address of the owner, shall be maintained by the city clerk's office. The decals must be affixed to the sides of the cart in such a manner as to be fully visible at all times. It shall be a violation of this ordinance and a misdemeanor for the owner of any such motorized cart to fail to have a current registration decal on any such motorized cart and subject the owner of such cart to the penalty for a misdemeanor as set forth in the city's Code of Ordinances or as defined as a misdemeanor pursuant to the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(1)  The registration fee for motorized carts owned by city residents shall be $12.00, and the registration shall be effective until the next regular registration period. Registration periods shall occur every five years, beginning January 1, 2013. 
(2)  Registration deadline. If the cart is not registered within ten business days of purchase or within 30 days after the effective date of this ordinance, a $20.00 penalty will be applied in addition to the registration fee; and the cart shall be considered an unregistered cart after the ten business-day period or the 30-day period after the effective date of this chapter which shall be August 27, 2012. 
(3)  Transfers. Upon occurrence of a sale of the cart to another person who shall operate the cart over the recreation paths and streets of the city, the registration must be transferred to the new owner within ten business days of the change in ownership at a cost of $5.00, and if the new owner is not a city resident, the nonresident registration/user fee for the balance of the year shall be due from the new owner. If the registration is not transferred within ten business days, a $20.00 penalty will be applied in addition to the $5.00 transfer charge; and the cart shall be considered an unregistered cart after the ten business-day period. Dealers acquiring a registered cart exclusively for resale (non-rental) shall not be required to pay the transfer charge, but shall notify the city of the transfer within ten business days of receiving the cart, and of the ultimate disposition of the cart within ten business days of sale. 
(b)  Gasoline carts. 
(1)  Every gasoline powered motorized cart shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
a.  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer. 
b.  The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened, including the consideration of missing or broken brackets or hangers. 
c.  The engine and powered mechanism of every cart shall be so equipped, adjusted and tuned as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any gasoline powered motorized cart to operate or permit the operation of such cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions, which is placed on a cart by the manufacturer, to render the device unserviceable by removal, alteration or which interferes with its operation. 
(c)  Rental carts. Cart dealers and distributors, as well as other commercial establishments, may rent carts to the public for use on the recreation paths and streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city. Each such establishment renting carts shall be required to register each such rental cart in accordance with subsections (a) and (b) of this ordinance and shall maintain a written record of each person who rents each cart. Renters shall be required to furnish positive identification, shall be provided a copy of this article to read, and must be at least 16 years of age. The registration fee and transfer fees and regulations shall be the same as those in subsections (a) and (b). 
(d)  Age, number of registrants limited. Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a motorized cart. Cart registration may be in one person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person. 
(e)  LSV. No LSV shall be operated on the paved recreational paths or streets located within the territorial boundaries of the city unless it is legally registered and insured according to laws of the state. 
    Sec. 38-7.3. Operation regulations. 
(a)  If such person has a valid state issued driver's license which is legal to allow a person to drive or operate a motor vehicle on the public highways within the State of Georgia, those persons who are 16 years of age and older may drive a motorized cart on recreation paths and/or streets designated for the use of motorized carts and those areas accessible by the public of the city unless such person has had his or her license to operate a motor vehicle suspended or revoked by the state which issued said license in which case such person shall not be permitted to operate a motorized cart on the recreation paths and/or streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city during the time of suspension or revocation. 
(b)  All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the recreation paths, streets and those areas accessible by the public in the city. Where cart paths exist, they must be used in preference to parallel city streets. 
(c)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(d)  Motorized carts may be operated only over those certain residential streets where the speed limit is 25 miles per hour or less only during daylight hours unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights and taillights. 
(e)  LSV. Only persons possessing a valid license issued by the state, other state of the United States of America which permits such person to operate a motor vehicle on the highways of the state may operate a LSV on the paved recreational public paths or public streets located within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(f)  No LSV shall be permitted to operate on, over, along, or across any street that has a posted speed limit in excess of 25 miles per hour. 
    Sec. 38-7.4. Recreation path users-Authorized. 
(a)  Authorized users of asphalt recreation paths are as follows: 
(1)  Pedestrians; 
(2)  Nonmotorized vehicles; 
(3)  Roller skates, roller blades and skateboarders (daylight only); 
(4)  Registered electric-powered golf carts; 
(5)  Registered gasoline-powered golf carts; 
(6)  Emergency and authorized maintenance vehicles; 
(7)  Bicycles, traditional and electric (as defined in section 38-7.1 of this ordinance); 
(8)  Electric and conventional wheelchairs; and 
(9)  Electric vehicles designed to carry one person at a speed not to exceed 20 miles per hour except as prohibited in this ordinance. 
(10)  LSV provided that the vehicle is operated only in a mode or other restriction which does not allow the vehicle to exceed 20 miles per hour. 
(b)  Authorized users of concrete sidewalks are as follows: 
(1)  Pedestrians. 
(2)  Nonmotorized vehicles. 
(3)  Roller skates, roller blades, and skateboards (daylight only). 
    Sec. 38-7.5. Same-Prohibited uses. 
    Prohibited uses of recreation paths and sidewalks are as follows: 
(1)  Automobiles and trucks (except authorized maintenance vehicles); 
(2)  Motorcycles; 
(3)  Street and trail motorized bikes or vehicles (not to include electric bicycles); 
(4)  Minibikes and mopeds; 
(5)  Horses; 
(6)  Go-carts; 
(7)  Un-registered electric-powered golf carts or motorized carts; 
(8)  Un-registered gasoline-powered golf carts or motorized carts; 
(9)  Electric or gasoline powered scooters; 
(10)  Motorized play vehicles; 
(11)  Un-registered LSMVs. 
    Sec. 38-7.6. Liability. 
    Each person using the recreation paths is liable for his own actions concerning the use of any motorized cart which is subject to this ordinance. Liability insurance coverage varies, and each person operating a motorized cart on the recreation paths and public streets and those areas accessible by the public should verify their coverage. 
    Sec. 38-7.7. Penalties. 
    Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be punished as a misdemeanor as provided by the laws of the State of Georgia and the ordinances of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, 8-27-2012) 
Sec. 38-8. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
    In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them, shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. oa-2018-05 , 6-4-2018) 
Chapter 40 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1-40-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2012-08, adopted Nov. 5, 2012, repealed Ch. 40, Art. II, Div. 1,  40-19-40-30, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Div. 1 pertained to similar provisions. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

Sec. 40-19. - Water and sewer rate schedule. 
(a)  Rate schedule. A water and sewer rate schedule for the city shall be adopted by resolution, which may be amended from time to time, and shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Rates for services. A service rate schedule for the following services shall be adopted by resolution, which may be amended from time to time, and shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk: 
(1)  Reconnect fee: This fee is incurred when an account has been cut off due to delinquency. There are three tiers for this rate: 
Tier 1) Paid before 4:45 p.m. on the day of disconnection or any business day thereafter (service restored same day of payment). 
Tier 2) Paid after 4:45 p.m. but before 5:00 p.m. on the day of disconnection or any business day thereafter (service restored same day of payment). 
Tier 3) Paid anytime on the day of disconnection or any business day thereafter, but service will not be restored until first business day following payment. 
(2)  Service call: This fee is incurred when service personnel are required to make more than two trips to an address to accomplish a task. 
(3)  Meter calibration fee: This fee is incurred when a customer requests the meter to be calibrated. Calibration requires dispatch of service personnel to the property, removal of the meter, delivery to public works for testing and calibration, and installation following the test. 
(4)  Return check fee: This fee is incurred when a check is returned for payment of any water bill or service. The customer will be provided two business days to pick up the check and pay with cash, credit card or money order for the amount of the bill and all associated service fees. If the bill and fees are not paid within two business days, the water service will be disconnected and the customer shall be assessed a disconnect fee. 
(5)  Credit card payment fee: This fee is incurred when a customer pays by credit card over the phone. 
(c)  Deposits for service. Each customer shall pay a deposit for services in an amount established by resolution, which may be amended from time to time, and shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(1)  Return of deposit. The deposit will be refunded via check, to the name of the account holder within 30 days of the account holder's request for disconnection of service. 
    The customer will be assessed another deposit at a new location in the city if the customer received a final notice on the previous account more than three times in 12 months. 
(2)  Transfer of deposit. The city will allow a deposit to be transferred from an existing account's service address to a new account's service address with written permission from the existing account holder to the name of the new account holder. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. OA-2012-09, 12-3-2012) 
Sec. 40-20. - Application for utility service. 
(a)  An individual consumer shall make application for water and sewer service at city hall and at the same time shall make a cash security deposit. Security deposit schedules are not printed herein, but are maintained by the city clerk in a separate schedule. 
    If service required is other than normal water and sewer usage, then the amount of deposit will be computed by the water department to approximate two months' usage for this type of service. 
(b)  Within newly constructed subdivisions, the developer/builder shall make a cash security deposit. Security deposit schedules are not printed herein, but are maintained by the city clerk in a separate schedule. 
The developer/builder shall instruct the purchasers of individual homes within the subdivision at the time of closing to contact the city hall to transfer the account to the purchaser's name. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 40-21. - Charges for initial water and sewer service. 
    Water and sewer service charges are maintained by the city clerk in a separate schedule. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 40-22. - Minimum charges. 
    The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not, under any condition, furnish water free of charge to anyone or any organization. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 40-23. - Responsibility and liability-City. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line of an applicant for service but only where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and is immediately adjacent to the property to be served. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 40-24. - Same-Consumer. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and/or employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use said water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection or other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal of service and discontinuance. 
(b)  Where meter or meter box is placed on the premises of consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer thereof, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(e)  In order to be received as consumers and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants, by becoming consumers of the city covenant, agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(f)  In multifamily housing, the city may require that a single master meter be installed and that the owner of the complex be held responsible for payments on the utilities. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 40-25. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water system and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement or right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 40-26. - Ending occupancy; notice; new occupant's responsibility. 
    Notice to discontinue service of city utility service(s) or to change occupancy must be made in writing. Account holder(s) are responsible for all services up to the time of disconnection. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 40-27. - Billing; collecting. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such days of each month as may be determined desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at the city hall. Failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure of water and sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Payments not received by the end of business on the due date, will be assessed a late fee on the first business day following the due date. The amount of the late fee is maintained by the city clerk in a separate schedule. 
(2)  If bill cannot be collected by the tenth day after the due date, then water and/or sewer service may be shut off from the user's property. 
(3)  If water service is shut off for nonpayment, an additional service charge will be added to the original amount of the bill for reestablishing water service. The amount of the charge to reestablish service is maintained by the city clerk in a separate schedule. 
(4)  Whenever water service has been discontinued or "cut-off" for nonpayment, it shall be unlawful for any person, except an authorized agent or employee of the city, to restore service. If the water service is cut back on by anyone other than an authorized agent or employee of the city after it has been cut off for nonpayment, additional fines including, but not limited to, the fines for the lock and tampering fee, will be added to all other charges and the late charges. The amounts for these fines are maintained by the city clerk in a separate schedule. 
(b)  Water and sewer service will not be reconnected until the customer's delinquent bill, including any penalties, disconnection charges, and/or fines have been paid in full. Bills shall be paid at city hall during normal business days and hours. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. OA-2012-09, 12-3-2012) 
Sec. 40-28. - Suspension of service for customers using city water and sewer service. 
(a)  When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the balance of the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded by the city to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(c)  The city reserves a right to discontinue its service without notice for the following reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
(3)  Emergency repairs. 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
(5)  Legal processes. 
(6)  Direction of public authorities. 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(d)  Damaging, injuring, interfering with or thief of services of city's utilities: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to: 
a.  Injure or destroy any meter, locking device, pipe, conduit, equipment or other apparatus belonging to and a part of the city utilities system; 
b.  Prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of the service supplied; 
c.  In any way to interfere with the proper action of the city; 
d.  Divert any service of the city; or 
e.  Otherwise use or cause to be used, without the consent of the city, any utility service provided by the city. 
(2)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section, and/or the person who with knowledge of such violation, receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of the improper action, shall be presumed to be responsible and prosecutable for the act of tampering and/or diversion and will be fined accordingly. (As set forth in Dallas, Georgia Code, Part I, Article IV, section 4-13.) 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 40-29. - Suspension of county water service for customers using city sanitary sewer and/or city garbage service. 
(a)  Water disconnection by the county public works department, water division, for customers using city sanitary sewer and/or garbage service. 
(1)  The city may request that the county discontinue/disconnect water service to those residents who are customers of the county water system and who are also customers of the city sanitary sewer system and/or the city garbage service, but are delinquent in their payment of those fees associated with the city sanitary sewer system and/or city garbage service. 
(2)  The county shall accommodate the request by the city to discontinue/disconnect the county-provided water for customer's nonpayment of city-provided sanitary sewer service and/or garbage service under the following conditions: 
a.  Upon receipt of the city's official notification to the county of nonpayment of city-provided sanitary sewer service and/or garbage service fees, disconnection of water service for a resident that is a county water system customer will be performed by the county public works department, water, sewer and environmental division; 
b.  Once disconnection of county water service has occurred, the customer also becomes responsible for payment of all county fees associated with reestablishing water service with the county; and, if the county determines applicable, of any additional fees or fines as set forth by the county for theft of services (rates of such fees and/or fines are set by the county); 
c.  When the city has received payment of city past due amounts and fees associated with past due accounts for city sanitary sewer service and/or garbage services, and payment for any county fees as described in this subsection (2)b., the city will provide the county public works department, water, sewer and environmental division with proof of such payment within one business day of the payment to allow the county to reconnect county water service to the county water customer; 
d.  After March 25, 2000, all new county water customers who will receive sanitary sewer service and/or garbage service from the city will be contracted as water customers with the county under an new water service agreement which will specifically provide that water service may be disconnected/discontinued for failure to pay sanitary sewer and/or garbage service fees to the city; 
e.  All new city sanitary sewer service and/or garbage service customers who are county water service customers, will be contracted under a new city form that will incorporate the agreement items set forth in this subsection (a), so as to inform the customers that their county water service may be disconnected/discontinued for nonpayment of: 
1.  City sanitary sewer service; and/or 
2.  Garbage service fees. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 40-30. - Delinquent account payment schedule. 
    The city clerk or his representative, shall be authorized to establish a payment schedule for collections of utility delinquent accounts with any meter account that can demonstrate a justifiable need. This payment schedule may in no way exceed 18 equal payments and the account must be kept current. The payment schedule shall be approved by the city manager and shall be signed by the city clerk or his/her representative and the delinquent meter account holder. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 40-31. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before his bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer. The fee for this service is maintained by the city clerk in a separate schedule; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was over read, no charge will be made. 
(c)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(d)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and from other proper data. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 40-32. - Adjustments due to leak. 
(a)  Any customer requesting adjusted rate credit for leak conditions shall show, to the satisfaction of the city clerk or his representative, that leak has been repaired. Evidence of repair may include, but is not limited to, receipt of plumber for repair, affidavit of owner repair accompanied by receipt of materials; and 
(b)  Upon showing of repair, adjusted rate credit will be applied to sewer portion of bills during leak period; however, adjustment period shall not exceed two months; and 
(c)  The adjusted rate credit will be calculated as follows: 
(1)  The amount of gallons used for the previous six months will be averaged; and 
(2)  This averaged usage amount will be deducted from the sewage charges of two billing cycles only. 
(d)  The leak adjustment provided for in this section may only be issued once per customer within any 12-month period; and 
(e)  No adjustments will be made to leaks involved with pool connections. 
(f)  Leak repair must have been made within two weeks of either the city notifying the consumer, or the consumer notifying the city that a leak was discovered. 
(1)  Failure to repair leak within the two-week time period, will forfeit any adjustments on account. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-08, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. OA-2014-07, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. oa-2018-08 , 10-1-2018) 
Secs. 40-33-40-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 40-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under EPA approved laboratory procedure in five days at 20 [degrees] Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Customer means every person who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the sewer system of the city and in obtaining, having or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through said system. The term "customer" includes the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
    Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
    Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
    Health officer means the city manager, the county sanitarian, the county health department and their duly appointed assistants. 
    Industrial waste means the wastewater from industrial processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
    Infiltration/inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes, or other openings. 
    Municipality means the governmental body having jurisdiction over the maintenance and operations of the water and sanitary sewer systems within the city and adjacent areas of the county. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Normal wastewater means wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which: 
(1)  The average concentration is not more than the following of: 
a.  Total suspended solids: 350 milligrams per liter (mg/l); 
b.  BOD5: 300 mg/l; 
c.  Total phosphorous: 15 mg/l; 
d.  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen: 20 mg/l; and 
(2)  The total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
    Pit privy means a shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a flytight slab on which is securely located a flytight riser covered with hinged flytight seat and lid. 
    Private decentralized wastewater system means any privately owned wastewater collection, treatment or disposal system serving more than one residential lot or business, or which has a daily flow in excess of 2,000 gallons per day, or which transfers flows between more than one parcel or tract of land. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface water, that are not intentionally admitted. 
    Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed. 
    Sewage means the spent water of a community. The equivalent term is wastewater. See Wastewater. 
    Sewage works (sewerage) means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performances of the wastewater facilities. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source and excluding sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Superintendent means the city utilities superintendent or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtration as approved by the EPA and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
    Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
    Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either, continuously or intermittently. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.1 ; Ord. No. OA-2015-07, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 40-48. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations of this division shall be a misdemeanor punishable under the laws of the state. Each day of continuing violation shall be considered a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of violation. 
(b)  In the event of violation of this division, the health officer or authorized employees may verbally instruct the owner as to the necessary corrective action. If the owner fails to carry out verbal instructions in a timely manner or if a serious violation or hazard to public health exists, the health officer or the city may issue to the owner a written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective action, and the time limit for completing the corrective action. The record of the mailing of said notice or order shall be prima facie evidence thereof and failure of said owner or owners to receive same shall in no way affect the validity of any proceedings conducted pursuant to this division. 
(c)  Failure to comply with any written order duly issued by the health officer or the city pursuant to this division will constitute a separate misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided by the laws of the state; provided further, that compliance with this division is required, notwithstanding the fact that a written order might have been issued. 
(d)  The violation of any provisions of this division, as now existing or as may be hereafter amended, may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Any public nuisance which is injurious to the public health, safety, or comfort may be abated by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the court of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained not withstanding the fact that such violation also constitutes a crime and not withstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city. 
(e)  Upon the receipt of a notice of a violation of this division and/or an order of the city requiring an act or thing to be done or to cease, the owners of any premises then in question may, in writing, demand a hearing before the city to present the evidence challenging the validity of the city's order. The owner may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. Said demand must be filed with the clerk of the city and be made within five days from the receipt of the order being challenged. Upon receipt of a demand for a hearing the city will set a date, time, and place for said hearing to be not less than 21 days from the date of filing of said demand. The hearing as provided herein shall apply to any customer's complaint, dispute, or challenge of the city's rules, regulations, resolutions, ordinances, or policies. Upon customer's written complaint filed with the clerk, the city shall set a hearing as provided herein or at a time agreed upon by the parties. 
(f)  Evidence before the city of any hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (e) of this section shall be admitted in accordance with the rules of evidence of the superior courts of the state; provided, however, the city may take official notice of any order, rule, regulation, or any other document, record, or entry contained in its official record or minutes for evidential purposes. 
(g)  For the purposes of this division, the decisions of the city will prevail in any instance in which there is a conflict between the health officer on any issue of sanitation, or the lack of it, and its effect on human health or well-being. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.9) 
Sec. 40-49. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  All premises shall be provided, by the owner thereof, with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this division. 
(d)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(e)  The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city's jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities herein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 30 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.2) 
Sec. 40-50. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 40-49, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with: 
(1)  The provisions of the city; 
(2)  The county health department; and 
(3)  The state department of human resources. 
(b)  Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the county health department. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(c)  No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tank unless he shall hold a valid permit for such work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of such a permit pending the inspection and approval by the health officer of the site and location of the proposed work. Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered, or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of human resources of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than one-half acre. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved, nor in any place where the health officer deems the use of same to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(f)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days after notice and at the property owner's expense. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(g)  The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(h)  No subsurface disposal facilities shall be installed in any place where the health officer deems the use of such facilities to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(i)  Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer where available or to a septic tank. Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(j)  No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved; 
(2)  In areas where the health officer deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; 
(3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or 
(4)  Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standards of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(k)  Discharge of septic tanks in sewer system. 
(1)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge, into any manhole, catchbasin or other opening, into the city sewer system, the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewage, or other similar matter or material, except as provided in section 40-50. 
(2)  Permits. The superintendent is hereby authorized to grant permits to discharge the contents of septic tanks at locations specified by the superintendent and under his supervision. Such permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the superintendent, continued dumping of such matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment processes. 
(3)  Charges. A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping the contents of septic tanks, as provided in separate rules. A record shall be kept of such dumpings and statements rendered at the first of each month, the amount of such statements, shall be payable within ten days after rendition. Failure to pay the amounts due within such ten-day period shall be cause for revoking the permit. 
(l)  Any premises that has a septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system, located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner, shall be corrected within 30 days from the receipt of written notification from the health officer that said system is not functioning in a sanitary manner, and that said system is ordered to be corrected. 
(m)  Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. 
(n)  No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(o)  Private decentralized wastewater systems are prohibited in the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.3 ; Ord. No. OA-2015-07, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 40-51. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as specified elsewhere shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in construction shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the county. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city's supervision: 
(1)  The building sewer shall be cast-iron soil pipe, ASTM A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe, ASTM D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of water service pipe shall be constructed of cast-iron, soil pipe or ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints. The type pipes stated in this subsection may also be required by the superintendent where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast-iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
(2)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) shall be followed. 
(3)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(4)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(5)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Push-on joints for cast-iron soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendation. PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber O-ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including oils), and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. Installation of gasket shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacture's instructions using all the necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the superintendent. 
(6)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the Y-branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located Y-branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45-degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be use for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(i)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(j)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(k)  The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(l)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(m)  If any house sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the house sewer; 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property; 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.4) 
Sec. 40-52. - Restricted use of the public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into a storm sewer system. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(d)  The substances, materials, waters, or waste described in this subsection shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or wastewater which will elevate the temperature of the influent to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) to 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) or higher. 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of oils, fat grease, or wax, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius) and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)  All industrial discharges to the city sewer system must comply with the federal industrial pretreatment standards developed by the state environmental protection division. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing taste or odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the city. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as that term is defined in section 40-47. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amendable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes which by interaction with other water or wastes in public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, from solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(11)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Any unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
b.  Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
c.  Unusual BOD (above 300 mg/l), chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine demand in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
(e)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (d) of this section and which, in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require surcharge payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(f)  When required by city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. This requirement will be on a case-by-case basis. 
(g)  The industrial users may be required to provide information needed to determine compliance with this division. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters; 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the public sewer. 
(h)  No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(i)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, March 12, 2007, the Federal Register. Sampling methods and location times are subject to approval by the city. 
(j)  Pretreatment of wastes. Persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewerage system may be required to pretreat such wastes. Plans for all pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the superintendent or the state environmental protection division prior to construction. At the time written plans are submitted for approval, written maintenance plans shall also be submitted and approved by the superintendent. The facilities shall be allowed to operate only as long as they are maintained in accordance with the approved maintenance plans. Pretreatment requirements shall be determined on a case-by-case basis and shall include the following facilities as a minimum: 
(1)  Neutralization. If plans are submitted for the neutralization of strong acid or alkaline wastes, the plans shall include the necessary instrumentation and controls to ensure compliance with the above regulations at all times. 
(2)  Equalization. Holding tanks or equalization basins shall be required ahead of the receiving manhole of the city sewerage system when deemed necessary by the superintendent to prevent peak flows that exceed the capacity of the system or that result in operational problems. 
(3)  All pretreatment facilities shall be operated and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(k)  Waiver of requirements. There shall be no provision for the granting of variances for discharge of incompatible wastes. If a user begins to violate any of the provision of this section, it shall be his responsibility to apply to the superintendent who can issue a temporary permit along with a compliance schedule for planning and construction of necessary treatment or pretreatment works. Each case will be carefully evaluated with respect to its effect on the wastewater treatment system and the environment prior to issuance of a temporary schedule. Any dilution of the wastewater by the user for the purpose of decreasing the concentrations of toxic materials shall be considered as a violation of this division. 
(l)  Discontinuance of service for failure to comply. Failure to comply with the provisions of this division shall be cause for the discontinuance of sewer or water service to the offending person. The procedure shall be as follows: A written notice, signed by the superintendent, shall be delivered personally to the person then responsible for the offending use, outlining the conditions of the wastes which violate the city ordinances. In the event that the person in charge will not accept the notice, it shall be conveyed by registered mail to the responsible person. The person notified shall have 24 hours from the time of receipt of the notice, either personally delivered or received by registered mail, to correct the offending conditions. If correction is not made or a request for extension is not received by the city within 24 hours, it shall be mandatory that water or sewer service shall be discontinued to the offending person without further notice. If a request for an extension of time is received by the city within 24 hours of the notice set forth in this subsection and if circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the superintendent, the best interest of the city would be served by extending the time for correction of the offending condition, then he may grant an extension of time up to a maximum limit of 30 days. 
(m)  Responsibilities of the person discharging waste. It shall be the responsibility of the person discharging industrial waste into the city sewerage system to: 
(1)  Build a control structure in the discharge line from his premises, immediately prior to the entrance of the discharge line into the city sewerage system, suitable for the sampling and measuring of wastes. Plans for this structure must be approved by the city. This requirement may be waived if deemed unnecessary by the city. In the event that no special manhole is required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(2)  Contact the superintendent prior to operation changes which will materially alter the characteristics of the waste from the last prior sampling. 
(3)  Make timely, periodic payments to the city of surcharges for excessive loadings as detailed in the city user charge system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.5) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, O.C.G.A.  12-8-2. 
Sec. 40-53. - Malicious damage. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.6) 
Sec. 40-54. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the public sewerage system in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to herein, the authorized employees or agents of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by said employees or agents and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required by this division. 
(c)  Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair; and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.7) 
Sec. 40-55. - Compliance with regulatory requirements. 
    The provisions of this division shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. Specific user charge and industrial cost recovery requirements, promulgated pursuant to public law, shall be considered as a part of this division upon official adoption. All nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in title 40 of Federal Regulations, part 403 (40 CFR 403). 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.8) 
Sec. 40-56. - Service charges. 
    It is hereby determined necessary to fix and collect sewer service charges from customers. Such charges shall be set by resolution of mayor and council and shall be kept and maintained separately by the clerk, and the revenues received shall be used for operation, maintenance, debt retirement, and other authorized expenses. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.10) 
Sec. 40-57. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the public sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal treatment; or 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(b)  Notification processes for discontinuance of service are presented in section 40-52(l). 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.11) 
Sec. 40-58. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
    In the event a wastewater discharge is made to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) under the jurisdiction of an approved sewer use ordinance for another governing body, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.12) 
Sec. 40-59. - Rules governing discharge from septic tank pump trucks. 
    Discharge of sewage, waste, matter, and other waste material into the sewer system of the city from septic tank pump trucks or similar tank pump trucks used for the removal of waste matter and sewage from holding tanks and similar devices, and other discharges which are not through an existing sewer connection, shall be permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Discharges, where made. All discharges must be made at water pollution control plant. The superintendent of the wastewater pollution control plant may permit discharges into a sewer manhole if he, in his sole discretion, taking into consideration the size and content of the proposed discharge, considers said discharge to be such as will not endanger the public health of the citizens of the city or likely to damage the sewage system of the city. Such permission must be granted in writing by the superintendent and shall be valid for no more than 30 days. 
(2)  Discharges, amount and origin. The city wastewater facilities shall only accept sewage and other waste materials by septic tank pump trucks that are removed from residential, commercial or industrial establishments which are located within the county and such sewage and/or other waste materials shall be limited to an amount of 2,000 gallons that may be discharged at any one time. 
(3)  Registration. All septic tank pump trucks or vehicles used in discharge operations must be duly licensed by the county health department and registered with the city prior to making a discharge into the city sewage system. 
a.  To register a vehicle used in discharge operations, the clerk of the city must be furnished with the make, model, serial number, and state license plate number of said vehicle. Upon receiving said information, it shall be the duty of the clerk of the city to register said vehicle with the city and issue a certificate stating that said vehicle has been so registered. Said registration shall be accomplished once each year for each vehicle. The registration certificate issued by the clerk of the city shall be kept with said vehicle at all times, and shall be presented to the superintendent of the city water pollution control plant upon request. 
b.  Once each year and prior to making a discharge into the sewer system of the city, each user must register with the clerk of the city by furnishing the clerk the following information: name, address, telephone number, number of vehicles to be engaged in discharge operation, and approximate number of discharge operations planned. Upon registration by the user, the city will select the payment method to be followed and advise the user who shall agree in writing to the method selected. The payment method selected and the user's consent thereto shall appear on the registration form, and the user shall be furnished a conformed copy thereof. 
(4)  Discharge fee; payment. There is hereby imposed a discharge fee of $0.10 per gallon with a maximum of 2,000 gallons. Collections shall be made by either of the two methods listed in this subsection. The selection of the collection method shall be solely at the city's option. 
a.  Method 1. Payment in advance of each discharge to the city clerk. Upon payment, the city clerk will issue a receipt which shall be shown to the superintendent of the wastewater pollution control plant or the operator in charge prior to the proposed discharge. 
b.  Method 2. Each user registered with the city hereunder shall deposit with the city the sum of $150.00 at the time of registration. A monthly statement will be mailed by the city for all discharges made by a said user during the previous month which shall be payable within ten days after the date of the statement. In the event the statement is not paid at the end of said ten-day period, the deposit made at the time of the initial registration shall be applied toward the payment thereof. If the application of the deposit does not satisfy the outstanding charges, or should the deposit with the city be less than $150.00, the certificate of registration of said user shall stand revoked instantly, and no further discharge into the sewage system of the city shall be permitted by said user until said charges shall be paid in full. 
(5)  Discharge hours. All discharges shall take place between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. from Monday through Friday. It shall be unlawful to make discharges between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. during weekdays and or any time between 4:00 p.m. on Friday to 9:00 a.m. on Monday. 
(6)  Discharges, authority to reject. 
a.  The superintendent of the wastewater pollution control plant is hereby authorized to refuse to allow any discharge into the sewage system of the city which he feels, in his sole discretion, might impair the proper operation of the sewage disposal system or be injurious to health of the citizens of the city. Prior to each discharge operation, the superintendent of the wastewater pollution control plant will be told by the person seeking to make the discharge the contents of said discharge, and based upon said information and the considerations set out herein, the superintendent shall decide if the discharge into the sewage system shall be made. A sample of each discharge will be taken and held to enable the superintendent to test for improper disclosure of the contents of each discharge. 
b.  It shall be unlawful to knowingly communicate false information to the city concerning the nature and contents of a discharge into the sewage system of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  4-512.13; Ord. No. 06-13, 4-3-2006) 
Secs. 40-60-40-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FATS, OILS AND GREASE REGULATIONS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 40-77. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to water quality shall be as defined in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to construction shall be as defined in this Code and in the latest adopted applicable editions of the state codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to state law. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    25 percent rule means the requirement for FOG interceptors to be maintained such that the combined FOG solids accumulation does not exceed 25 percent of the design hydraulic capacity of the FOG interceptor. 
    Architectural or historical restrictions means a building or structure in the city that is 100 years or older and has special historical or esthetic interest or value. 
    Backflow means a reversal of normal flow in a system caused by a negative pressure (vacuum or partial vacuum) in the supply piping or other condition that reverses the normal direction of flow. 
    Baffle means a retention wall three-quarters of the length of the chamber nearer to the outlet. 
    Best management practices means a schedule of activities, a prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of fats, oils, and greases into the sewer system. These practices may vary by site, but produce the same reductions in fats, oils, and greases in the sewer system. 
    Change in operations means any change in the ownership, food types, or operational procedures of a food service establishment. 
    City means the city and/or the mayor and council of the city. 
    Compliance inspector means a person authorized by the city to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and or disposal facilities. 
    Extreme economic hardship means a cost to comply with the requirements of this division that exceeds $50,000.00. 
    Fat, oil and grease (FOG) means any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the food preparation process, that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies or may solidify with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
    Fixtures means a pot sink, prerinse sink, vegetable sink, meat sink, mop sink, soup kettles, wok stations, floor drains, automatic hood wash units, garbage disposals, trash compactors, dishwashers, and any other similarly functioning plumbing fixtures. 
    Flow means volume of wastewater moving in a certain direction. 
    Flow control device means a mechanism installed to control flow of hydraulic levels of FOG into an interceptor. 
    FOG control program means a program to reduce and/or control the discharge of fats, oils, and grease into the sewer system by educating and regulating food service establishments located in the city or establishments located outside the city but which discharge FOG. 
    FOG interceptor means a multi-compartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located underground between a food service establishment and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices must be cleaned, maintained, and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on regular intervals to be effective. 
    FOG manifest means a document that the state permitted transporter must provide to the FOG generator as proof of services rendered. 
    FOG wastewater discharge permit means a permit issued by the city authorizing the food service establishment or generator to discharge wastewater into the city's facilities or into the sewer system. 
    Food service establishment (FSE) means any person who prepares and/or packages food or beverage for sale or consumption, on or off site, with the exception of private residences so long as the private residence is not used to prepare or package food or beverage for sale. The term "food service establishment" includes, but is not limited to, food courts, food manufacturers, food packagers, restaurants, catering services, bar/tavern, cafeterias, soda fountains, institutions both public and private, mobile food vehicles (coach), wing trailers, diners, grocery stores, bakeries, coffee shops, ice cream shops, lounges, hospitals, hotels, nursing homes, churches, schools, day care center, and all other food service establishments not listed above either fixed or mobile as are or may hereafter be recognized by the health department and/or the state department of agriculture. 
    Fresh air system fixtures means a system that provides free circulation of air, which will prevent contamination from back flow or back siphonage, e.g., compartment sinks, dishwashers, floor drains, meat sinks, vegetable sinks, wok stations, mop sinks, etc. 
    Generator means any person including those outside the jurisdictional limits of the city who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into sewers within the city's boundaries. 
    Georgia state permitted transporter means a transporter as that term is defined by O.C.G.A.  12-15-20 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
    Grease trap means an inside mechanism no less than 100 pounds and no more than 300 pounds in size, with baffle and flow control installed before the master trap. 
    Hot flushing means a situation prohibited in the city that occurs when the FOG interceptor is too close to a hot water using device so the water does not cool sufficiently in the interceptor to allow the FOG to coagulate and float to the top, and FOG is instead carried out to the sewer system. 
    Limited food preparation establishment. 
(1)  The term "limited food preparation establishment" means an establishment that is engaged only in reheating or serving of ready to eat food products and as a result, discharges wastewater containing less than 100 mg/l of FOG per operating business day. 
(2)  The term "limited food preparation establishment" does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food. 
    New construction means any structure, planned or under construction, where a sewer connection permit is required by law or regulation but has not been issued by the city. 
    Nonhazardous manifest means a receipt that is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing of FOG, liquids or other wastes as required by the city. 
    Plumbing drainage institute rating means interceptors that are tested, rated, and certified in conformance with Standard Plumbing Drainage Institute and by the Plumbing and Drainage Institute. 
    Public works superintendent means the public works superintendent of the city public works department. 
    Regulatory agencies means those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the city including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region IV, Georgia and Washington, DC (EPA); 
(2)  The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR); 
(3)  The Georgia Division of Public Health; 
(4)  The Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD); or 
(5)  Any regulatory agency or body as may be established by federal, state, or local law. 
    Remodeling or remodeled means a physical change or operational change in a structure that requires an issuance of or revision to a business license or a building permit. 
    Septic tank means a hollow chambered tank without a baffle, T's, and flow control to restrict FOG from entering the city's sewer system. 
    Shovel inspection means an inspection performed by a FOG compliance inspector who uses a shovel to determine the condition of the FOG interceptor. 
    Sludge means any solid, semi-solid or liquid decant, subnate or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility. 
    Sludge judge inspection means a test in which the FOG compliance inspector uses an instrument, usually a clear hollow plastic tube, to pull and measure a core sample from the FOG interceptor to determine its condition. 
    Standard Plumbing Drainage Institute (PDI-G101) means a comprehensive engineering and testing program developed to establish flow rates and FOG holding capacity for uniform rating of FOG interceptors. 
    Total solids means the sum of suspended and dissolved solids within a sample. 
    Visual inspection means an in-person observation by a compliance inspector to determine if a shovel inspection and/or a sludge judge inspection is necessary to determine the condition of the FOG interceptor. 
    Waste means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, or gaseous, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature intended for disposal. 
    Wastewater constituents and characteristics means the individual chemical, physical, and/or bacteriological parameters, including volume and flow rate, and such other parameters, that serve to define, classify, or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater. 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.5(f)), 9-8-2008; Ord. of 10-6-2008,  I(4-512.5(f))) 
Sec. 40-78. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by this division, upon citation and conviction of the violation in the city municipal court, shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with section 40-128. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction, of any violation of this division, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(c)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of this division, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $1,000.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(d)  The penalties provided in this section are not cumulative and shall not prohibit the city from pursuing any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by this Code, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.51), 9-8-2008; Ord. of 10-6-2008,  I(4-512.51)) 
Sec. 40-79. - Purpose, scope, and policy. 
(a)  This division is designed to facilitate the maximum beneficial public use of the city's sewer system while preventing blockages and overflows of the sewer system resulting from discharges of FOG into the city's sewer system and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for all facilities emitting FOG. 
(b)  By enactment of the regulations from which this division is derived, the city intends to exercise its authority over sizing, location, maintenance, and material of grease traps and/or interceptors located within the city and/or discharge into the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  The provisions of this division shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all wastewater or waste containing FOG discharged into the city's sewer system and/or private wastewater systems, including septic tanks. 
(d)  This division establishes quantity and quality standards on all wastewater and/or waste discharges containing FOG; which may alone or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the sewer system causing or potentially causing or contributing to the occurrence of sanitary sewer overflows and blockages. 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.52), 9-8-2008; Ord. of 10-6-2008,  I(4-512.52)) 
Sec. 40-80. - Transporters of nonhazardous commercial waste. 
    O.C.G.A.  12-15-20 et seq., sets forth a permitting scheme for transporters of commercial waste and provides a regulatory method for the clean and sanitary removal of commercial waste. O.C.G.A.  12-15-23 specifically authorizes local governments to enforce compliance with the provisions of the state law described in this section. O.C.G.A.  12-15-20 et seq., as currently enacted and as may hereinafter be amended, is therefor adopted by reference as if set out fully in this section. 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.53), 9-8-2008; Ord. of 10-6-2008,  I(4-512.53)) 
Sec. 40-81. - Best management practices. 
(a)  All persons disposing of FOG shall be required to properly dispose of FOG using all of the following best management practices: 
(1)  Dispose of FOG in covered collection containers; 
(2)  Place food scraps from dishes into trashcans and garbage bags and dispose of properly; 
(3)  Avoid disposing of food scraps in garbage disposers to help maintain interceptor volume; 
(4)  Allow FOG to cool first before it is skimmed, scraped, or wiped off of all preparation and servicing surfaces; 
(5)  Prewash dishes and pans with cold water before putting them in the dishwasher; 
(6)  Cover the kitchen sink drain with screening and empty debris into the garbage as needed; 
(7)  Cover the floor drain with a fine screen and empty into the garbage can as needed; and 
(8)  Recycle used fryer oil. 
(b)  All persons disposing of FOG shall not use any of the following practices when disposing of FOG: 
(1)  Pouring FOG down the drain; 
(2)  Putting food scraps down the drain; or 
(3)  Running hot water over dishes, pans, fryers, woks, and griddles to rinse FOG down the drain (also known as hot flush). 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.54), 9-8-2008; Ord. of 10-6-2008,  I(4-512.54)) 
Sec. 40-82. - Requirements for interceptor and specific plumbing connections. 
(a)  All food service establishments shall only introduce pretreated wastewater acceptable to the city, under the requirements and standards established herein before discharging, directly or indirectly, into the city sewer system. 
(b)  No more than 100 mg/l of FOG shall be discharged per operating business day. The FOG generator shall bear all of the expense of proving compliance with the 100 mg/l threshold. 
(c)  Any food service establishment required to provide FOG pretreatment shall install, operate, and maintain an appropriately designed and adequately sized FOG interceptor that has been approved by the public works superintendent or designee. 
(d)  The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136 (Code of Federal Regulations). 
(e)  FOG interceptors shall be connected to the food service establishment's lateral sewer line after all fixtures which may introduce FOG have been connected and shall have fresh air connected, as defined in this division. Fresh air fixtures include but are not limited to sinks, dishwashers, garbage disposals, automatic hood wash units, floor drains in food preparation and storage areas, and any other fixtures which have a potential to introduce FOG. Wastewater from sanitary sewer fixtures and other similar fixtures shall not be introduced into the FOG interceptor. 
(f)  FOG interceptors shall not be connected to septic tanks. 
(g)  All food service establishments that have dumpster pad/trash compactor drains on site and are connected to the sewer system shall have a separate interceptor (no less than 1,500 gallons in size) installed and functioning at all times. The sloping area to the outside drain and the drain shall be covered either by the dumpster/compactor or a canopy to prevent inflow and infiltration of rainwater. 
(h)  Any drains that lead to the sewer system including, but not limited to, trench drains, enclosed dock drains, carwash drains, elevator drains, and other similar types of drains shall have an oil water debris interceptor of no less than 1,500 gallons and no more than 3,000 gallons in capacity. 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.55), 9-8-2008; Ord. of 10-6-2008,  I(4-512.55)) 
Sec. 40-83. - FOG interceptor physical specifications/requirements. 
(a)  All interior FOG interceptors shall: 
(1)  Be a minimum of 100 pounds in capacity as defined by the Plumbing Drainage Institute; 
(2)  Be made of corrosion-resistant coated metal; 
(3)  Be properly sized based on the results of an inspection and FOG evaluation; 
(4)  Contain properly installed and functioning baffle walls and other flow control devices necessary to achieve the appropriate retention time; 
(5)  Have at least a 30-minute interior retention time before gray water is discharged into the sewer system; 
(6)  Tie all of the fresh air fixtures to the FOG interceptor; 
(7)  Have 15-foot distance between the FOG interceptor and the last fresh air fixture and have a proper flow control device; 
(8)  Have a temperature of discharge entering the interior FOG interceptor that does not exceed 140 degrees Fahrenheit; and 
(9)  Be Plumbing Drainage Institute rated, be accessible for inspection, and be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications by a licensed plumber and not a representative and/or an apprentice of the licensed plumber. 
(b)  All exterior FOG interceptors shall: 
(1)  Be a minimum of 1,500 gallons in capacity; 
(2)  Be properly sized based on the results of an inspection and FOG evaluation; 
(3)  Be constructed of reinforced materials suitable for loadbearing and watertight to prevent inflow and infiltration; 
(4)  Be precast with a minimum of 3,000 psi concrete pursuant to applicable American Society for Testing and Materials standards with four to seven percent air entrapment; 
(5)  Have an invert elevation of the inlet between three inches to six inches above the invert elevation of the outlet; 
(6)  Contain a properly installed and functioning baffle wall and other flow control devices necessary to achieve an adequate time for FOG to properly separate but not to exceed 24 hours; 
(7)  Contain inlet and outlet-Ts made of schedule 40 PVC piping and at a 90-degree angle with a minimum diameter of the inlet and outlet piping to be six inches; 
(8)  Include the outlet-T six inches from the manhole cover; 
(9)  Include T-piping of the inlet and outlet that is within 18 inches of the bottom and at least five inches above the static liquid level of the tank; 
(10)  Have the FOG interceptor set level on a consolidated, stable base so that no settling or tipping of the FOG interceptor can occur; 
(11)  Connect all of the fresh air fixtures to the FOG interceptor; 
(12)  Have the outlet discharge line from the FOG interceptor directly connected to a sewer line tapped into the collection main; 
(13)  Have solid manhole covers to prevent inflow and infiltration; 
(14)  Have two or more manholes for entry to each chamber of hydraulic liquid mass; 
(15)  Be accessible for inspections and have no permanent or temporary structure or container placed directly over the FOG interceptor or installed in areas subject to traffic; and 
(16)  Be installed by a licensed plumber. 
(c)  The contents of any fryer oil containers shall not be mixed with any other FOG interceptor waste or any other nontoxic or toxic substances. 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.56), 9-8-2008; Ord. of 10-6-2008,  I(4-512.56)) 
Sec. 40-84. - Maintenance requirements for new and existing food service establishments. 
(a)  Depth requirement. The depth of FOG (floating and settled) in the FOG interceptor shall not be equal to or greater than 25 percent of the total operating depth of the interceptor. 
(b)  General requirements for FOG interceptors. In order to maintain FOG interceptors, all food service establishments shall remove the sludge, floating materials, solids, and wastewater, and shall scrape all excessive solids from the walls, floor, baffles, and all pipe work and shall pump interior and exterior FOG interceptors dry as set forth in this division and as required by the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(1)  FOG interceptors shall be kept free from any inflow/infiltration such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., as such inflow reduces the effectiveness of the FOG interceptor; thereby increasing the need for more frequent cleaning; 
(2)  To ensure that the FOG interceptor can be maintained properly, the FOG interceptor needs to be free from any obstruction that would hinder the maintenance, function, and inspection of the interceptor; 
(3)  A state permitted transporter shall perform all maintenance of FOG interceptors. All state permitted transporters working in the city shall have an active state waste transporter's permit and the city transporters permit in the manner and form set forth by O.C.G.A.  512-15-20 et seq. Transporters working in the city are required to leave a copy of a nonhazardous waste manifest with the food service establishment. Maintenance schedules may vary based on individual circumstances to protect the sewer system; 
(4)  The FOG compliance inspector has the authority to change the FOG interceptors' cleaning cycles for any FOG generator at any time; 
(5)  The discharge or introduction of any additives to the sewer system is unlawful and prohibited, such as the direct introduction of additives into the biological agents, including enzymes, bacteria, and/or degreasing agents; 
(6)  The FOG generator shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the FOG interceptor waste by a state permitted waste transporter and maintenance of records of disposal as specified in this section. All waste removed from each FOG interceptor must be disposed of at an appropriate disposal facility designed to receive such waste; 
(7)  No FOG interceptor pumpage shall be discharged to the sewer system as otherwise prohibited in this division; 
(8)  Every FOG interceptor shall be required to have a state nonhazardous waste manifest. The state nonhazardous waste manifest must be complete with all information required by this division and state law; and 
(9)  Mechanical FOG interceptors are prohibited in the city. 
(c)  Exterior FOG interceptors. Maintenance of exterior FOG interceptors shall be performed at least once every 90 days. Skimming, decanting, and/or any reintroduction of water into exterior FOG interceptors shall not be allowed under any conditions. 
(d)  Interior FOG interceptors. Interior FOG interceptors maintenance shall be performed once every 30 days, and all of the fresh air and/or safe way plumbing fixtures shall be connected. In-house cleaning of interior FOG interceptors is prohibited. To ensure proper FOG interceptor maintenance, interior FOG interceptors shall be free from any obstruction that would hinder the maintenance of the interceptor. Interior FOG interceptors shall be easily accessible with a minimum clearance of 36 inches. 
(e)  Interior and exterior FOG interceptor records. All food service establishments shall maintain records of the date and time of all cleaning and maintenance. Every FOG interceptor manifest shall be placed in a logbook, folder or three-ring binder notebook. This book shall be made available on demand by the FOG compliance inspector during inspection. All records of at least three years shall be kept onsite and available. These records shall include: 
(1)  A logbook of FOG interceptor and/or FOG control device cleaning and maintenance; 
(2)  A record of best management practices being implemented, including employee training; 
(3)  Copies of records and manifests of waste transporting interceptor contents; 
(4)  Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the lateral sewer line; and 
(5)  Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the FOG interceptors. 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.57), 9-8-2008; Ord. of 10-6-2008,  I(4-512.57)) 
Sec. 40-85. - New and existing facilities; grandfathering; effective date. 
(a)  New facilities. Food service establishments, which are newly proposed, constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated, shall be required to install a properly sized FOG interceptor according to the requirements set forth in this division and such FOG interceptors shall be permitted and installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the food service establishment. 
(b)  Existing facilities. The city requires all existing food service establishments to install, operate, and maintain a FOG interceptor that complies with the requirements set forth in this division. All food service establishments shall repair or replace any noncomplaint plumbing or the existing FOG interceptor within 90 days of written notification by the city if any one or more of the following conditions exist or occur: 
(1)  The facility is found to produce any product that creates FOG as a byproduct; 
(2)  The facility does not have a FOG interceptor; 
(3)  The facility has an undersized, irreparable, improperly configured, or defective FOG interceptor; 
(4)  Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system is performed which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by the city; 
(5)  The existing facility is sold or undergoes a change of ownership or expansion; 
(6)  The existing facility does not have a plumbing connection to a FOG interceptor in compliance with the requirements of the city; or 
(7)  If a food service establishment changes its business name. 
Additional time to repair or replace any noncomplaint plumbing or the existing FOG interceptor may be given by the public works superintendent on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  Grandfathering. If an existing food service establishment is housed in a structure that, because of its architectural or historical restrictions, the owner will suffer extreme economic hardship in order to upgrade the existing FOG interceptor, then the establishment may keep the current FOG interceptor in place provided that all fresh air fixtures must be tied into the current FOG interceptor, and the FOG interceptor must be at least 15 feet from the last fresh air fixture. Additionally, the FOG interceptor must be cleaned every ten days by a state permitted transporter. In the event that any remodeling of such a food service establishment is undertaken or if the food service establishment changes ownership, then a FOG interceptor that complies with all applicable requirements of this Code shall be installed. 
(d)  Notification of planned changes. All food service establishments shall notify the FOG compliance manager in writing at least 90 days in advance prior to any change of ownership, facility expansion/remodeling, or process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. All food service establishments shall submit any information requested by the city for evaluation of the effect of such expansion on the food service establishment's FOG discharge to the sewer system. 
(e)  Effective date. The ordinance from which this division is derived shall become fully effective six months after its adoption by the city council and approval by the mayor. During this six month period, the city council or designee shall promulgate a written policy to ensure that all existing food service establishments in the city come into compliance with and obtain the necessary permits required by this division. The delayed effective date of these regulations is designed to allow a staggered schedule of inspections and permitting such that all existing food service establishments in the city are in compliance with and have obtained the required permits on or before the expiration of the six months described in this section. During this six-month period, food service establishments shall comply with the inspection and permitting staggered schedule promulgated by the city council and if in compliance with such staggered schedule, such food service establishments shall not be subject to citation for failure to be in compliance with this division or for failure to have obtained the required permits delineated in these regulations. After the expiration of this six-month period, all existing and newly constructed or remodeled food service establishments shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.513), 9-8-2008; Ord. of 10-6-2008,  I(4-512.513)) 
Sec. 40-86. - Notification of spills by the food service establishment. 
(a)  In the event that any food service establishment is unable to comply with any permit condition due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the food service establishment has reasonable opportunity to know that his discharge shall exceed the discharge provisions of the FOG wastewater discharge permit or this division, the food service establishments shall immediately notify the compliance inspector or designee by telephone at the number specified in the permit. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or sanitary sewer overflows, the food service establishment shall immediately notify the compliance inspector or designee by telephone at the number specified in the permit. 
(b)  All food service establishments shall provide written notification of this oral or telephonic notification to the compliance inspector at the address specified in the permit no later than five working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring. 
(c)  Such notification shall not relieve a food service establishment of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the city or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor will such notification relieve a food service establishment from payment of any fees or imposition of any other liability which may be authorized by this division or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.58), 9-8-2008; Ord. of 10-6-2008,  I(4-512.58)) 
Sec. 40-87. - Inspections and authority to enforce regulations. 
(a)  Authority to inspect. The compliance inspectors shall inspect food service establishments on both an unscheduled and unannounced basis or on a scheduled basis. All food service establishments may be inspected four or more times per year. Inspection of a FOG interceptor shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against the accumulation of FOG in an amount that would exceed the 25 percent rule. Inspection shall include all fixtures, equipment, food processing, and storage areas, and shall include a review of the processes that produce wastewater discharged from a facility through the FOG interceptor. Any deficiencies shall be noted, including, but not to be limited to: 
(1)  Failure to report changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(2)  Failure to properly maintain the FOG interceptor; 
(3)  Failure to maintain logs, files, records, or access for inspection or monitoring activities; 
(4)  Failure to obtain or renew the FOG discharge permits in a timely manner; or 
(5)  Any other violations of this division or state law that requires correction by the food service establishment. 
(b)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this division or where the compliance inspector or designee has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or structure or upon a premises, a condition which is contrary to or in violation of the applicable provisions of this Code, the compliance inspector or designee is authorized to enter the building, structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform any of the duties imposed by the applicable provisions of this Code. If such building, structure, or premises is occupied, the inspector shall present credentials to the occupant and shall request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building, structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the inspector shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law for entry. In the event of an emergency involving actual or imminent sanitary sewer overflow, the inspector may access adjoining businesses or properties that share a sewer system with a food service establishment in order to prevent or remediate an actual or imminent sewer overflow. 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.518), 9-8-2008; Ord. of 10-6-2008,  I(4-512.518)) 
Sec. 40-88. - Noncompliance fees, letters, and schedules. 
(a)  Reinspection fee. Any food service establishment in noncompliance with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or with any provision of this division shall pay a noncompliance fee. The purpose of the noncompliance fee is to compensate the city for cost of additional inspection, followup, sampling, monitoring, laboratory analysis, treatment, disposal, and administrative processing incurred as a result of the noncompliance, and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any penalties as may be assessed pursuant to this division. Noncompliance fees shall be in the amount adopted by action of the governing authority. 
(b)  Noncompliance letters. Immediately following every inspection and/or FOG evaluation, the food service establishment inspected shall receive a letter indicating the results of the inspection. A certified letter of noncompliance means the food service establishment is in violation of the applicable provisions of this Code. Letters of noncompliance shall include a description of the code being violated and the immediate course of action the food service establishment shall be required to take to come into compliance. Failure to comply with a letter of noncompliance is also a violation of this division. 
(c)  Compliance schedule. Upon determination that a food service establishment is noncompliant with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or any provision of this division, or needs to construct and/or acquire and install a FOG interceptor, the compliance inspector may also issue and require the food service establishment to abide by a compliance schedule. The issuance of a compliance schedule may contain terms and conditions including, but not limited to, requirements for installation of a FOG interceptor and facilities, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling records, best management and waste minimization practices, payment of fees, or other provisions to ensure compliance with this division. 
(d)  Fees. The compliance inspector shall not issue a compliance schedule until such time as all amounts due and owed by the food service establishment to the city are paid in full. If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a compliance schedule, the compliance inspector may issue an order suspending or revoking the FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.519), 9-8-2008; Ord. of 10-6-2008,  I(4-512.519)) 
Secs. 40-89-40-119. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2014-11, adopted Sept. 8, 2014, deleted the former Subdiv. II,  40-121-40-128, and enacted a new Subdiv. II as set out herein. The former Subdiv. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. OA-2008-02,  I(4-512.59, 4-512.510-4-512.512, 4-512.514-4-512.517, 4-512.520), adopted Sept. 8, 2008; and an ordinance adopted Oct. 6, 2008,  I(4-512.59, 4-512.510-4-512.512. 4-512.514-4-512.517, 4-512.520). 

Sec. 40-120. - Required; procedure. 
(a)  Food service establishments proposing to discharge or currently discharging wastewater that contains FOG into the city sewer system shall obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit annually or cease ongoing operation until such permit is obtained. In addition to any other penalties authorized by law, failure to obtain such a permit shall subject the food service establishment to the potential of the disconnection of water service until such permit is obtained. 
(b)  FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this division and all other regulations, charges for use, and fees established by the city. The city, in accordance with this division and applicable law, shall have the authority to enforce the conditions of FOG wastewater discharge permits. 
(c)  The FOG wastewater discharge permit shall be issued upon: 
(1)  Receipt of a complete application; 
(2)  Compliance with this division; 
(3)  Compliance with the applicable provisions of this Code; and 
(4)  The proper installation and maintenance of a FOG interceptor that complies with the applicable provisions of this Code. 
    In the event that the food service establishment complies with the applicable provisions of this division, a permit will be issued or denied within 30 days of compliance with this section. If the permit is not issued or denied within the timeframe specified herein, the permit shall be deemed issued and approved. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-11, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 40-121. - Application. 
(a)  All food service establishments are required to obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit and shall complete and file with the city prior to commencing or continuing discharges, an application for a wastewater discharge permit in a form prescribed by the city along with any applicable fees. Fees are not printed herein, but are maintained by the clerk in a separate rate schedule. The applicant shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, assessor's parcel numbers and latitude and longitude coordinates of property, description of the food service establishment, operation, cuisine, service activities, and, as applicable, clients using the applicant's services; 
(2)  Whichever is applicable, the name and address of any and all principals/owners/major shareholders of the food service establishment, articles of incorporation, and most recent report of the secretary of state; 
(3)  Name and address of property owner or lessee and the property manager for the property where the food service establishment is located; and 
(4)  Any other information specified in the application form. 
(b)  Applicants may be required to submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, FOG control devices, FOG interceptors, or other pretreatment equipment and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation for evaluation. 
(c)  Other information related to the applicant's business operations and potential discharge may be requested to properly evaluate the permit application. 
(d)  After evaluation of the data furnished, the city may issue a FOG wastewater discharge permit, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this division and as otherwise determined by the compliance inspector to be appropriate to protect the city's sewer system. 
(e)  The FOG wastewater discharge permit and application fee shall be paid by the applicant in an amount adopted by action of the governing authority. Payment of the application permit fee must be received by the city at the time of filing the application for the permit. A food service establishment shall also pay any delinquent invoices in full prior to any permit renewal. Fees are not printed herein, but are maintained by the clerk in a separate rate schedule. 
(f)  An application shall not be considered complete until all the information required by this section is provided to the compliance inspector or designee. The compliance inspector shall have 15 business days from receipt of such information to advise a food service establishment that an application is not complete. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-11, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 40-122. - Conditions. 
    The issuance of a FOG wastewater discharge permit may contain any of the following conditions or limits: 
(1)  Limits on discharge of FOG (100 mg/1), which may cause or contribute to sanitary sewer overflows and/or sewer blockages. 
(2)  Requirements for proper operation and maintenance of FOG interceptors and other FOG control devices. 
(3)  FOG interceptor maintenance frequency and schedule. 
(4)  Requirements for implementation of best management practices and installation of adequate FOG interceptor and/or FOG control device. 
(5)  Requirements for maintaining and reporting status of best management practices. 
(6)  Requirements for maintaining and submitting logs and records, including waste hauling records and waste manifests. 
(7)  Requirements to self-monitor the discharge to the sewer system and periodically assess and report on the condition of the sewer lateral. 
(8)  Requirements for the food service establishment to construct operate and maintain, at its own expense, FOG control devices and sampling facilities. 
(9)  Additional requirements as otherwise determined to be reasonably appropriate by the compliance inspector to protect the city's sewer system or as specified by other regulatory agencies. 
(10)  Other terms and conditions, which may be reasonably applicable to ensure compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-11, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 40-123. - Modification of terms and conditions. 
(a)  The terms and conditions of an issued permit may be modified by the compliance inspector if there is a change in: 
(1)  The generator's current or anticipated operating data; 
(2)  The city's current or anticipated operating data; 
(3)  In the requirements of regulatory agencies, which affect the city; and 
(4)  A determination by the compliance inspector and his designee that such modification is required to comply with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  The food service establishment may request a modification to the terms and conditions of an issued permit. The request shall be in writing stating the requested change and the reasons for the change. The compliance inspector shall review the request, make a determination on the request, and respond in writing within 30 days of receipt of the request. 
(c)  The food service establishment shall be informed of any change in the permit limits, conditions, or requirements at least 45 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, not to exceed 45 days. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-11, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 40-124. - Duration and renewal. 
    FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for the calendar year and shall expire on December 31 of each year. Permit renewal applications and the permit renewal fees shall be submitted to the city and payable January 1 of each year. Permit renewal fees are not printed herein, but are maintained by the clerk in a separate rate schedule. 
    Any permit renewal applications remaining unpaid by April 3, shall be assessed a ten percent penalty in addition to the amount of the permit renewal fee due to be paid and shall also accrue an interest on delinquent permit renewal fees, administrative fees, and/or regulatory fees at a rate of 1.5 percent per month. If the total amount of the permit renewal fee and late fees are not paid by May 1, then additional penalties for delinquency shall be assessed as prescribed in this article, the Charter of the city and/or general state law. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-11, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 40-125. - Exemption. 
    A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a food service establishment and is exempt from obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-11, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 40-126. - Nontransferability. 
(a)  FOG wastewater discharge permits issued under this division are for a specific food service establishment, for a specific operation, and create no vested rights. 
(b)  No permit holder shall assign, transfer, or sell any FOG wastewater discharge permit issued under this division nor use any such permit for or on any modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. All food service establishments shall submit any information requested by the city for evaluation of the effect of such expansion on the food service establishment's FOG discharge to the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-11, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 40-127. - Payment of charges. 
    All fees established by this division are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. Accounts shall become delinquent if not paid within 30 days. Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after 30 days shall be cause for immediate initiation of permit revocation proceedings or immediate suspension of the permit. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-11, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 40-128. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Permit suspension and revocation. The compliance inspector may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that a food service establishment: 
(1)  Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a noncompliance letter or compliance schedule order; 
(2)  Destroys, removes, conceals, or knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the city; 
(3)  Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the city to determine permit terms or conditions, discharge compliance, or compliance with this division; 
(4)  Falsifies, tampers with, destroys, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method; 
(5)  Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the city for user charges, permit fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to this division; 
(6)  Causes interference, a sewer blockage, or a sanitary sewer overflow in the sewer system, violates FOG interceptor maintenance requirements, violates any condition or limit of its FOG wastewater discharge permit, or violates any provisions of this division; or 
(7)  Refuses to accept a notice by personal service or certified mail. 
(b)  Notification. 
(1)  When the compliance inspector has reason to believe that grounds exist for permit suspension or revocation, he shall give written notice thereof by certified mail to the food service establishment setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist, together with the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the mayor and council of the city. The hearing date shall be not less than 15 calendar days or more than 45 calendar days after the mailing of such notice. At the suspension or revocation hearing, the food service establishment shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or oral evidence. The decision of the mayor and council of the city shall be final. 
(2)  The written decision and order of the mayor and council of the city shall be sent by certified mail to the food service establishment at the food service establishment's business address. Upon an order of suspension or revocation by the compliance inspector becoming final, the food service establishment shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no right to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly into the city's sewer system for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the food service establishment. Any owner or responsible management employee of the food service establishment shall be bound by the order of suspension or revocation. Upon an order of revocation by the compliance inspector becoming final, the food service establishment shall permanently lose all rights to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the city's sewer system. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the food service establishment. 
(3)  An order of permit suspension or revocation issued by the city shall be final in all respects on the sixteenth day after it is mailed to the food service establishment. 
(c)  Damage to facilities or interruption of normal operations of the sewer system. Any person who discharges any waste which causes or contributes to any sewer blockage, sanitary sewer overflows, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the city's sewer system and/or equipment, or to the operation of those facilities and/or equipment shall be liable for all costs required to clean and/or repair the facilities and/or equipment, together with expenses incurred by the city to resume normal operations. A service charge of 25 percent of the city's costs shall be added to the costs and charges to reimburse the city for miscellaneous overhead, including administrative personnel and record keeping. The total amount shall be payable within 45 days of invoicing by the city. Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to the city violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities and/or equipment shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the city, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. 
(d)  Termination of water service to the food service establishment. The city, by order of the city manager or his designee, may physically terminate water service to any property as follows: 
(1)  If so ordered in any order of suspension or revocation of a permit; or 
(2)  Upon the failure of a person not holding a valid FOG wastewater discharge permit to immediately cease the discharge, whether direct or indirect, to the city's sewer system after the issuance of a final order or suspension or revocation; and 
(3)  All costs for physical termination of the water service shall be paid by the owner or operator of the food service establishment as well as all costs for reinstating service. 
(e)  Emergency suspension order. The city may, by order of the city manager or his designee, suspend water service when the compliance inspector or designee determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment, or may cause sanitary sewer overflows, sewer blockages, interference to the city's sewer facilities, or may cause the city to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Any discharger notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all wastewater containing FOG to the sewer system. 
(f)  Emergency suspension hearing. As soon as reasonably practicable following the issuance of an emergency suspension order, but in no event more than five business days following the issuance of such order, the city manager or his designee shall hold a hearing to provide a food service establishment the opportunity to present information in opposition to the issuance of the emergency suspension order. Such a hearing shall not stay the effect of the emergency suspension order. The city manager or his designee shall issue a written decision and order within two business days following the hearing, which decision shall be sent by certified mail to the food service establishment at that food service establishment's business address. This decision shall either lift the emergency suspension order or suspend or revoke the permit subject to the suspension and revocation appeal process set forth in this division. 
(g)  Appeal. Any suspension, termination, or revocation pursuant to this division shall be appealable to the superior court of the county by written appeal filed in the superior court of the county within 30 days of any such suspension, termination or revocation. 
(Ord. No. OA-2014-11, 9-8-2014) 
Secs. 40-129-40-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WATER CONSERVATION 
Subdivision I. - In General[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2015-06, adopted Aug. 31, 2015 , repealed the former Subdiv. I,  40-174-40-182, and enacted a new Subdiv. I as set out herein. The former Subdiv. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from OA-2009-01,  4-520-4-520.4, adopted May 4, 2009; and Ord. No. 2010-15, adopted Dec. 20, 2010. 

Sec. 40-174. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City manager means the manager of the city. 
    Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
    Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
    Conveyor car wash means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
    Customer means any person or entity purchasing water from the city. 
    In-bay automatic car wash means a commercial car wash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the car. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
    Private facility means a water system providing drinking water to property owned only by a single owner. Examples would include a facility serving a single industrial site, or a facility serving a mobile home park where all lots are owned by a single owner. 
    Public facility means a water system providing drinking water to more than one property owned by different owners. Examples would include a facility serving an industrial park with several owners, or a facility serving a subdivision with separate homeowners. 
    Recycled water system means a water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
    Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
    Self-service car wash means a commercial car wash where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
    User means a customer of the water system, or other person using the water system. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-06, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 40-175. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this division pursuant to O.C.G.A.  8-2-1 to 8-2-3 is to: 
(1)  Impose water conservation restrictions; 
(2)  Provide definitions; 
(3)  Provide exemptions; 
(4)  Provide for penalties; 
(5)  Provide for related matters; 
(6)  Repeal any conflicting ordinances; 
(7)  Reduce water consumption from commercial car wash facilities by requiring all new conveyor car washes to install operational recycled water systems; and 
(8)  For other purposes. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-06, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 40-176. - Permit. 
    The mayor and council of the city shall adopt standards, rules, and requirements in order to obtain all permits requested by this division. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-06, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 40-177. - Interference with city property prohibited. 
(a)  All persons are prohibited from interfering with or disturbing in any manner or form, any water meters, locks, cutoffs, corporation cocks or other appliances of the city, or to appropriate or use any water after service has been cut off or discontinued for the nonpayment of the charges therefore or for other cause. Tampering fees shall be assessed where a meter has been disturbed. Tampering fees and any other charges imposed or due by this section are not printed herein, but shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk and may be amended from time to time as needed, by the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia. The city reserves the right to remove a service where a meter has been tampered with and to refuse continued service to a property that has a history of violations of water service policies or ordinances. 
(b)  There will be no unauthorized operation of a city-owned hydrant. 
(c)  A customer's water meter may be turned off for any violation of the city public works department rules and regulations or standard operating policies and procedures, which are incorporated herein by reference. 
(1)  If customer's meter is turned off by the city, a padlock will be applied to meter and the customer must first pay either a fee for same day service restoration, or a fee for next day service restoration, plus any past due amounts, to remove said padlock and restore service. Said fees and any other charges imposed or due by this section are not printed herein, but shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk and may be amended from time to time as needed, by the mayor and city council of Dallas, Georgia. 
(2)  If the padlock is removed or other means are used to gain water service, then the customer shall pay a tampering fee plus the cost of any damage to the lock, meter or meter setter or any other damages to city property. The meter will be removed until all monies due are paid, including any overdue bills. A cease and desist order shall be issued to the owner of record of the property served by the meter where the tamper has occurred. Tampering and subsequent tampering fees are not printed herein, but are maintained by the clerk in a separate rate schedule. 
(3)  If, after removal of the meter, an alternative means of obtaining water service is attempted, such as a "jumper" or other means, then the water service will be removed and future service will be considered as if the tampered service never existed. The property owner shall have to apply for and pay for new service, which may or may not be granted, and shall have to pay a fee prior to new service being granted. Said fees and new service costs are not printed herein, but are maintained by the clerk in a separate rate schedule. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse to provide or continue to provide service to any property that may not be in the best interest of the system, including property with a history of tampering with the meter or other portions of the system, or a history of nonpayment of bills, regardless of identity of the owner of the property or the customer. 
(e)  The city reserves the right to refuse to provide service to any customer that may not be in the best interest of the system, including customers with: 
(1)  A history of tampering with the meter (or other portions of the system) on any property; 
(2)  A history of nonpayment of bills to the public works department on any account on any property; or 
(3)  Having any unpaid bill on any former public works department account on other property. 
(f)  For the purposes described herein, it shall be prima facie evidence of interference with city property by the land occupier, if there exists on any property under his ownership or control any device, machine or construction which allows the land occupier to take, use or utilize any water, without paying proper compensation therefore. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-06, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 40-178. - Title to extensions; refusal of extensions. 
(a)  Title to all waterline extensions shall vest in the city upon completion. 
(b)  The city shall reserve the right to refuse any extension of water service, or prescribe any additional conditions, if in its judgment the proposed extension would not promote the orderly, harmonious and efficient growth and development of the city and any other service area. 
(c)  The city shall reserve the right to refuse any extension of water service to any customer with outstanding balances due or outstanding fines due. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-06, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 40-179. - Meters required; rates. 
(a)  No water shall be furnished to any premises except through meters and shall be charged at the established rates. Each premises (including a separate apartment or condominium) or separate business must have a separate water meter. When a building is subdivided, a separate water meter must be provided for each unit. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of each developer or owner of property to bear the full expense of installing required service lines to and within the developer's or owner's property from the existing system in a manner as approved by the city public works department. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-06, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 40-180. - Resale or misuse prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any water consumer to sell or permit the regular use of water by any other person or for other uses than that applied for. 
(b)  New multiple water accounts are not permitted by the city. Any person making an illegal connection to a water account is subject to termination of water service and/or a tampering fee of up to $1,000.00, as assessed by the public works department, plus the fee for water used. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-06, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 40-181. - Water rates. 
    Water rates shall be as established in the city water and sewer rate structure ordinance, as amended, which are not printed herein, but are maintained by the clerk in a separate rate schedule. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-06, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 40-182. - Outdoor landscape watering ordinance. 
(a)  Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of agricultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A.  1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable ordinances of the City of Dallas, Georgia and the State of Georgia guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A.  31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydro seeding. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this subdivision. 
(2)  The marshal's department or police department of the City of Dallas, Georgia, shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(3)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia, to be heard before the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia, who shall adjudicate and determine any violations of this section. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be and is hereby declared a nuisance and the city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law in the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(c)  Repealer. All ordinances of parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are repealed. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall go into effect on January 1, 2011. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-06, 8-31-2015 ) 
Secs. 40-183. - Car washes to recycle water. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  This subdivision applies to all new conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011, regardless of the water source. 
(2)  The provisions of this subdivision do not apply to convey or commercial car washes that were permitted or constructed before January 1, 2011. 
(3)  The provisions of this subdivision do not apply to self-service car washes or in-bay car washes. 
(b)  Commercial car wash water recycling requirement. 
(1)  All new commercial conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011, must install operational recycled water systems. A minimum of 50 percent of water utilized will be recycled. 
(c)  Enforcement and unlawful operation. 
(1)  The marshal's department or police department of the City of Dallas, Georgia, shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(2)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this subdivision, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each day of operation in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(3)  Any car wash defined by this subdivision operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance upon the determination and adjudication that such is unlawful and a public nuisance by the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia, to be heard before the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Dallas, Georgia, who shall adjudicate and determine any violations of this section. 
    The city, may in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such car wash and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on a car wash contrary to the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. OA-2015-06, 8-31-2015 ) 
Sec. 40-184. - Waste of water; prohibitions. 
(a)  The following uses are a waste or unreasonable use or method of use of water and are prohibited: 
(1)  Allowing water to escape from any premises onto public right-of-way, such as streets and sidewalks, or upon any other person's property; 
(2)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device during rain; 
(3)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device that has any broken or missing sprinkler heads; 
(4)  Failing to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler head, or a leaking valve, or a leaking outdoor faucet, or a service line leak, or any other visible outside water leaks, on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person, within two weeks; 
(a)  Failure to comply with section 40-184(a)(4) will forfeit any adjustments to billing account. 
(5)  Washing any vehicle with a hose and not having a water shut-off nozzle or allowing water to run continuously from a hose while washing any vehicle is also prohibited. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-08 , 10-3-2016; Ord. No. oa-2018-09 , 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 40-185. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The restrictions in section 40-184 do not apply to the following authorized uses: 
(1)  Flow resulting from firefighting or routine inspection of fire hydrants or from fire training activities; 
(2)  Water applied as a dust control measure, as required by erosion and sedimentation rules; 
(3)  Water applied to abate spills of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials, where water is the appropriate methodology; 
(4)  Water applied to prevent or abate health, safety, or accident hazards when alternate methods are not available; 
(5)  Water used for construction or maintenance activities where the application of water is appropriate methodology and where no other practical alternative exists; 
(6)  Water used for power washing hard surfaces to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, unless prohibited by drought restrictions; 
(7)  Mobile car washes when approved or a special use permit is obtained from the local authority; 
(8)  Emptying of swimming pools for maintenance when proper local rules are followed. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-08 , 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 40-186. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Water wasting includes water waste by any classifications of user. 
(b)  Whenever the director of the city department of water resources, city manager or mayor determines that there is a waste of water in or about premises to which water is supplied from the city, either by willful waste or by means of a leak in any water pipe or fixture located in or upon the premises, said waste may cause the water to be cut off, subject to section 40-184. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 40-312 of this Code. 
(d)  In addition to the penalty provided for the violation of this article, the city may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. OA-2016-08 , 10-3-2016) 
Secs. 40-187-40-220. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Privately Owned Water Systems 

Sec. 40-221. - Private facilities. 
    Privately owned private water facilities are permitted, subject to approval by the city council or his designated representative. All proposed private water facilities that require permitting under the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act shall require approval by the city prior to submission of permit application. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.6, 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 40-222. - Public facilities. 
    Public water facilities that are privately owned are not permitted. Water systems that serve more than one property owner shall be allowed only as publicly owned and operated systems. Furthermore, any permits for such facilities shall be issued to the city as the appropriate government agency. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.7, 5-4-2009) 
Secs. 40-223-40-257. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Construction Regulations 

Sec. 40-258. - Application. 
    The requirements of section 40-259(a) and (b) shall apply to any residential construction or commercial construction initiated after the date the ordinance from which this division is derived is adopted, and includes new development that may have already been initiated but structures have not yet been approved by the city, as well the repair and/or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilet or showers or both. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.10, 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 40-259. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Construction restrictions. On or after the date the ordinance from which this division is derived is adopted, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which employs: 
(1)  A gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  A showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  A urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  A lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  A kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(b)  Irrigation systems. All new irrigation systems, both residential and nonresidential, shall have installed a rain sensor irrigation shutoff switch to prevent operation of the system during or within six hours after an adequate rain event. The term "adequate rain event" means at least one-half inch of rainfall. 
(c)  Conservation. 
(1)  Authority to implement. The city manager with the approval of the city council, is authorized to implement special water conservation measures, on a case-by-case basis, during times of: 
a.  Drought, low-stream flows, interruptions in the raw water supply due to breaks or contamination; 
b.  The inability of the county master meters and/or city ground water wells to meet demand. 
c.  Excessive losses or demands in the distribution system due to breaks, fires or other causes; 
d.  Restrictions imposed by suppliers or the state; 
e.  Contamination in the finished water; or 
f.  Any other purpose for which the curtailed use of water might be reasonably required in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare as determined by the city council. 
(2)  Restrictions. The water conservation measures may include restrictions or prohibitions on nonessential uses such as: 
a.  Swimming pool filling; 
b.  Watering of lawns and gardens; 
c.  Washing of motor vehicles; 
d.  Recreational uses; and 
e.  Other uses which the city manager or his designated representative may deem to be nonessential. 
(3)  Commencement and duration. The type, nature, degree, commencement and duration of restrictions or prohibitions shall be determined by the city manager or his designated representative, with the concurrence of the city council. 
(4)  Notice of restrictions. Notice of the restrictions or prohibitions shall be publicized in such a manner as to provide adequate notice to the water customer, including, but not limited to, inclusion on the customer's water bill. 
(5)  Violations. The violation of the restriction or prohibition shall be enforced as allowed by this division, as recommended by the city manager or his designated representative and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.11, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. OA-2018-02 , 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 40-260. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of any existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of section 40-259(a) when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing building; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this division were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner or his agent of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (a)(2) through (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector. An inspection fee of $50.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.12, 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 40-261. - Effective date. 
    On or after the date in which the ordinance from which this division is derived is adopted, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city or any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of section 40-259. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.13, 5-4-2009) 
Secs. 40-262-40-285. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Cross Connection Control And Backflow Prevention 

Sec. 40-286. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air-gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level (overflow) rim of such vessel. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the overflow rim of the vessel; and in no case less than one inch. 
    Approved means accepted by the city manager or his designated representative as meeting applicable specifications stated or cited in this section or as the city manager or his designated representative, in his discretion, finds suitable for the proposed use. 
    Approved backflow prevention device means a device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled "AWWA C506-78 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices," and has met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by the publication, "Specifications of Backflow Prevention Devices No. 69-2, dated March 1969, or the most current issue thereof. Any device where approval is required by the fire marshal's office shall be listed for fire protection use as required by the National Fire Protection Association Codes, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Approved tester means a person holding a currently valid certification recognized by the state environmental protection division. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters include, but are not limited to, water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These auxiliary waters may be contaminated, polluted or constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city does not have sanitary control. 
    Back pressure means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source or sources other than the intended source. 
    Backflow means the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back-pressure or back-siphonage. 
    Backflow preventer or backflow prevention device means a device, process or means designed to prevent backflow. 
    Back-siphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution system, as a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source, caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Check valve means a valve that is drip-tight in the normal direction of flow when the inlet pressure is at least one psi (pound per square inch) and the outlet pressure is zero, permitting no leakage in a reverse direction to the normal flow. The closure element of the valve is internally loaded to promote rapid, positive closure. It comprises only one component of a backflow prevention assembly. 
    City water systems or water system means the water system of the city. 
    Contamination means any impairment of the quality of the city's potable water by the introduction or admission of any foreign substance, including, but not limited to, sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials, to a degree which degrades the quality of the potable water and creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
    Cross connection means any actual or potential physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the potable water system. Alternatively, it is a connection or potential connection between any part of a potable water system and any other environment containing other substances in a manner that might allow such substances (such as gasses, liquids, or solids) to enter the potable water system and to affect the water's taste, color or odor. This term includes, but is not limited to, any temporary connections, such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices or sliding multiport tubes. 
    Cross connection control by containment means any of the following: 
(1)  At service connection. The installation of one approved backflow prevention device at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control any or all actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water system. 
(2)  After service connection. The installation of an approved backflow prevention device on the service line leading to and supplying all or a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross connections within the customer's premises which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross connection. 
    Cross connections, controlled means a cross connection that has an approved backflow prevention device properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Customer means any owner of premises receiving city water system service or any end-user thereof, including any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual firm, association or trust and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
    Department means the city's water system. 
    Double-check valve assembly means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shutoff valves on each end of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and field evaluation program resulting in current approval of a recognized and approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for inline testing and maintenance. 
    Hazard, degree of, means evaluating the potential risk to public health based on available information and categorization of potential sources of contamination or pollution and the adverse effect of the contamination or pollution upon the potable water system. 
    Hazard, health, means any condition, device, or practice affecting the water supply system and its operation which creates or could create, or in the judgment of the city manager or his designated representative, may create a present or future danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer or the city's potable water supply. 
    Hazard, pollutional, means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable as to taste, odor or color or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not necessarily be dangerous to the health of the water consumer. 
    Hazard, system, means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system. A pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water system. 
    Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted, in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system or pollutional hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This hazard may include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Polluted or contaminated waters; 
(2)  Process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; 
(3)  Chemicals in fluid form; 
(4)  Plating acids and alkalies, circulating cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; 
(5)  Oils, gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes; or 
(6)  Contaminated natural waters emanating from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems. 
    Pollution or polluted means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in water which tends to degrade the water's quality so as to constitute a hazard or to impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such water's domestic use. 
    Reduced pressure principle device means an assembly of two independently-acting, approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shutoff valves at each end of the assembly. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and a field evaluation program resulting in current approval by a recognized and approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The assembly shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at an acceptable level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In the event that either of the check valves leak, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged. 
    Water, nonpotable, means water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. 
    Water, potable, means any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption. 
    Water purveyor means a supplier of water, including property owners supplying water for their own use. 
    Water service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system (i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system). If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. The term "service connection" also includes the water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
    Water system means the city water system and the customer's water system, where not specifically limited as such. The department system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the department, up to the point where the customer's system begins (at and including the water meter and any required backflow prevention devices used in conjunction therewith). The source facilities shall include all components of the facilities used in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system. The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the department's distribution system which are used in conveying department-delivered domestic water to points of use. 
    Water, used, means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
(b)  See also Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water,  391-3-5-.13(4); Manual of Cross connection Control, 9th edition, University of Southern California, 1993; Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross Connection Control, American Water Works Association Manual of Water Supply Practices, Manual 14, 2nd edition, 1990; Cross Connection Control Manual, United States Environmental Protection Agency, June 1989. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.14(B), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 40-287. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this subdivision is to protect the city's public potable water supply from actual or possible contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system or the customer's private water system such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water system. This subdivision also provides for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control with the goal of systematically and effectively preventing contamination or pollution of the city's water system by containment. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.14(A), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 40-288. - Duties. 
(a)  Department. The city manager or his designated representative shall be primarily responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the public potable water service connection. Where appropriate, the department shall coordinate with other city personnel from building inspections, the fire department, the police department, etc., to promulgate and enforce laws, rules, regulations and policies to be followed in controlling cross connections. 
(1)  Program implementation and execution. The department shall initiate a backflow prevention program and emergency plan designed to ensure that customers install, test and maintain approved backflow prevention devices where needed to protect the public water supply from potential and actual hazardous sources of cross connection. The department shall list, categorize, and prioritize for assessment potential sources of contamination or pollution by the degree of hazard they present to the public water supply. The department shall assess a customer's system by inspecting the customer's system, including cross connections and devices used, and using all information available to determine whether all appropriate devices are installed and maintained in proper working order. The department shall map and schedule inspections of installed devices and premises to ensure all devices continue to be installed and maintained in proper working order. 
(2)  Discretion. The city manager or his designated representative shall use discretion, based on the state rules for safe drinking water and on the city's policy and procedures for backflow and back-siphonage prevention and cross connection control to determine whether the type of existing or proposed devices are sufficient to meet the threat of potential hazard to the city's potable water supply. 
(3)  Right to enter and to test. Pursuant to section 40-313, the city manager, public works director or their designated representative shall have the right to enter and to test, at any reasonable time, a customer's premises to inspect the piping system thereof for cross connections and compliance with the city's backflow prevention ordinance and policy. On request, the customer or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspections agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. Pursuant to section 40-314, the department is authorized to seek an inspection warrant when a customer or occupant of premises refuses access. 
(4)  Notice. If, in the judgment of the public works director, an approved backflow prevention device is required at the customer's water service connection, the public works director or his designated agent shall give notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at the service connection or where appropriate. 
(5)  Discontinuance of water service. The city manager or his designated representative has the authority to discontinue water service to the premises until the requirements of this section have been satisfactorily met. 
(6)  Notice to authorities. The department shall contact all appropriate federal, state and local agencies, including the local board of health, upon a finding of possible contamination or pollution of the city's potable water supply. 
(b)  Customer. The customer shall immediately install approved backflow prevention devices as required and directed by the department at the customer's own expense. The customer has the duty to maintain approved backflow prevention devices at all times. If a device so requires, the customer shall have the device tested annually or whenever deemed necessary by the department. The customer shall retain and provide testing results performed by an approved tester to the department as requested. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain the device or to report testing results shall subject the customer to the enforcement provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.14(C), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 40-289. - Requirements. 
    The following requirements are part of the department's policy for protection of the water supply: 
(1)  Protection. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulation and this division. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention device required by this section is not installed, tested and maintained at the customer's expense, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(2)  Accessibility. The customer's system shall be readily accessible and open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the department to determine whether cross connections or other structural, sanitary contamination or pollution hazards, including violations of this division, exist. Reduced-pressure backflow prevention devices and assemblies shall be readily accessible and installed in such a manner as to prevent partial or total submergence of the device or assemblies. Pit installations are prohibited. The city shall have the right to inspect and test the backflow prevention device or devices on an annual basis or whenever deemed necessary, at the customer's expense. Upon a customer's failure to provide access, the department shall be authorized to seek an inspection warrant. 
(3)  Notice. When such a condition becomes known, but does not constitute an emergency, the public works director or his designate agent shall give notice in writing to such customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at his service connection. 
(4)  Emergency hazards. When the city becomes aware of an actual emergency condition, the city water system and/or the department of public works shall be authorized to isolate or contain the hazard or take any steps necessary to protect the public water supply. The department taking action shall give notice to the customer as soon as is reasonable and practical under the circumstances. 
(5)  Installation. An approved backflow prevention device appropriate to the degree of hazard shall also be installed by the customer at the customer's expense on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being serviced but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line whenever any the following conditions exist: 
a.  When premises have an auxiliary water supply which does not or may not have a safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the public works director. 
b.  When premises upon which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
c.  When premises have internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist. 
d.  When premises contain any service connection three-quarter inch or larger in diameter. 
(6)  Types of devices required or prohibited. The type of protective device required shall be provided by and at the expense of the customer and shall depend upon the degree of hazard on premises. 
a.  The public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device whenever any the following conditions exist: 
1.  Where there is an auxiliary water supply (unless it is already subject to another rule requiring a protective device). 
2.  Where there is any health hazard which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, at the expense of the owner of the premises. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries, and plating plants. 
3.  Where there are uncontrolled cross connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection, at the expense of the owner of the premises. 
4.  Where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross connection survey or inspection, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device on each service to the premises, at the expense of the owner of the premises. 
b.  The public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved double-check valve assembly whenever the condition exists that there is water or a substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the public water system. 
c.  Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the public works director. In addition, if a device is installed such that it directly affects fire hydrants, standpipes and/or sprinkler systems. 
d.  The customer may install an approved thermal expansion relief device in the customer's water system whenever a backflow prevention device is installed. 
e.  Unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system shall be prohibited. 
(7)  Effective dates. 
a.  Subdivision. This subdivision shall become effective immediately upon approval by the city council. 
b.  Compliance. Customers with preexisting cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses, or interconnections in violation of this policy shall have a period of two weeks from the date of notice of violation to comply with the city manager or his designated representative's order to install an approved backflow prevention device. After a thorough investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required to install an approved device, the deadline for compliance shall be determined by the public works director in consultation with the city manager. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.14(D), 5-4-2009) 
Secs. 40-290-40-311. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Compliance Monitoring; Administrative Enforcement 

Sec. 40-312. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This division shall be enforced by the marshal's bureau. Citations for violations may be issued by the marshal's bureau at the direction of the city manager or the public works director. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this division shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this division may be fined up to $125.00 for the first occurrence, $250.00 for the second occurrence, and $500.00 for the third and subsequent occurrences, unless otherwise specified. The municipal court of the city shall also be empowered to award restitution costs, costs of damages to water service and meters, and unpaid bill amounts, in addition to the fines listed in this subsection. 
(c)  Tampering fees may be assessed as specified by the marshal's bureau and water service may be withheld until such fees are paid, along with prior overdue bills. The municipal court shall also be empowered to impose any unpaid tampering fee as a fine, in addition to the fines listed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  All persons are prohibited from interfering with or disturbing in any manner or form, any water meter, fire hydrant, locks, cutoffs, corporation cocks, or other appurtenances of the water system or to appropriate or use any water without first contracting with the system for such use or after service has been cut off or discontinued for the nonpayment of the charges therefor or for other cause. Any person violating this provision shall be assessed a tampering fee of $500.00, unless otherwise specified in this division. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.15, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. OA-2016-08 , 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 40-313. - Inspection, entry of premises. 
    The public works director, and other authorized representatives of state and federal regulatory agencies, shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this division and any permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the public works director or his designated representative ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. The public works director or his designated representative shall also have the right to enter all private properties through which the city holds a utility easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the water or wastewater facilities lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work on such easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the utility easement pertaining to such property. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the public works director or his designated representative will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The public works director or his designated representative shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The public works director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at his own expense. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the public works director or his designated representative and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the public works director access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.16, 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 40-314. - Search warrants; inspection warrants. 
    If the authorized city representative has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this division or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city manager or his authorized representative may seek issuance of a search warrant or inspection warrant from any court who has jurisdiction and venue to issue such warrants. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.17, 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 40-315. - Cease and desist orders; assessment of violation fees. 
(a)  When the public works director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, or any permit or order issued hereunder, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the public works director may issue an order to the user and/or owner directing them to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user and/or owner to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation. 
(b)  Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. Failure to comply with a cease and desist order shall subject the user to having water service removed or cut-off. 
(c)  When the city manager or his designated representative finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, the city manager or his designated representative may impose a violation fee on such user in an amount not to exceed $500.00 per day, unless another fee is specified in this division. Such fees shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. 
(d)  Users desiring to dispute cease and desist orders or fees must file a written request for the city manager or his designated representative to reconsider the order or fee (along with full payment of the fee amount) within 30 days of being notified of the order or fee. Where a request has merit, the city manager or his designated representative may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user is successful in the appeal of any dispute, the violation fee, shall be returned to the user. The city manager or his designated representative may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fee. 
(e)  Assessment of a fee shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.18, 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 40-316. - Unpaid charges and fees. 
    Unpaid charges, fees (of any sort), and penalties shall, after 15 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of 15 percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 11/2 percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties. Water service may be cut off until all such fees and charges are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.19, 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 40-317. - Termination of service; creation of lien for unpaid amounts; interest. 
    In addition to, or in lieu of, taking any other action available under this division, in order to enforce the operation of this division, the city shall have the power and authority to enter upon the property of any user who has violated any provision of this article following issuance of a cease and desist order, as provided in section 40-315, to terminate the user's wastewater and/or water service in any manner deemed necessary and appropriate by the city. In the event of such termination under this section, the city shall retain all rights to collect unpaid bills or amounts owed by the terminated user according to law or other provisions of this division. Such rates or charges, if not paid when due, shall constitute a lien upon the premises served. Past due amounts shall bear interest at the same rate as would unpaid ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.20, 5-4-2009) 
Secs. 40-318-40-337. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Judicial Enforcement Remedies And Appeal 

Sec. 40-338. - Injunctive relief. 
    When the city manager or his designated representative finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, or any permit or order issued hereunder, the city manager or his designated representative may petition the superior court through the city's attorney for the issuance of temporary restraining order and/or permanent injunction, as appropriate. The city manager may also seek restitution, cost of litigation and reasonable attorney's fees for bringing any such action wherein relief is granted. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.21, 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 40-339. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this division are not exclusive. The city manager or his designated representative may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. OA-2009-01,  4-520.22, 5-4-2009) 
Chapter 42 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2015-02, adopted June 1, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 42,  42-1-42-23, and enacted a new Ch. 42 as set out herein. The former Ch. 42 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from OA-2012-07, adopted Aug. 27, 2012. 

Sec. 42-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
    Community development director means City of Dallas, Georgia, Community Development Director. 
    County means Paulding County, Georgia. 
    Driver means any person in charge of or operating a cab or taxicab whether as owner, agent, employee or otherwise. 
    Highway means any public street, boulevard, avenue, drive or alley in the city. 
    Owner means any person having control of the operation, maintenance of, or collection of the revenue derived from cabs and taxicabs. 
    Permit means the written authority granted by the mayor and council to engage in the cab or taxicab business in the city. 
    State means State of Georgia, United States of America. 
    Taxicab or cab means a motor driven vehicle of distinctive color or design, with a seating capacity of not less than five persons, or more than seven, including the driver, operated for hire from a central office location and the destination of which is under the direction of the passenger or passengers transported therein, not operated on a fixed route, used in the business of transporting passengers for compensation in the city and. The term "taxicab" shall not include limousines regulated by the state public service commission. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-2. - Permits required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any taxi within the city without first having complied with the provisions of this article. Compliance with the requirements of this article is made a condition precedent to the operation of a taxi or taxi service in the city and to driving a taxi in the city for a City of Dallas, Georgia licensee. 
    No permit is required if the operation of the taxi in the city is limited solely to passing through the city without picking up a passenger or for dropping off a passenger in the city who's trip originated outside the city. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-3. - Classes of permits. 
    There shall be two classes of permits required under this article: 
(1)  Company permit. This permit applies to persons, firms, partnerships, corporations or other entities engaged in the business of operating a taxicab in the city and which are subject to an occupation tax under Chapter 10 of this Code. 
(2)  Operator's permit. This permit applies to any person operating a taxicab on the streets of the city and who is operating under the sponsorship of a company permit. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-4. - Company permits. 
    In order to secure a company permit, an applicant must provide information showing its qualifications on a form provided by the city, and must submit to a background investigation and fingerprinting. An applicant must: 
(1)  Be the legal owner of the taxi service; 
(2)  Be at least 21 years of age; 
(3)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or a person who has otherwise been granted employment authorized by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service; 
(4)  Hold an occupation tax certificate issued by the City of Dallas, Georgia; 
(5)  Maintain an office within the city staffed at all times during hours of operation as outlined in this article by company employees, including a dispatcher, from which all dispatching of vehicles will be performed; 
(6)  Provide proof of insurance as required in this article; 
(7)  Provide a complete description of each and every vehicle to be used as a taxi, including make, model, vehicle identification number, and tag number; 
(8)  If a company operates more than four vehicles, then a secured area either inside a fence or garage building must be provided for storing the vehicles when they are not in operation. 
    The City of Dallas, Georgia, community development director is authorized to reject any application which is incomplete, which shows the applicant to be less than 21 years of age or not a legal U.S. resident, or where the applicant's stated home address differs from that shown on his Georgia driver's license. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-5. - Convictions disqualifying applicant for a company permit. 
    No permit shall be issued if the applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses: 
(1)  Two or more misdemeanors, or one or more open container violations, or to driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, or possession of or receiving of stolen property in the last five years. 
(2)  Manslaughter, or negligent homicide, resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle. 
(3)  Any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle is used. 
(4)  Failure to stop and render aid or leaving the scene of an accident, as required under the laws of the state. 
(5)  Perjury or false swearing in making any statements under oath in connection with this "Application for Permit." 
(6)  Perjury or the making of a false affidavit or statements under oath relating to the ownership or operation of motor vehicles. 
(7)  Convictions or forfeiture of bail on three charges of a violation of the state motor vehicle laws within a 12-month period. 
(8)  The violation of any law involving moral turpitude. 
(9)  Repeated violation of the City of Dallas, Georgia, ordinances, Paulding County, Georgia, laws, or Georgia state laws, which affect the safety of human life or limb on the streets of the city. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-6. - Place of operation. 
    No person, to whom granted by lawful authority an occupation tax certificate to operate or engage in a taxicab business, shall operate or carry on the business from any place in the city other than the established place of business referred to and described in the application. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-7. - Hours of operation. 
    The standard hours of operations for any holder of a company permit to operate or engage in a taxi business within the city shall be Monday through Sunday, 24 hours per day. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-8. - Insurance required. 
    No owner of a taxicab shall operate or authorize any other person to operate a taxicab in the city unless it is covered by a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state, which provides the following minimum coverage: 
One hundred thousand dollars for injury to or death of one person in one accident; 
Two hundred thousand dollars for injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident; and 
Fifty thousand dollars for injury or destruction of property of others in any one accident. 
    Each taxicab operated within the city limits shall be required to carry and maintain in effect this minimum insurance coverage and provide current certificates of insurance evidencing such coverage, the name of the insurance company supplying the coverage and the policy number. The insurance must provide specific coverage for a vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers. 
    If the term of said insurance coverage is less than a period of 12 months, on the first Monday of each month, the holder of the company permit shall provide to the City of Dallas, Georgia, community development director either a current insurance identification card for each vehicle intended to be operated in the coming month or a verified statement from a licensed insurance agent or licensed insurance company within this state setting forth the identity of the vehicles for which coverage has been procured, by vehicle identification number, make and model, the amount of coverage afforded to each such vehicle and the term for which such coverage has been prepared by the taxicab company or taxicab driver. 
    If the term of such insurance coverage is at least a period of 12 months, proof of such insurance coverage, together with a receipted premium from the insurer, or its duly authorized agent, showing payment of the premium on the policy for and during the period covered by the life of the occupational tax certificate, shall be provided to the city before a permit shall be issued. The insurance policy must provide and stipulate therein that the insurer will give notice to the city a minimum of 30 policy on the person insured. 
    Failure to maintain such coverage shall constitute cause for revocation of a City of Dallas, Georgia, permit. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed to waive applicable laws of the State of Georgia or federal laws of the United States of America, if any, which require a higher amount of minimum coverage. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-9. - Drivers qualifications. 
    Before operating a taxicab within the city, a driver shall: 
(1)  Possess a class C driver's license; 
(2)  Be competent to operate a motor vehicle; 
(3)  Be familiar with the traffic laws and ordinances of the city; 
(4)  Not have been convicted of a felony unless ten years have elapsed since the date of completion of felony sentence; 
(5)  Not have been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude within past ten years; 
(6)  Not have been classified as a habitual offender by the department of public safety for the previous five years; 
(7)  Not have had a driver's license revoked by the department of public safety for violations for the previous five years; 
(8)  Provide authorization and any information necessary to enable the chief of police or his designee to investigate the driver's background, criminal history, and traffic record; 
(9)  Be of good character as determined by the aforesaid investigation; and 
(10)  Possess an operator's permit issued by the city. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-10. - Condition of vehicle. 
    Every taxi vehicle licensed in the city shall be: 
(1)  Equipped with working heat and air conditioning and a taxi mile meter for fare purposes. 
(2)  Inspected not less than yearly and prior to annual renewal of any taxi license, by a mechanic having a business license in the City of Dallas, Georgia and approved by such mechanic for compliance with vehicle safety and equipment requirements of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, including those for brakes, windows, wipers, tires, signals, lights. The city shall provide a form for this purpose. Once inspected, the certificate of inspection form shall be delivered to the community development director. Once the vehicle has passed the yearly inspection, a sticker is to be placed on the rear window of the taxi vehicle; it is unlawful to tamper with or falsify such a sticker. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-11. - Vehicle permit. 
    Each vehicle operated as a taxi shall be issued a permit number by the community development director, and such permit number shall be displayed upon such vehicle as required by subsection 42-12(b). 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-12. - Identification of vehicle. 
(a)  The word "TAXI" painted on each side and the rear in letters of not less than four nor more than six inches in height. 
(b)  The number of the permit of the vehicle shall be painted on each side and the rear thereof in letters of not less than two inches in height, and a city-issued taxi permit sticker be affixed in the upper right corner of the rear window. Such stickers must at all times be displayed. Each vehicle will be assigned a numbered sticker and that sticker shall not be used on any other vehicle. 
(c)  The name and the permit number of the licensee of the vehicle shall be posted in a place visible to any passenger in the vehicle. 
(d)  Each company vehicle must have either a uniform exterior body color scheme or a uniform emblem on the door, not smaller than 100 square inches in area, uniform for all vehicles of each licensee. 
(e)  The rate for fare charges and a phone number where customer complaints can be reported to the licensee, shall be printed on the exterior in letters of not less than four nor more than six inches in height, and also posted conspicuously inside the vehicle. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit the charging of a flat rate for trips to and from such destinations as Hartsfield International Airport provided that such flat rates are conspicuously posted on the taxi cab or set forth on a rate card provided to the customer prior to the trip. 
(f)  Such marking shall be affixed only by means of permanent vinyl lettering or paint and shall, as of January 1, 2013, be a minimum of four inches in height. The four-inch lettering requirement can be met if the logo is a minimum of four inches in height and the lettering within the logo is a minimum of two inches in height. 
(g)  Be equipped with a "TAXI" roof light permanently mounted on the roof of the vehicle and maintained in good working order at all times. The light should be on when the taxi is in service. 
(h)  Maintain signage in the passenger compartment stating, in clearly legible lettering of a minimum of one inch in height, "The public is invited to contact the City of Dallas Community Development Department by calling 678-363-6175 to report any instance of a taxi being operated while not in a clean and safe operating condition." 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-13. - Taxicab equipment. 
    All taxicabs operating in the city shall: 
(1)  Be equipped with a taximeter maintained in good working order at all times. Such taximeter shall be permanently affixed in front of the passengers' seat and be visible to them at all times. After sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. It shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one (1) of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. It shall be sealed at all points and connections that, if manipulated, would affect its correct reading and recording. 
(2)  Be maintained in a good, safe and serviceable mechanical condition. 
(3)  Be inspected not less than yearly and prior to annual renewal of any taxi license, by a mechanic having a business license in the City of Dallas, Georgia and approved by such mechanic for compliance with vehicle safety and equipment requirements of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, including those for brakes, windows, wipers, tires, signals, lights. The city shall provide a form for this purpose. Once inspected, the certificate of inspection form shall be delivered to the City of Dallas, Georgia, community development director. Once the vehicle has passed the yearly inspection, a sticker is to be placed on the rear window of the taxi vehicle; it is unlawful to tamper with or falsify such a sticker. 
(4)  Meet the emission standards as set forth by federal guidelines and the State of Georgia so as to be in compliance with all county and state licensing and emission standards. 
(5)  Be maintained in a clean condition, free from foreign matter and offensive odors. Clean inside and outside, including the trunk, and free of any body damage. 
(6)  Transport as passengers only the number of persons specified by the vehicle manufacturer. 
(7)  Meet the minimum weight for a taxicab, 2,000 pounds, as determined by the manufacturer's specifications. 
(8)  As of January 1, 2013, no vehicle operated as a taxi cab shall be more than 12 years old. 
(9)  Any vehicle more than ten years old shall be inspected twice yearly at even intervals by an ASE Certified Mechanic having a business license in the City of Dallas, Georgia, and approved by such mechanic for compliance with vehicle safety and equipment requirements of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, including those for brakes, windows, wipers, tires, signals, lights. The city shall provide a form for this purpose. 
(10)  Have at least three doors for loading passengers. Each taxicab must be a station wagon, a sedan, a minivan or a sports utility vehicle. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-14. - Log books. 
    Daily trip sheets shall be maintained for all taxis operated within the city. The driver shall retain the trip sheets in the vehicle for a period of 72 hours from the time of the recorded trip, after which they will be maintained in the office of the company permit holder for a period of no less than 120 days. All trip sheets shall be subject to the inspection of the police chief or his designee. As used in this subsection, the term "trip sheet" means a daily log of all passengers, the time, place of entry and the destination of each passenger, the amount charged and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-15. - Transferability. 
    Any vehicle permit issued in accordance with this article shall not be transferable. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-16. - Denial, suspension and revocation of permit. 
(a)  An application for a permit or a permit issued under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked for due cause as defined in subsection (c) hereof. 
(b)  The municipal court shall furnish a permit holder a notice setting forth the time, place, and purpose of a hearing at which it intends to consider the revocation or suspension of a permit. After a hearing, if the municipal court determines due cause exists, it may suspend, revoke or place on probation for a maximum of 12 months, with or without conditions, the permit. 
(c)  A permit may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for a permit. 
(2)  For failure to pay all fees, taxes, penalties or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article, and of the City of Dallas, Georgia, Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  For failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a permit. 
(4)  For violation of any part of this article by the permit holder, its agents, partners, officers, employees or contractors. 
(5)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse shall result in the automatic suspension of the permit. 
(6)  For unauthorized transfer or other misuse of the permit. 
(d)  An operator's permit may be suspended or revoked for having three or more moving violations in any twelve-month period. 
(e)  Permit holders under this article are responsible for violations of this article by their vehicle operators whether such operators are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(f)  Permits issued under this article are not transferable. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-17. - Regulatory fee required. 
    A regulatory fee of $300.00 shall be required annually for a company permit. A regulatory fee of $100.00 shall be required annually for the operator's permit for drivers operating under the auspices of a company permit. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-18. - Notification of new drivers. 
    It shall be the duty of a company permit holder to notify the City of Dallas, Georgia, community development director, within 30 days, of a driver being hired or terminated from employment. Failure to so notify can result in revocation of the permit. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-19. - Violations. 
    Repeated violations of traffic laws or ordinances or of any ordinance provision regulating the conduct of taxicab drivers shall be cause for revocation of said permit to operate in the city. 
    It is a violation and grounds for suspension or revocation of an operator permit for any operator to: 
(1)  Commit more than three traffic infractions within any 12-month period; 
(2)  Be found guilty of a felony; 
(3)  Be guilty of reckless driving or driving or being in physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs; 
(4)  Fail to deliver to the city police department within 24 hours any property of value left in a vehicle; 
(5)  Allow a person to get out of the vehicle while it is in motion or discharge a passenger at any place other than the curb or pavement edge; 
(6)  Allow a passenger to consume alcohol, intoxicating substances, or other controlled substances in the vehicle; 
(7)  Transport a passenger to a destination by a route that is not the safest and most direct, unless the passenger specifically authorizes such alternate or indirect route; 
(8)  Pick up any additional passengers without the express consent of the original passenger; 
(9)  Refuse to pick up as a passenger any person of proper deportment when the vehicle is available, or to discriminate against any person because of race, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age, or mental or sensory handicap; 
(10)  Activate the meter when the vehicle is not engaged or fail to activate the meter at the beginning of each trip, unless the trip is made under contract; 
(11)  Engage in any unfair or deceptive acts or practices. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 42-20. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  The City of Dallas, Georgia's, police department, marshal's bureau, and community development department shall enforce the regulations contained in this article. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished by the payment of fines up to $1,000.00. Each separate occurrence shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  The violation of the provisions of this article by any person, corporation, partnership or other entity may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city. 
(d)  Violations of any provision of this article by any permit holder shall be due cause for revocation of any city permit or certificate, after notice and hearing before the city municipal court. 
( Ord. OA-2015-02, 6-1-2015 ) 
Chapter 44 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
    Alley means a minor way used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
    Billiard room means any public place or place of business where the game of billiards is permitted to be played and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. The term "billiards," as used in this definition, means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions, with balls which are impelled by a cue, and shall include all forms of the game known as "carom billiards," "pool," "pocket billiards" and "English billiards." (See section 10-279, pertaining to pool room status, for further definition.) 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. The term "building" includes the term "structure." 
    Building, accessory, means a building subordinate or supplemental to the main building on a lot and used for purpose customarily incidental to that of a main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith. 
    Building department means the city or its designated representative, which is designated by ordinance to administer and enforce all building codes for the city. 
    Building inspector means the city, or its representative, who is designated by ordinance as the building inspector for the city. 
    Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which said building is located. 
    City planning commission will be known in this chapter as the planning commission. 
    Dwelling means a building designed, arranged, or used for permanent living quarters for one or more persons. 
    Dwelling unit, single-family, means a building containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for residential use, which meets or exceeds the following standards: 
(1)  Minimum width in excess of 16.5 feet; 
(2)  Minimum square footage of 1,500 square feet; 
(3)  The roof shall have a minimum three to 12-foot roof pitch and shall have a surface covering of wood shakes, asphalt, fiberglass or wood shingles, concrete or other materials approved by the building official; 
(4)  The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, Masonite, aluminum or vinyl lap siding, or other materials approved by the building official. 
    Family means one or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single-housekeeping unit. 
    Game room means any public place or place of business where there are available to the public five or more electronic or mechanical games of skill or chance. 
    Junkyard means any such use involving the storage or disassembly of wrecked automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles; storage, baling or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, scrap metal, used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures and used brick, wood, or other building materials. Such uses shall be considered junkyards whether or not all or part of such operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, addition to, or accessory to, other uses of the premises. 
    Lot means a portion or parcel of land devoted to a common use or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. The term "lot" includes the term "plot" or "parcel." 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines. 
    Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the building line. 
    Manufactured home. 
(1)  The term "manufactured home" means: 
a.  A new or used structure; 
b.  Transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode: 
1.  Is eight body feet or more in width; 
2.  40 body feet or more in length; or 
c.  When erected on site, is: 
1.  320 or more square feet; 
2.  Built on a permanent chassis; and 
3.  Designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation; 
4.  Connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; 
(2)  The term "manufactured home" includes any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
    Manufactured home park means a parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use. 
    Maps, zoning maps or city zoning maps means the official zoning maps of the city. 
    Modular home or industrialized building means any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. 
    Nonconforming use means a building, structure, or use of land existing at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Pool room means a billiard room as defined in this section. 
    Roominghouse or boardinghouse means a dwelling, other than a hotel or lodginghouse, where meals or housing accommodations for three or more persons are provided for hire. 
    Semitrailer truck means a mobile unit designed for the hauling of materials which is equipped with a chassis. 
    Sign, business, means an attached or freestanding structure which directs attention to a business or profession conducted on the premises. 
    Sign, outdoor advertising, means a structural poster panel, or painted sign, either freestanding or attached to the outside of a building, for the purpose of conveying information, knowledge or ideas to the public about a subject either related or unrelated to the premises upon which it is located. 
    Street means a public or private way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
    Used or occupied, as applied to any land or building, includes the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
    Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street and the front line of the building projected to side lines of the lot. 
    Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to side lines of the lot. 
    Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. 
(b)  Except as specifically defined in this section, all words used in this section shall carry their customary meaning as defined by a standard dictionary. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1803(j)(2); Ord. No. 92-20, 11-2-1992; Ord. No. 03-11, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 2008-04,  5-302, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-2. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person violating, by act or omission, any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300.00 or by 90 days in jail or both, at the discretion of the municipal court of the city. Where such an act or omission is continued in violation of the provisions of these regulations after notice of such violation by the building inspector, each and every day during which such act or omission continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1811(h)) 
Secs. 44-3-44-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-23. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector of the city who is hereby given the authority to perform these functions. The zoning enforcement officer's duties shall include: 
(1)  Receiving applications; 
(2)  Inspecting premises; and 
(3)  Issuing building permits and certificates of occupancy for uses and structures that meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1811(a)) 
Sec. 44-24. - Building permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation or filling of any lot for any construction of any building, or to commence construction of any building, or to commence the moving or alteration of any building or to commence the development of land for a use not requiring a building, until the building inspector has issued a building permit for such work. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1811(b)) 
Sec. 44-25. - Application for building permit. 
(a)  All applications to the building inspector for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale showing: 
(1)  The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
(2)  The size of the building to be erected; 
(3)  The location of the building on the lot; 
(4)  The location of existing structures on the lot, if any; 
(5)  The number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate; 
(6)  The setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots; 
(7)  The layout of off-street parking and loading spaces; and 
(8)  Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(b)  If the proposed excavation, filling, or construction as set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the city then in force, the building department shall issue a building permit upon payment of the required fee. If a building permit is refused, the building inspector shall state such refusal in writing with the cause. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1811(c)) 
Sec. 44-26. - Construction progress. 
    Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months of the date of issue or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1811(d)) 
Sec. 44-27. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector is required in advance of the occupancy or use of: 
(1)  Any building, structure, land, or premises; 
(2)  Any building, or structure hereafter erected or moved; 
(3)  Any building hereafter altered, so as to affect the front, side, or rear yards thereof, or its height; 
(4)  Any nonresidential building, structure, or premises in which there is a change of occupancy or use; 
(5)  Each nonconforming use created by the passage of and subsequent amendments to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Such nonconforming use shall obtain a certificate of occupancy within 30 days of the date of said passage or amendments. 
(b)  Within three days after the application for a certificate of occupancy and payment of any required fees, the building inspector shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or building, as stated on the certificate of occupancy and signed by the owner or his appointed agent, is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter, and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the plans submitted for the building permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1811(e)) 
Sec. 44-28. - Denial of certificate of occupancy. 
    A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter, or unless the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan upon which the building permit was issued. The building inspector shall state in writing the reasons for denying such certificate of occupancy. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1811(f)) 
Sec. 44-29. - Records of applications and certificate. 
    Records of applications for building permits, records of plats and plans in connection with said permits, and records of all occupancy certificates and denials shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1811(g)) 
Sec. 44-30. - Remedies. 
    In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation to this chapter, the building inspector, or any other appropriate city authority or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent the violation in the case of each building or use of land. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1811(i)) 
Sec. 44-31. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width or size of yards, courts, or other open spaces, or require a lower height of buildings or smaller number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statue, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statue require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statue shall govern. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1815) 
Secs. 44-32-44-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 

Sec. 44-51. - Established. 
    A board of zoning appeals is hereby established. Said board shall consist of three members appointed by the city council for overlapping terms of three years. Initial appointment shall be as follows: one member for one year, one member for two years, and one member for three years. Each successive appointment shall be for three years. 
    Any vacancy in the membership of the board of zoning appeals shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
    Members shall be removable for cause by the city council upon written charges and after public hearing. 
    Members shall receive a payment per meeting to allow for expenses incurred in performing their duties; payment schedule maintained by the clerk in a separate schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1812(a); Ord. No. OA-2012-03, 3-5-2012) 
Sec. 44-52. - Proceedings. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from its members who shall serve for one year or until reelected or until their successors are elected. The board shall appoint a secretary, who may be a municipal officer, an employee of the city, or a member of the planning commission. The board shall adopt rules and bylaws in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairperson, or in his absence, the vice chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. All meetings of the board of zoning appeals shall be open to the public. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1812(b)) 
Sec. 44-53. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings, or structures in the same district or of permitted or nonconforming uses in other districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variance. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of zoning appeals that all of the following conditions exist: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography. 
b.  The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship. 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved. 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1812(c)) 
Sec. 44-54. - Appeals, hearings, and notice. 
    Appeals to the board of zoning appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within the board of zoning appeals a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The board of zoning appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals or other matters referred to it, and give at least 15 days public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon a hearing, any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1812(d)) 
Sec. 44-55. - Application for hearing. 
    Application for a hearing and decision or requests for variances, appeals and special exceptions shall be filed with the city (on forms it shall provide) along with a nonrefundable fee in the amount of (amount set by mayor and council) at least 20 days prior to the meeting at which they are to be heard. Each application shall contain such information as may be required to enable the board to make its decision. Each application for a variance shall include a plat drawn to scale showing the following information: 
(1)  All property lines, with dimensions; 
(2)  Location of buildings and other structures, creeks, and easements referenced to the property line of the tract; 
(3)  North arrow, sheet number, lot and parcel number from the county tax sheets; 
(4)  Location of setback lines or other dimensional requirements from which the variance is sought; 
(5)  Location and distance of structures, creeks, and easements on adjacent property. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1812(e)) 
Sec. 44-56. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building inspector certifies to the board of zoning appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of zoning appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the building inspector, and on due cause shown. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1812(f)) 
Sec. 44-57. - Decisions. 
    In exercising its powers, the board of zoning appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building inspector and may issue or direct the issuance of a building permit. The concurring vote of two members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision or determination of the building inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variation of this chapter. On all appeals, applications and other matters brought before the board of zoning appeals, said board shall inform, in writing, all the parties involved of its decisions and the reasons therefor. Recourse from a decision by the board of zoning appeals shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction in such matters. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1812(g)) 
Secs. 44-58-44-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 44-88. - Authority. 
    This chapter, including the city zoning maps, may be amended from time to time, but no amendment, other than by annexation ordinance, shall become effective unless a public hearing has been held in accordance with O.C.G.A.  36-66-4. The city and the city planning commission shall ensure that the general public and property owners are afforded due process in the city's regulation of the uses of property through the city zoning powers. This shall be accomplished by the procedures and regulations in this division. Action shall not be initiated for a zoning map amendment affecting the same parcel of property more often than once every six months. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1813(a)) 
Sec. 44-89. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Before enacting an amendment to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or to the city zoning maps, a public hearing must be held by the mayor and council of the city in accordance with O.C.G.A.  36-66-4, as now adopted or hereafter amended. At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing, the city shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city, a notice of the hearing. The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(b)  If the amendment is to the city zoning maps, then the published notice shall also include, in addition to the items in subsection (a) of this section, the location of the property to be rezoned, the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classification of the property to be rezoned and at least 15 days prior to the hearing, there shall be a sign placed in a conspicuous location on the property to be rezoned that shall contain the following information: 
City Zoning Notice 
Name of owner___________ Address of property________ Present zoning___________ Proposed zoning___________ For additional information, please call the Dallas City Hall at_______  
(c)  If an application for an amendment to the city zoning maps is voluntarily withdrawn prior to a final decision by the mayor and council of the city or if the application is not approved by the mayor and council of the city, then the same property cannot be resubmitted for consideration for an amendment until the expiration of at least six months from the date of disapproval or withdrawal. Any reapplication must abide by the same public notice procedures as stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  All public hearings held before the mayor and council or the city planning commission in regard to each zoning decision shall be conducted under the following procedures: 
(1)  The public hearing shall be called to order by the mayor or by the presiding officer; 
(2)  The mayor or presiding officer shall explain the procedures to be followed in the conduct of any public hearing on a proposed zoning decision; 
(3)  For each proposed zoning decision, if the subject of the public hearing is a rezoning request initiated by a petitioner other than the mayor and council, then the petitioner, or his representative, shall first present and explain the request for the rezoning. If the request for rezoning is initiated by the city, or if the request is a zoning ordinance amendment, then the city manager shall present and explain the request on behalf of the city. Thereafter, all individuals that desire to speak in favor of the request shall be permitted to speak. The petitioner and those speaking in favor of the request shall be limited to 15 minutes total time for their presentation of data, evidence and opinion; 
(4)  For any proposed zoning decision, after all persons in favor of the request have spoken, then all individuals who desire to speak in opposition to the request or amendment, shall have the opportunity to do so. All persons speaking in opposition to the application shall be limited to 15 minutes total time for their presentation of data, evidence and opinion; 
(5)  When any person desires to speak, he shall first raise his hand and be recognized by the mayor or presiding officer, then stand and state his name and address and then shall make whatever comment that he has that is appropriate to the issue; 
(6)  Thereafter, the mayor or presiding officer shall declare the public hearing closed and either another public hearing shall be commenced for the next request, or the regular business session of the mayor and council or the city planning commission shall be convened. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1813(b); Ord. No. 96-17, 8-5-1996) 
Sec. 44-90. - Application for map amendments. 
    An application for amendment to the zoning maps may be initiated by the city planning commission or be submitted by the mayor and council to the planning commission, or by any person who owns property within the city. Unless initiated by the city council or by the city planning commission, all applications for zoning map amendments must be submitted by the owner of such property or by an authorized agent of the owner. An application for an amendment affecting the same property shall not be submitted more often then once every six months; however, this provision shall not apply to those properties affected by an amendment filed by the city council or by the city planning commission. The official zoning maps of the city shall be kept by the city clerk of the city and all approved amendments shall be shown on the official zoning maps. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1813(c)) 
Sec. 44-91. - Application contents and filing procedures. 
(a)  Each application to amend the official zoning maps shall be filed with the city manager. 
(b)  Each application shall be submitted under the following conditions and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A legal description of the tracts proposed to be rezoned, or referenced to the county tax sheet records; 
(2)  A plat showing the dimensions (metes and bounds), acreage, and location of the tracts prepared to scale; 
(3)  The present and proposed zoning classification for the tracts; and 
(4)  The name and address of the owners of the land and their agents, if any. 
(c)  It shall meet the applicable development standards for the district for which application is made. 
(d)  An application shall be submitted to the city manager at least 30 days prior to the date on which it is to be considered by the planning commission. It shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, as determined by resolution of the mayor and council of the city, to defray the public expense of processing the application. A fee shall not be charged if an official governmental agency files the application. 
(e)  The applicant shall present a map showing the location of the property for which an application is submitted, and its relationship to adjoining properties and public facilities and services. 
(f)  An application may not be withdrawn or amended by the applicant after the legal advertising as required by this chapter shall have first appeared. However, the city council may allow an application to be withdrawn subject to the six-month limitation of this section. The city council may amend an application prior to acting thereon, but only to reduce its size, or change the district requested to a less intensive or lower density district than that requested or by requiring that certain conditions contained in section 44-240 be made a part of the rezoning decision. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1813(d)) 
Sec. 44-92. - Prior study. 
    The city manager or his designated representative, upon receiving an application for rezoning of an area or a particular piece of property shall do the following: 
(1)  Consult with other departments of the city, county and/or state to fully evaluate the impact of any zoning change upon public facilities and services including, but not limited to, schools, drainage, traffic, water, sewer, etc.; 
(2)  Study each application with references to its appropriateness and effect on existing, proposed and/or projected land use; 
(3)  Report to the city planning commission and the city council the results of the studies set forth in this subsection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1813(e)) 
Sec. 44-93. - Procedures and zoning standards of the mayor and council and the city planning commission. 
(a)  So that the purpose of this chapter will be served and so that health, public safety and the general welfare will be secured: 
(1)  The mayor and council of the city in its decision on an application for a proposed amendment may, in its legislative discretion: 
a.  Approve or deny the application for a proposed amendment as submitted; 
b.  Defer a decision until a specific meeting date; or 
c.  Require an applicant to file a site plan or other plans regarding the proposed project development and defer action until a later date; 
whether a valid withdrawal of the application has been made by the applicant. 
(2)  The mayor and council may also require that: 
a.  The land areas for the proposed amendment be reduced; 
b.  The zoning district be changed to one other than requested; and/or 
c.  Zoning conditions be added or deleted, as the mayor and council may deem appropriate. 
(b)  Whenever the city shall exercise its zoning powers, either through a recommendation by the city planning commission or by the mayor and council in approving or disapproving the application, the following standards are considered relevant in balancing the city's interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of property: 
(1)  Existing land use and zoning classification of nearby and adjacent properties; 
(2)  Whether the zoning proposed will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of nearby and adjacent properties; 
(3)  Whether the zoning proposed will adversely affect the existing use or usability of nearby or adjacent properties; 
(4)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposed has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(5)  Whether the zoning proposed will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
(6)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposed; 
(7)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon individual property owners; 
(8)  The extent to which property values are diminished by existing zoning classification, as compared to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; and 
(9)  Whether the zoning proposed conforms with the policy and intent of an adopted land use plan. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1813(f)) 
Sec. 44-94. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  A local official, including planning commission members, who has a property interest in any real property affected by a rezoning action upon which that official is authorized to vote; or has a financial interest in any business entity which has a property interest in any real property affected by rezoning action upon which that official is authorized to vote; or has a member of the family that has a property interest or financial interest in a business that has a property interest in any real property affected by a rezoning action upon which that official is authorized to vote shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing to the mayor and council of the local government in which the local government official is a member. Such disclosures shall be a public record and available for public inspection at any time during normal business hours. 
(b)  When any applicant for rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of that applicant's application for the rezoning action, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more or made gifts having in the aggregate value of $250.00 or more to a local official of the local government which will consider the application, then it shall be the duty of the applicant and the attorney representing the applicant to file a disclosure report with the mayor and council of the local government in accordance with O.C.G.A.  36-67A-3 as now adopted or hereafter amended. 
(c)  Any applicant who knowingly violates subsection (b) of this section or a local government official who knowingly violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance with O.C.G.A.  36-67A-4. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1814) 
Secs. 44-95-44-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-117. - Division into districts. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into 12 districts designated as follows: 
R-1 Single-family residential district Residential district R-2 Low-density multifamily residential district R-3 High-density residential district R-3 Single-family attached residential district (fee simple title) O-I Office-institutional district C-1 Central business district C-2 General business district C-3 Special commercial district C-N Neighborhood business district G General industrial district New Town overlay district  
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1804(a)) 
Sec. 44-118. - District boundaries. 
    The boundaries of each district are as shown on maps entitled "Official Zoning Maps, Dallas, Georgia," adopted March 1988, and certified by the city clerk. Said maps, and all explanatory matter thereon, accompany and are hereby made a part of this chapter. Said maps shall be retained in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection during normal office hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1804(b)) 
Sec. 44-119. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning maps, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways, or railroads, or right-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning maps. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning maps. 
(4)  Where a district boundary line, as appearing on the zoning maps, divides a lot in single ownership at the time of this enactment, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extensions shall not include any part of such a lot more than 35 feet beyond the district boundary line. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1804(c)) 
Secs. 44-120-44-136. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012, repealed Ch. 44, Art. III, Div. 2,  44-137-44-141, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

Sec. 44-137. - R-1 Single-family residential district. 
    Within an R-1 residential district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings except for manufactured homes. 
(2)  Churches and similar places of worship and their customary related uses. 
(3)  Public and private schools offering general education courses. 
(4)  Municipal, county, state, federal and other public uses, including parks and playgrounds. 
(5)  Accessory buildings provided such shall be permitted only in a rear yard and shall not be less than ten feet from any property line. 
(6)  Nursery schools (day care centers) and kindergartens, provided that they shall have at least 35 square feet of indoor space provided for each child and at least 100 square feet of play area per child in the outdoor play area; and that the outdoor area shall be enclosed by a fence having a minimum height of six feet; and provided that the principal building of such use shall meet all the yard requirements of the R-1 residential district. 
(7)  Bed and breakfast/special events facilities, provided that they shall have at least one bath per each bedroom; parking spaces for at least 50 vehicles; and an owner or manager shall reside at the facility. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-138. - Reserved. 
Sec. 44-139. - R-2 residential district. 
    Within the R-2 residential district, the following uses shall be allowed: 
(1)  All uses permitted in R-1 residential district with a total density limitation of three dwellings/acre. 
(2)  Two-family and low-density multifamily dwelling (duplexes, triplexes and quadruplexes) with a total density limitation of three dwellings/acre. Separate bath/toilet facilities shall be provided for each dwelling. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Manufactured homes, provided each manufactured home is located within an approved manufactured home park and conforms to the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective on June 15, 1976. All manufactured housing (mobile homes) produced before this date shall not be moved into the city. 
b.  Any existing manufactured housing located within the city upon adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be exempt until either relocated, vacant for a period of six months or destroyed greater than 50 percent of its value, at which time the provisions of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall prevail. 
(4)  Manufactured home parks are permitted within R-2 residential districts provided they meet the requirements of article V of this chapter, pertaining to manufactured home parks. 
(5)  Tourist homes; rooming houses and boardinghouses. 
(6)  A business, occupation or profession carried on within a single-family residential dwelling by the resident thereof that is designated as a home occupation shall conform to the following criteria: 
1.  The occupation carried on within the dwelling unit shall be restricted to the heated floor space of the dwelling, shall not involve the sale of those articles on the premises, and shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling by a member of the family in residence only. 
2.  The occupation carried on within the dwelling unit shall not occupy in excess of 25 percent of the heated floor space within the structures, and said occupational use shall be clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes. 
3.  There shall be no external display of products or storage of equipment or other externally visible evidence whatsoever of the occupation, business or profession. 
4.  There shall be no emission of smoke, dust, odor, fumes, glare, noise, vibration, electrical or electronic disturbance detectable at the lot line or beyond. 
5.  There shall be no stock of goods or materials on the premises with the exception of literature and brochures appurtenant to the occupation, business or profession. Said literature and brochures shall remain in that part of the residence designated for home occupation purposes. 
6.  There shall be no chemical, mechanical or electrical equipment on the premises other than that normally found in a purely domestic residence. 
7.  Contact with customers and clients shall be made by telephone or mail. No on-street parking of business-related vehicles shall be permitted at any time. No business vehicle larger than a van, or pickup truck shall be permitted to remain on the premises other than a vehicle owned by the resident. 
8.  Music lessons given to one pupil at a time and cultural, art or dance instruction given to as many as four pupils at one time is a home occupation. 
9.  Child Care, but not for more than five children at a time, is a home occupation. 
10.  Beauty salons, barbershops and similar businesses are not home occupations. 
11.  There shall be no external identification sign exceeding two square feet in area. 
12.  The above listed requirements of a home occupation shall not be construed to restrict the sale of garden produce grown on the premises, provided that this exception shall not extend to allow the operation of a commercial greenhouse or nursery or the existence of stands or booths for display of said produce. 
13.  Any business, occupation or profession, the operation of which does not meet the aforementioned requirements of a home occupation shall not be interpreted to be a home occupation despite the fact that it might attempt to operate in a single-family residence. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. OA-2017-01 , 12-11-2017) 
Sec. 44-140. - R-3 Residential District, high-density. 
    Within the R-3 residential district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in R-2 residential district. 
(2)  Multifamily residential developments which allow up to nine dwelling units per acre with provisions for customary accessory uses. Single-family attached subdivisions (fee simple ownership) may have up to nine units per acre. 
(3)  Manufactured houses, provided they are located in a manufactured home park which meets the requirements of article V of this chapter, pertaining to manufactured home parks. 
(4)  Buildings with five attached dwelling units or more shall be considered apartment buildings. Total building area is limited to 50 percent of site area. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided on site for each dwelling unit, except in the case of low income public housing which shall provide one and one-half parking spaces per dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall have separate bath/toilet and kitchen/dining areas. Each dwelling units shall contain a minimum of: 
a.  850 square feet for two bedroom units. 
b.  1,000 square feet for three bedroom units. 
c.  1,200 square feet for four bedroom units. 
(5)  Buildings should be placed at least 20 feet apart. The front of the one building must not face the rear of another building on the site. 
(6)  The developer of the apartment complex shall set aside and develop not less than 25 percent of the land area within the complex for open space, parks or recreational use. Required drives, yard areas and common parking court areas shall not be credited toward this minimum required open space allocation. Only 50 percent of such area may be developed with recreational facilities. Not more than 50 percent of the land reserved for open space purposes shall be within a floodplain. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-141. - R-3 single-family attached residential district high-density (fee simple title). 
    Single-family attached subdivision: (Fee Simple Title, High Density-Conditions (1)-(12) shall be mandatory in the FST District, subject to the provisions of Article II, Division 2 of the zoning board of appeals). 
(1)  Open space requirements . The developer of the subdivision shall set aside and develop not less than 20 percent of the land area within the subdivision for open space, parks or recreational use. Required streets, drives, yard areas and common parking court areas shall not be credited toward this minimum required open space allocation. Only 50 percent of such area may be developed with recreational facilities. Not more than 50 percent of the land reserved for open space purposes shall be within a floodplain. 
(2)  Density. The density of the subdivision shall not exceed that specified under district development standards, residential. However, only 50 percent of the portion of the subdivision, which is within a floodplain, may be included as developable land for the purpose of density determination. 
(3)  Minimum unit width, yard and height requirements. The minimum unit width, ward and building height requirements permitted in the subdivision shall be as specified under district development standards, residential; provided, however, that in a condominium such yards may, but need not be, conveyed to the respective unit owners. 
(4)  Planted buffer. There shall be a buffer area with a minimum depth of 20 feet adjacent to every exterior subdivision property line, excluding that portion which abuts a street right-of-way. The buffer shall be a part of the maintained common area. 
(5)  Street frontage . Units within the subdivision which front on a street may front on a public street classified as another street or on a private drive having a pavement width of not less than 26 feet or, if such street is designated as being one-way, 20 feet. Units within the subdivision may front a major or minor through-way if parking is provided in the rear of the units or in planned parking areas located to the rear of the front building setback line and separated from such streets by an open space providing a minimum depth of 20 feet. Individual cub cuts for each unit shall be prohibited; curb cuts shall be limited to one per 100 feet of street frontage. 
(6)  Separate parcel of land required . A separate parcel of land is required for each dwelling unit. 
(7)  Maximum number of units. Maximum number of units, except in a condominium, whether attached or detached, shall be located on a separate parcel of land not more than ten dwelling units shall be permitted in a single-family attached building. "Single-family attached building" is defined as a building containing two or more single-family attached dwelling units joined at one or more points by one or more party walls or other common facilities not including the walls of an enclosed courtyard or similar area. 
(8)  Open space between units and buildings . The front or rear face of a dwelling unit shall be not less than 50 feet from the front or rear face of another dwelling unit. The unattached side face of a single-family attached building shall be not less than 20 feet from the side face of another such building and not less than 40 feet from the front or rear face of another such building or unit. 
(9)  Alignment. No dwelling unit shall be situated so as to face the rear of another dwelling unit within the subdivision unless terrain differences or vegetation will provide effective visual separation. 
(10)  Parking. At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each unit. Such space shall be provided: 
a.  Under the dwelling unit; 
b.  To the immediate front or rear of the dwelling unit; and 
c.  In common off-street parking areas not more than 300 feet from the dwelling unit as measured along the shortest paved route. All off-street parking spaces shall be designed and located so that vehicles will not be required to back into a public street. 
(11)  Preservation of common areas. With the exception of condominiums, which shall be governed as by state law provided, the developer of the subdivision or a home owners' association created by the developer, by recorded covenants and restrictions running with the land, shall preserve and maintain for the owners and occupants of the units, the lands set aside for open space, parks or recreational use and common off-street parking spaces established for the subdivision. The book and page in which such covenants and restrictions are recorded shall be shown on the final plat of the subdivision. 
(12)  Development plan. With the exception of condominiums, which shall be governed as by state law provided, the development plan for the subdivision shall be processed in conformance with all applicable requirements of the city subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-142. - HR-1 historic residential district. 
    Within a HR-1 historic residential district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Single family dwellings except for manufactured or modular homes. 
(2)  Churches and similar places of worship and their customary related uses. 
(3)  Accessory buildings provided such use shall only be permitted in a rear yard and shall not be less than ten feet from any property line. 
    The purpose of the HR-1 historic residential district is to maintain the historic neighborhoods of the city. The following regulations shall apply only within the HR-1 historic residential district: 
(1)  In the event that an existing structure is destroyed or requires more than 50 percent of the value of the structure to be repaired, then a new structure may be built upon the lot with the same exterior dimensions as the original structure. (Same footprint.) 
(2)  Any new structure located within the HR-1 historic residential district must be architecturally designed to be compatible with existing structures within the District. 
(3)  All construction plans must be approved by the City of Dallas Planning Commission or the City of Dallas Historic Preservation Commission or other entity so designated by the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Secs. 44-143-44-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012, repealed Ch. 44, Art. III, Div. 3,  44-166-44-171, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

Sec. 44-166. - O-I office-institutional district. 
    Within the O-I office and institutional district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
    All uses permitted within the R-2 residential district. 
(1)  All uses permitted within the R-2 Residential District 
(2)  Offices, including drive-in banks. 
(3)  Privately owned utility stations and structures. 
(4)  Compatible business with primary use of office; such as pharmacist with doctor's office. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-167. - C-1 central business district (old downtown district). 
    Within the C-1 central business district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted within the R-2 residential district. 
(2)  Any retail business or service establishment. 
(3)  Hotels, offices, banks, and theaters. 
(4)  Automobile parking lots and garages. 
(5)  Bus terminals and railroad terminals. 
(6)  Newspaper offices and printing establishments. 
(7)  Automobile service stations, provided that all structures and buildings, except principal use signs, and including storage tanks shall be placed not less than 25 feet from any side or rear property line except where such side or rear property lines abut a street, in which case the setback shall be that required for such streets measured from the right-of-way. All buildings or structures including gas pumps and storage tanks, except principal use signs, shall comply with the setback requirements of any abutting street. If the station is located on a corner lot, the means of egress and ingress provided shall not be less than 15 feet from the intersection of street lines. Ingress and egress shall be arranged and designed so as to minimize the interference with the flow of traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian. 
(8)  Attached outdoor advertising signs and business signs. 
(9)  Public buildings and structures. 
(10)  Public utility stations and structures. 
(11)  Churches. 
(12)  Automobile sales and service. 
Sec. 44-168. - C-2 general business district. 
    Within a C-2 general business district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the C-1 central business district; 
(2)  Funeral parlors and mortuaries, provided any such use is located on a major street; 
(3)  Tourist courts and motels; 
(4)  Veterinary clinics and/or animal hospitals, provided no part of any building, structure, pen, or enclosure is located closer than 50 feet to any property line; 
(5)  Dog grooming shops; 
(6)  Signs, including outdoor advertising, incidental or accessory advertising, and business signs, provided the required setback is observed; 
(7)  Truck terminals, provided any such use shall be located on a major street; 
(8)  Wholesaling and warehousing, except the wholesaling and storage of petroleum or other inflammable products; 
(9)  Light industrial operations which do not cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard, or other objectionable conditions; 
(10)  Accessory use: Manufacture[d] homes, dropped semi-trailers, modular homes, tents and other structures of this nature may be placed for accessory use on a limited time basis upon special approval by the mayor and council. Type uses permitted are: offices; storage; warehousing; and special sales promotions. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. OA-2013-02, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 44-169. - C-N neighborhood business district. 
    Within the C-N neighborhood business district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Any retail business or retail service establishment. 
(2)  Theaters, but not including drive-in theaters. 
(3)  Radio, television, and appliance repair shops. 
(4)  Offices, including drive-in branch banks. 
(5)  Accessory uses. 
(6)  Attached outdoor advertising, signs and business signs, provided that all lighting is so shielded that it does not adversely affect adjacent residential areas. 
(7)  Publicly owned and operated buildings and lands. 
(8)  Automobile service stations, provided that all structures and buildings, except principal use signs, and including storage tanks shall be placed not less than 25 feet from any side or rear property line except where such side or rear property lines abut a street, in which case the setback shall be that required for such streets measured from the right-of-way. All buildings or structures including gasoline pumps and storage tanks, except principal use signs, shall comply with the setback requirements of any abutting street. If the automobile service station is located on a corner lot, the means of ingress and egress provided shall be not less than 15 feet from the intersection of street right-of-way lines. Ingress and egress shall be arranged and designed so as to minimize the interference with the flow of traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian. 
(9)  Churches, synagogues, or other places of worship. 
Within the C-N neighborhood business district, every use shall be so constructed, maintained, and operated as not to be injurious or offensive to occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, smoke, vibration, dust, electrical disturbance, toxic or noxious waste material, odor, fire and explosive hazard, glare, or traffic congestion. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-170. - G general industrial district. 
    Within a G general industrial district, the following uses shall be permitted as well as all uses permitted in the C-1 central business district, C-2 general business district and C-N neighborhood business district: 
(1)  Assembly halls; 
(2)  Automobile, truck and trailer lease rentals; 
(3)  Boat sales; 
(4)  Bookbinding; 
(5)  Bottling plants; 
(6)  Building materials storage yard; 
(7)  Cold storage plants; 
(8)  Colleges and universities; 
(9)  Commercial vocational schools; 
(10)  Electric transformer station; gas regulator station and telephone exchange; 
(11)  General building contractors; 
(12)  Manufacture of prepared food or prepared food products; 
(13)  Manufacturing of electrical devices; 
(14)  Neighborhood recreation centers or swimming pools; 
(15)  Photoengraving, typesetting, electrotyping and stereotyping; 
(16)  Plumbing and heating equipment dealers; 
(17)  Publishing and printing establishment; 
(18)  Radio, television and other communication transmission towers; 
(19)  Repair services; 
(20)  Research, testing and laboratories; 
(21)  Re-upholstery, furniture and automobile; 
(22)  Taxi stands and dispatching agencies; 
(23)  Telephone business offices. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. OA-2013-02, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 44-171. - H-1 heavy industrial district. 
(1)  Within a H-1 heavy industrial district the following uses shall be permitted as well as uses permitted in the C-1 central business district, C-2 general business district, C-N neighborhood business district and G general industrial district: 
a.  Boarding or breeding kennels; 
b.  Bus stations for freight; 
c.  Crematories; 
d.  Dry cleaning plants; 
e.  Heavy construction contractors; 
f.  Petroleum bulk stations; 
g.  Railroad stations for freight; 
h.  Tire retreading and recapping; 
i.  Tool [and] Die pattern or machine shops; 
j.  Trailer [and] manufactured home sales room [and] sales lot. 
(2)  Special provisions: Within H-1 heavy industrial district the following uses shall not be permitted without the prior approval of the governing authority of the City of Dallas as hereinafter set forth: 
a.  Acid manufacture or storage; 
b.  Airports or landing fields; 
c.  Asphalt manufacture, refining or storage or asphalt plants; 
d.  Brick, tile or terracotta manufacture; 
e.  Butane or propane storage; 
f.  Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacture; 
g.  Chemical manufacture; 
h.  Production or bulk storage of chlorine or other noxious gas; 
i.  Commercial or large scale slaughter of animals; 
j.  Manufacture of concrete, cement or clay products; 
k.  Cotton gins; 
l.  Creosote manufacture or treatment; 
m.  Distillation of bones, coal, petroleum, animal refuse, grain, tar or wood; 
n.  Storage or manufacture of explosives or fireworks; 
o.  Fat rendering, production of fats and oils from animals or vegetable products by boiling or distillation; 
p.  Fertilizer manufacture; 
q.  Dumping or reduction of garbage, offal or dead animals; 
r.  Gas manufacture or bulk storage; 
s.  Grain elevators or commercial feed mills; 
t.  Incinerators; 
u.  Manufacture or bulk storage of petroleum or petroleum products; 
v.  Quarrying or stone crushing; 
w.  Excavating, crushing, storage or distribution of rock, sand or gravel; 
x.  Stockyards; 
y.  Racetracks or drag strips for automobiles or other motorized vehicles; 
z.  Automobile or equipment salvage or parts yard; 
aa.  Building material or equipment salvage or storage yards; 
bb.  Junkyard or salvage yard of any kind; 
cc.  Used metal storage yard; 
dd.  Metal processing; 
ee.  Steel mill or foundry; 
ff.  Any business that allows, employs, shows, exhibits or displays live nude persons. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "nude person" means a person displaying any portion of the female breast, either by a female or any other person, below the top of the areola or the displaying of any portion of any person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. The term "displaying" means being visible to the normal human eye; 
gg.  Any public dance hall that allows dancing either for patrons or the viewing of employed dancers; 
hh.  Adult entertainment establishments; 
ii.  Flea markets; 
jj.  Livestock auctions. 
(3)  Prior approval of the governing authority. No property in the corporate limits of the city shall be used for any of the purposes specified in subsection (2) of this section unless such property is zoned H-1 heavy industrial district, and unless such use shall have first been approved by the mayor and council of the city pursuant to the following procedures: 
a.  Any person desiring to use property for the purposes specified in subsection (2) of this section shall apply to the city clerk, and such application shall give a description of the property to be so used, a description of the exact use to which such property shall be put, and such other pertinent information as shall be required by the mayor and council or by any governmental agency which might investigate such proposed use at the request of such mayor and council. 
b.  Upon the filing of such application, the city manager shall determine what studies are necessary for a decision regarding the proposed use of such property, and shall call upon whatever governmental agencies he deems appropriate for studies or information pertaining to such use. The governmental agencies from which the city manager might make such request shall include, but shall not be limited to, the fire department, the public health department and any environmental agency. 
c.  A study shall be made by the city and a report and recommendation of such study shall be made to the mayor and council. Notice of the time and place of the hearing of such application by the planning commission shall be published in the legal organ of the county for at least two consecutive weeks prior to such hearing. 
d.  The mayor and council of the city shall consider such application at either a regular or a called meeting following the making of the reports by the planning commission and by such other governmental agencies as may have been called upon to make studies in connection with such application. 
e.  The mayor and council shall make every reasonable effort to render its decision as to such application within 90 days of the date of filing of such application. However, such mayor and council shall have the authority to postpone the final consideration of such application for such reasonable times as may be necessary to receive reports from governmental agencies which are investigating such application and to allow such mayor and council to intelligently study such application and proposed use. 
f.  No property located within the corporate limits of the city shall be used for any purpose specified in subsection (2) of this section unless the mayor and council of the city shall have first determined that such use will not be unduly injurious to the surrounding community. In making such determination, the mayor and council shall consider such factors as the likelihood that such use would cause noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odors, dust, fire hazards or other objectionable conditions. 
(4)  Any use of property as a storage yard, salvage yard or junkyard pursuant to authorization granted under this section shall be screened from view on all sides by a solid wall, planted screen or similar opaque partition at least six feet in height. Any such partition, screen or fence shall comply with all setback requirements of this district. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Secs. 44-172-44-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NEW TOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 44-196. - Purpose, intent and authority. 
(a)  Title. This division shall be known as the "New Town Overlay District." 
(b)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this district to establish standards for the design of sites, buildings, structures, plantings, signs, street hardware and such other improvements that are visible to the public and affect the physical development of land within the designated New Town Overlay District in keeping with the city livable centers initiative (LCI) plan and the city's comprehensive plan. The following standards shall be considered in evaluating projects proposed within the New Town Overlay District: 
(1)  All structures will be evaluated on the overall appearance of the project and shall be based on the quality of its design and its relationship to the surrounding area. 
(2)  The quality of design goes beyond the materials of construction to include scale, mass, color, proportion, and compatibility with adjoining developments. 
(3)  Colors shall be harmonious and only the use of compatible accents shall be permitted. 
(4)  Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets, shall have good proportions and relationships to one another. 
(5)  For any design in which the structure frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall be compatible within themselves and harmonious with their surroundings. 
(6)  Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting of individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous appearance. 
(c)  Statement of intent. These standards are intended to promote imagination and innovation to encourage the development of high quality, integrated, walkable developments with variety in the appearance of buildings and sites within the overlay district. These standards are further intended to preserve and enhance the character, quality, and longterm sustainability of development in the city and to promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing for consistent and coordinated treatment of the property encompassed within the overlay district. The city LCI report (2006) identified a strong community preference for the city to grow in a more cohesive, sustainable pattern. The overlay district regulations include controls regarding the design of buildings, sites, structures, parking areas, signage, transportation facilities (pedestrian and vehicular), open space/greenspace, and landscaping (trees and vegetation). 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1816(A)) 
Sec. 44-197. - Boundaries. 
(a)  General provisions. The boundaries of the New Town Overlay District shall be any and all properties located within and any parcel with frontage along or property adjacent to the public right-of-way of the roadways listed in subsection (b) of this section. The provisions of the overlay do not apply to new single-family detached homes or subdivisions or to the alteration of existing single-family homes to remain. 
(b)  Roadways named. The roadway corridors that comprise the boundaries of the overlay district subject to these provisions are as follows: 
(1)  Main Street south from First Avenue to Seaboard Drive. 
(2)  Seaboard Drive from Main Street to the Silver Comet Trail. 
(3)  State Route No. 6/U.S. Hwy. 278 from the intersection of Seaboard Drive to Pumpkinvine Creek. 
(4)  State Route No. 120/Buchanan Street from the Silver Comet Trail to West Memorial Drive. 
(5)  West Avenue from U.S. Hwy. 278 to the Silver Comet Trail. 
(6)  West Memorial Drive from U.S. Hwy. 278 to Main Street. 
(7)  East Memorial Drive from Main Street to Park Street. 
(8)  Confederate Avenue from Memorial Drive to a distance 500 feet north of Memorial Drive. 
(9)  Park Street from East Memorial Drive to Hardee Street. 
(10)  First Avenue from Hardee Street to Main Street. 
(c)  Downtown subdistrict. The downtown subdistrict shall include all properties located within and any parcel with frontage along or property adjacent to the public right-of-way of the following boundaries: 
(1)  Main Street south from First Avenue to the Southern Railway. 
(2)  The northern edge of the Southern Railway from Main Street to West Memorial Drive (properties along the southern edge of the railway are not to be included in the downtown subdistrict). 
(3)  West Memorial Drive from the Southern Railway to Main Street. 
(4)  Confederate Avenue from Memorial Drive to a distance 500 feet north of Memorial Drive. 
(5)  East Memorial Drive from Main Street to Park Street. 
(6)  Park Street from East Memorial Drive to Hardee Street. 
(7)  First Avenue from Hardee Street to Main Street. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1816(B)) 
Sec. 44-198. - Planning commission approval. 
(a)  Approval by the city planning commission shall be required for any proposed or revised development plan or structure or structural alteration in the New Town Overlay District, including approval of the architectural design, landscaping, sewerage, drainage, parking, signage, lighting and access to the property and shall be necessary prior to: 
(1)  The establishment of any use of the land; 
(2)  The issuance of any improvement location permit; 
(3)  The erection, construction or structural alteration of any buildings within the district; or 
(4)  Modification or revision of any site development plan. 
(b)  The city or its agents, in reviewing applications, shall examine factors concerning the site, site plan, and the surrounding area, which include, but are not limited to, the following items: 
(1)  Topography; 
(2)  Zoning on-site; 
(3)  Surrounding zoning and existing land use; 
(4)  Streets, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks; 
(5)  Access to public streets; 
(6)  Driveway and curb cut locations in relation to other sites; 
(7)  General vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(8)  Internal site circulation including connectivity with adjoining parcels and developments; 
(9)  Special and general easements for public or private use; 
(10)  On-site and off-site surface and subsurface storm and water drainage; 
(11)  On-site and off-site utilities; 
(12)  The means and impact of sanitary sewage disposal and water supply technique; 
(13)  Protective restrictions or covenants and/or recorded commitments; 
(14)  Outdoor storage areas; 
(15)  Provisions for adequate and acceptable minimum and maximum setbacks, lighting, signage, screening, landscaping, and compatibility with existing platted residential use; and 
(16)  Effects the proposed project may have on the entire New Town Overlay District. 
In addition thereto, the city, at its discretion, may request and require architectural drawings which are to be stamped/certified by a professional architect, registered landscape architect, and/or specific engineering plans stamped by a professional engineer, for any and all buildings, out parcels, or other such aspects of the site and/or its development as the city may deem necessary for its review of the application and development plans and proposal. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1816(C)) 
Sec. 44-199. - Building design standards. 
(a)  Architectural design requirements. 
(1)  Structures within the New Town Overlay District shall have a "turn of the century" design aesthetic. Building designs should be reminiscent of structures built between 1880 and 1920, with a strong sense of proportion, a pedestrian scale, and facades typically comprised of masonry (including brick), wood and glass. 
(2)  Building designs should emphasize vertical proportions where the height of individual buildings, windows, and other building elements should exceed their width. 
(3)  Structures longer than 100 feet in length shall create variations in the facade through varying the cornice height, facade depth, materials, textures, colors, and/or window and door patterns to provide visual interest and avoid imposing or monotonous facades. 
(4)  Exterior metal walls shall be prohibited on all buildings erected, constructed, altered, repaired or used in this New Town Overlay Zone, which abut, are adjacent to or are visible from any of the roadway corridors that define the district's boundaries. 
(5)  Building facades may be constructed from masonry (including brick), glass, and/or wood as defined below, or other materials or products which provide the same desired stability and quality. (Please note: Building facades to be regulated by this district include all building sides which are visible from any public street or sidewalk within the district.) Products other than the following listed products must be approved by the city: 
a.  Masonry construction. Masonry construction shall include all masonry construction that is composed of solid, faced, or veneered-wall construction (excluding masonry boards, concrete masonry units (CMU) and/or cinder blocks, unless otherwise approved by the city) with standard brick size. 
1.  Stone material used for masonry construction may consist of granite, sandstone, slate, limestone, marble, or other hard or durable all-weather stone. Ashlar, cut stone, and dimensioned stone construction techniques are acceptable. 
2.  Brick material used for masonry construction shall be composed of hard fired (kiln-fired) all weather standard size brick or other all weather facing brick. 
b.  Glass walls. Glass walls shall include glass curtain walls construction. Glass curtain wall shall be defined as an exterior wall which carries no floor or roof loads, and which may consist of a combination of glass and other surfacing materials supported in a metal framework. 
c.  Wood construction. Wood construction shall include wood siding, board and baton, and other traditional wood construction. Fiberboard (Hardiplank and/or similar products) may be allowed with approval of the city. Other synthetic siding material including vinyl siding and metal siding are prohibited as a facade material within the overlay district. 
(6)  The materials and finishes of exposed roofs shall compliment those used for the exterior walls. Exposed roofs shall be defined as that portion of a roof visible from ground level of any public roadway or public area (sidewalk and/or parking area) or residentially zoned or used area. 
(7)  Roof-mounted equipment (mechanical and all other) shall be screened from view. The appearance, materials, and color of roof screens shall be coordinated with the building to maintain a unified appearance. 
(8)  All building mechanical and electrical equipment located adjacent to the building and visible from any public roadway, public area (including sidewalks and/or parking areas), or a residentially zoned or used area shall be screened from view. Such screens and enclosures shall be treated as an integral element of the building's appearance and shall thus consist of materials and colors that are compatible with the building facade and/or dense landscaping. 
(9)  The exposed walls and roofs of buildings shall be maintained in a clean, orderly, and attractive condition; free of cracks, dents, punctures, breakage, and other forms of visible marring. Materials that become excessively faded, chalked or otherwise deteriorated shall be refinished, repainted or replaced. 
(10)  Refuse and waste removal areas, loading berths, service yards, storage yards, and exterior work areas shall be screened from view from public ways. 
(11)  Screening of service yards, ground mounted mechanical and electrical equipment, refuse/waste areas and other places that tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of these. Walls or fencing may be comprised of brick, stone, wrought iron or wood. No barbed wire, razor wire, chain link fence or similar elements shall be visible from any public area (roadway, sidewalk or parking area). Screening shall be equally effective in winter and summer. 
(b)  Relationship of buildings to site. 
(1)  Buildings shall be placed in close proximity to public roadways, shall relate to roadways and pedestrian sidewalk areas, and shall promote easy access from sidewalks into buildings. 
(2)  Setbacks and building edges shall be varied from building to building (up to ten feet in variation) to enhance visual interest and to prevent consistent building edges longer than 100 linear feet. 
(3)  Parking areas shall be located to the side and behind buildings. Parking and driveways may not be located between buildings and public roadways. Under special exception from the city, a maximum of two rows of parking may be allowed between buildings and federal or state designated highways. If parking and/or a driveway of any type is allowed under special exception, a landscape berm no less than 12 feet in width and four feet in height must be provided between public roadways and the parking and/or driveway positioned between the roadway and building. 
(4)  Pedestrian paths along public roadways may not be interrupted for more than 30 continuous linear feet by driveways. Pedestrian sidewalks/paths over driveways must be differentiated from driveway pavement through the use of another material or the same material with a different color and texture. 
(5)  Shared driveways serving multiple properties and inter-parcel access are strongly encouraged to minimize the number of driveways through pedestrian areas/sidewalks and the number of access points for each individual development and along major roadways. 
(6)  Deceleration lanes, except for those required by the department of transportation on federal or state controlled roadways, are not allowed within the New Town Overlay District. 
(7)  All new developments shall preserve a minimum of 15 percent of the development parcel as open space (natural or publicly accessible open space). The term "open space," as it relates to this requirement, does not include impervious surfaces with the sole exceptions of pedestrian sidewalks and multiuse trails. 
(8)  Plans for new developments and exterior alterations to any existing structures must include a detailed site plan that shows all sidewalks areas, parking areas, building footprints and entries, pedestrian paths from sidewalks and parking areas to building entries, clear transitions of the streetscape (sidewalks, landscaping and lighting) with adjacent parcels along all public roadways, and calculation of required open space. 
(9)  Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, building wall extensions, plantings, berms, or other innovative means so as to attractively landscape and/or screen parking areas from the view of public ways. 
(10)  Within the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings. 
(11)  Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations shall be underground. 
(12)  Within the downtown subdistrict the following additional provisions/restrictions shall apply: 
a.  All new structures in the downtown subdistrict shall be placed at the back of and adjacent to the pedestrian sidewalk. 
b.  The maximum block size in the downtown subdistrict is 200 feet. Blocks longer than 200 feet should be sub-divided to create alleyways, driveways, or new roadways at appropriate intervals. 
c.  All parking in the downtown subdistrict must be on-street parking or located to the side or behind buildings. No parking, other than on-street parallel parking, or driveways shall be permitted between the public roadway, pedestrian sidewalk, and facing building edges in the downtown subdistrict. 
d.  Parking areas to the side of any building in the downtown subdistrict must include a minimum five-foot planting area between the public sidewalk and the parking area. The planting area may include shade trees, shrubs, seasonal flowers, and/or benches, but shall not include impervious pavement or surfaces. 
e.  Curb cuts in the downtown subdistrict shall be a maximum of 24 feet in width. Shared driveways among multiple parcels and/or developments are encouraged to minimize the number of disruptions in the pedestrian environment/sidewalks. 
f.  Entrances to buildings within the downtown subdistrict must be clearly visible, face the public street, be directly accessible from the adjacent public sidewalk along the roadway, and must be unlocked during normal business hours. 
g.  There is no minimum open space requirement for buildings in the downtown subdistrict 
(c)  Minimum building height. 
(1)  All structures within the overlay district shall have a minimum building height of 24 feet measured to the top of the parapet wall on a flat roof or the lowest eave of a sloped roof and shall have the appearance of a two-story or taller structure. 
(2)  Downtown subdistrict structures must have a minimum of two occupied levels above grade. 
(d)  Uses in the downtown subdistrict. 
(1)  Structures including a vertical mix of uses with ground floor commercial uses (office, retail, restaurant, etc.) and office and/or residential units above are encouraged and hereby allowed within the downtown subdistrict in addition to any other uses allowed by the underlying zoning. 
(2)  For vertical mixed-use buildings, parking requirements shall be based on the parking required by the underlying zoning for the use on the ground floor plus one space per bedroom for residential units and three spaces for every 1,000 square feet of office space on upper floors. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1816(D)) 
Sec. 44-200. - Signage standards. 
(a)  Residential subdivisions and multifamily complexes. Residential uses shall be permitted one freestanding sign (ground mounted) per main entrance, not to exceed two signs per development. Signs shall be monument-style in construction and limited to a maximum of 100 square feet per sign. Maximum sign height should not exceed 12 feet. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial uses. Each development shall be permitted one freestanding sign (ground mounted). Signs shall be monument-style in construction and limited to a maximum of 100 square feet. Maximum sign height should not exceed 18 feet. Monument signs shall be limited to the use of no more than three colors. For the purposes of this section, a shopping center or similar use shall be permitted one main freestanding sign; no freestanding signs shall be permitted for individual establishments in shopping centers or similar uses. Out-parcels located within a shopping center complex are allowed one monument sign each, but no more than two for any single shopping center or development, not to exceed 40 square feet with a maximum height not to exceed eight feet. Signs shall be located ten feet off a roadway right-of-way and shall not obstruct sight distances nor impede pedestrian access. 
(c)  Wall signs. In addition to subsection (b) of this section, each structure shall be permitted one on-structure, wall sign. For the purposes of this section, a shopping center or similar use shall be permitted one wall sign per tenant. On-structure signs shall not project above the eave line for buildings with pitched roofs or above the cornice line for buildings with flat roofs. The top of any wall sign shall be placed no higher than 24 feet above the ground nor extend from the wall more than 12 inches. Individual wall signs are limited in size and shall be no larger than ten percent of the building face projection for the applicable business or structure (for example: a building face that is 40 feet by 20 feet equals 800 square feet total and would be limited to a wall sign no larger than 80 square feet). 
(d)  Construction. Freestanding signs shall be ground mounted, monument type structures constructed of the same material as and designed to complement the principle building's architecture. Wall signs must closely resemble and shall be compatible with the building's architecture. Signs shall not have reflective backgrounds or reflective lettering. Digital or electronic controlled message components shall comprise no more than 33 percent of the total sign area. Scrolling text shall be permitted including date, time, and temperature. No message shall be displayed for an interval of less than ten seconds. 
(e)  Illuminations. All signs must be illuminated by an externally located stationary light source, shielded and directed solely at the sign. Freestanding/monument signs are limited to one lighting source per sign face. Colored lamps are not permitted. Wall signs may include no more than one lighting source per eight feet of sign length. Internally lit signs (freestanding and wall signs) are not permitted. 
(f)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be integrated with installation of freestanding signs in a manner that preserves sight distances and pedestrian access. 
(g)  Window signs. Window signs shall not exceed ten percent of the total window area. Temporary interior window signs shall not exceed one-fourth of the total window area on the facade in which the windows face. No business shall display temporary window signs for more than 30 consecutive days or more than a total of 90 days in any calendar year. 
(h)  Other sign requirements. No permanent banners or streamers or inflated devices of any kind are allowed within the overlay district. Temporary banners are allowed for a maximum of 30 days upon written approval from the city. Bench signs; flashing, blinking and traveling signs; portable, mobile and trailer signs; and roof signs are prohibited. Neon signs are strongly discouraged and require written approval from the city. 
(i)  Hanging and suspended signs. Within the downtown subdistrict, freestanding or monument signs as described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are limited to a maximum of 40 square feet. On-structure signs may be turned perpendicular to the building and hung from the building facade provided no sign is larger than 30 square feet and the sign is not located within 50 feet of the Dallas Theatre marquee. Hanging, suspended or projecting signs in the downtown subdistrict shall hang no lower than seven feet above the public sidewalk and project no more than four feet from the building face. Hanging or suspended signs must project from the wall at a 90-degree angle. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1816(E)) 
Sec. 44-201. - Landscaping plan. 
(a)  Procedure and contents. A landscaping plan shall be submitted to the city, or its designee, for their approval at the same time other plans (i.e., architectural design, lighting, parking, signage, and site plans) are submitted to the city. This plan shall be drawn to scale, including dimensions and distance, shall delineate all existing and proposed structures, private parking areas, walks, ramps for handicapped, terraces, driveways, signs, lighting standards, steps and other similar structures; and shall delineate the location, size, and description of all landscape materials. Landscape treatment for plazas, roads, paths, service and private parking areas shall be designed as an integral and coordinated part of the landscape plan for the entire development parcels. Additional information may be requested by the city or its designee for the filing of landscaping plans. 
(b)  Areas to be landscaped. The following areas are to be landscaped: 
(1)  Greenbelt. 
a.  Nonresidential. A greenbelt (located on the front-side of buildings) shall be suitably landscaped and shall be otherwise unoccupied except for steps, walkways, terraces, lighting standards, benches, and other similar structures, but excluding driveways and parking areas. The greenbelt shall be a minimum of five feet wide for all commercial buildings. Mounding and other innovative treatments are to be especially encouraged in this area. 
b.  Residential. The greenbelt shall include a ten-foot landscaped strip along all exterior building edges and shall be otherwise unoccupied except for steps, walkways, terraces, porches, stoops, lighting standards, benches, and other similar structures, but excluding driveways and parking areas. 
c.  Downtown subdistrict. A greenbelt adjacent to buildings is not required in the downtown subdistrict. 
(2)  Peripheral planting. There shall be peripheral landscaping strips, a minimum of five feet in depth/width, located along any parking area which abuts any front, side, or rear property line. 
(3)  Planting within parking lots. All parking lot landscaping shall be a quality to improve and enhance the site and its surrounding area. Effective use of mounding and existing topography is encouraged. Efforts to break up large expanses of pavement are to be encouraged by the interspersing of appropriate planting areas wherever possible, and shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the parking area. Not less than five percent of a private parking lot shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall be specifically provided at the ends of parking rows and as a means of separating parking from major circulation isles within lots. One shade tree must be provided within parking areas for every 20 parking spaces provided. Parking areas with less than 20 parking spaces are not required to include plantings within the parking area, but should seek to screen parking from adjacent roadways and properties. For purposes of this computation, landscaping in the greenbelt (adjacent to buildings) and on the periphery of the lot shall not be included. 
(c)  Landscaping standards. 
(1)  The interior dimensions, specifications, and design of any planting area or planting medium proposed to be constructed shall be sufficient to protect the landscaping materials planted therein and to provide for proper growth. 
(2)  Primary landscaping materials used in the greenbelt, adjacent to buildings, shall consist of one or a combination of the following: 
a.  Shade trees; 
b.  Ornamental trees; 
c.  Shrubs; 
d.  Ground covers; 
e.  Grass; 
f.  Mulches; 
g.  Etc. 
(3)  The primary landscaping materials used in and around private parking areas shall be trees, which provide shade at maturity. Shrubbery, hedges, and other planting material may be used to compliment tree landscaping, but shall not be the sole contribution to the landscaping. 
(4)  All shade trees proposed to be used in accordance with any landscaping plan shall be a minimum of eight feet in overall height and have a minimum trunk diameter of 21/2 inches, 12 inches above the ground, upon planting. They should be of a variety which will attain an average mature spread greater than 20 feet. The types of trees shall be those specified in chapter 16, article II, tree preservation. Varieties of oak, elm, and maple trees, particularly those with fall color, are encouraged. 
(5)  Landscaping materials selected should be appropriate to local growing and climatic conditions. Wherever appropriate, existing trees should be conserved and integrated into the landscaping plan. Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, color and for its ultimate growth. Indigenous and other hardy plants that are harmonious to the design and of good appearance shall be used. 
(6)  The landscaping plan shall ensure that sight distances are not obstructed for drivers of motor vehicles. 
(7)  Where natural or existing topography patterns contribute to beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification to topography shall be permitted where it contributes to good appearance. 
(8)  Grades of walkways, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking and, if seating is provided, for sitting. 
(9)  Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, strengthening vistas and important axis, and provide shade. Spectacular effects shall be reserved for special locations only. 
(10)  Unity of designs shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials and by correlation with adjacent developments. 
(11)  In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrians or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices. 
(12)  Where building sites limit planting, the placement of trees in parkways or paved areas is encouraged. 
(13)  In areas where general planting will not prosper, other materials such as fences, walls and pavings of wood, brick, stone, gravel, and cobbles shall be used. Carefully selected plants shall be combined with such materials where possible. 
(14)  Miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall be designed to be part of the architectural concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale shall be good, colors shall be in harmony with buildings and surroundings, and proportions shall be attractive. 
(15)  Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures and street hardware (benches, lighting, trash receptacles, etc.) shall meet the criteria applicable to site, landscape, buildings and signs. 
(d)  Landscaping installation and maintenance. 
(1)  Installation. All landscaping required by the approved landscaping plan shall be installed prior to the issuance of a building certificate of occupancy permit if said permit is issued during a planting season, or within six months of the date an occupancy permit is issued during a nonplanting season. If not planted, a bond shall be required for plantings for a period of one year (12 months) from date of certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and their agencies to ensure proper maintenance of the landscaping, in accordance with the standards set by this chapter and as indicated on the landscaping plan, which has been approved by the city. This is to include, but not limited to, replacing dead plantings with identical varieties or a suitable substitute, and keeping the area free of refuse and debris. 
(3)  Changes after approval. No landscaping which has been approved by the city may later be altered, eliminated, or sacrificed, without first obtaining further approval from the city. 
(4)  Inspection. The city shall have the authority to visit any lot within the New Town Overlay District to inspect the landscaping and check it against the approved plan on file. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1816(F)) 
Sec. 44-202. - Sidewalk requirements. 
(a)  The installation of sidewalks and crosswalks in all developments, residential and commercial, shall be required for developments subject to this chapter. The sidewalks shall be typically constructed of concrete or other durable materials in keeping with the architectural design and surrounding area as approved by the city, and shall be subject to review and approval by the city during the plan review process. 
(b)  Sidewalks along primary streets shall be a minimum of ten feet in width. A 20-foot buffer of landscaping shall be placed between U.S. Highway 278 and pedestrian sidewalks. A minimum ten-foot buffer of landscaping and/or brick pavers shall be placed between all other primary roadways and pedestrian sidewalks. Primary roadways shall include: 
(1)  State Route No. 6/U.S. Hwy. 278; 
(2)  South Main Street from Foster Avenue to U.S. Hwy. 278; 
(3)  Seaboard Drive; 
(4)  West Avenue from U.S. Hwy. 278 to the Silver Comet Trail; 
(5)  South Johnston Street between the Southern Railway and Main Street; 
(6)  State Route No. 120/Buchanan Street from U.S. Hwy. 278 to West Memorial Drive; and 
(7)  West Memorial Drive from U.S. Hwy. 278 to the Southern Railway. 
(c)  Sidewalks along secondary streets shall be a minimum of eight feet in width. A minimum four-foot buffer of landscaping and/or brick pavers shall be placed between roadways and pedestrian sidewalks. Secondary streets shall include all other public roadways within the district not identified as primary roadways outside of the downtown subdistrict. 
(d)  In the downtown subdistrict, sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet in width. A minimum four-foot buffer of landscaping, planters, and/or brick pavers shall be placed between roadways and pedestrian sidewalks. 
(e)  Within landscape and/or brick paver buffers along all public roadways, street trees shall be planted at no less than 40 feet on center. Roadway and pedestrian lighting shall be placed at no less than 80 feet on center along primary and secondary streets and no less than 60 feet in the downtown subdistrict. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1816(G)) 
Sec. 44-203. - Parking requirements. 
    The number of parking spaces required is established in this chapter, depending upon the zoning and the intended land use. Alternatives to the established parking requirements may be granted to developments which have a mixture of uses whose peak parking requirements do not coincide in time and thereby may share parking spaces. The applicant shall provide expertly prepared justification for seeking such exception (i.e., a reference such as shared parking, Urban Land Institute). There shall be an appropriate number of parking spaces, accessible to the buildings and identification as reserved for use by handicapped individuals, and these spaces shall be of sufficient width to accommodate their needs. All parking standards shall comply with this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1816(H)) 
Sec. 44-204. - Lighting requirements. 
    In reviewing the lighting plan for any proposed development within the New Town Overlay District, factors to be considered by the community development department shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Safety provided by the lighting; 
(2)  Security provided by the lighting; 
(3)  Possible light spillage or glare onto adjoining properties or streets. Down-shielding is encouraged and spillage or glare onto adjoining properties is prohibited; 
(4)  Attractiveness of the lighting standards and their compatibility with the overall treatment of the property; 
(5)  Height, placement, and spacing of lighting standards considering the use (maximum height of 30 feet); and 
(6)  Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building and the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and building fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1816(I)) 
Sec. 44-205. - Access to individual sites. 
(a)  Transportation corridors by their functional nature as primary thoroughfares and circulation routes must have reasonable restrictions as to the number and location of access points within the overlay district. 
(b)  The following listed roadways represent major roadways in the overlay district, which must be controlled as to the number of access points (curb cuts) permitted: 
(1)  Main Street. 
(2)  Seaboard Drive. 
(3)  State Route No. 6/U.S. Highway 278. 
(4)  State Route No. 120/Buchanan Street. 
(5)  West Memorial Drive. 
(6)  South Johnston Street. 
(7)  West Avenue. 
(c)  In order to provide safe and sufficient traffic movement to and from adjacent lands and to protect the functional integrity of the roadways as primary thoroughfares and circulation routes, curb cuts and access points along these roadways should be minimized. Access at the side or rear of buildings and alleyways to accommodate service delivery functions and secondary access are encouraged. New access points onto these primary roadways within the district shall be coordinated with existing access points whenever possible. Inter-parcel access and other strategies to minimize the number of necessary curb cuts are encouraged. Access to proposed developments shall be provided by the state department of transportation and/or city access management standards, policies, guidelines and regulations. 
(d)  Curb cuts are prohibited on Main Street and Memorial Drive within the downtown subdistrict if the property is accessible from another public roadway. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1816(J)) 
Sec. 44-206. - Access to potential development sites. 
    Stub streets shall be built in all cases where adjacent lots have reasonable potential for development. Reasonable potential shall include any adjacent parcel of adequate size for commercial or residential development or any adjacent parcel so determined by the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1816(K)) 
Sec. 44-207. - Other standards. 
(a)  Outside storage prohibited. No outside, unenclosed storage of refuse (whether or not in containers) shall be permitted on any lot. 
(b)  Temporary or seasonal sales. Temporary or seasonal sales are allowed within the district on a case-by-case basis for a maximum of four times per year with written approval from the director of community development for a maximum of no more than 30 consecutive days or more than a total of 90 days in any calendar year. Requests for temporary or seasonal sales shall be made in writing accompanied by a recorded plat of the site and written permission by the property owner to the director of community development. A business license is required of all approved temporary or seasonal sales. Outdoor sales (if allowed by the underlying zoning district) must be covered. Examples of coverings include, but are not limited to, tents and awnings. 
(c)  Loading berth requirements. Loading berth requirements shall be as specified in the underlying districts, except that any loading or unloading berth or bay shall be screened from view as detailed in this chapter. 
(d)  Accessory buildings and uses. All accessory buildings and uses which are permitted in the underlying districts shall be permitted within the overlay district, except that any detached accessory building on any lot shall be designed and constructed with the same material as the principle building as to be compatible with the principle building with which it is associated. All accessory buildings shall have a roof. 
(e)  Paving requirements. All parking areas shall be finished with a hard surface such as asphalt, concrete or other materials approved by the community development department. 
(f)  Underground utilities. All utilities including, but not limited to, electric, cable, and phone services shall be underground unless otherwise approved by the community development department after written submittal providing justification for overhead utility services. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1816(L)) 
Secs. 44-208-44-211. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 44-212. - C-O corridor overlay district. 
(1)  Purpose, intent and authority. 
a.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this district to establish standards for the design of sites, buildings, structures, plantings, signs, street hardware and such other improvements that are visible to the public and affect the physical development of land within the Georgia State Routes 6, 6 Business and 61 corridors which shall be designated as corridor overlay district. 
The following standards shall be considered in evaluating projects proposed within the corridor overlay district: 
1.  All structures will be evaluated on the overall appearance of the project and shall be based on the quality of its design and its relationship to the surrounding area. 
2.  The quality of design goes beyond the materials of constructions to included scale, mass, color, proportion and compatibility with adjoining developments. 
3.  Colors shall be harmonious and only the use of compatible accents shall be permitted. 
4.  Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets, shall have good proportions and relationships to one another. 
5.  Any design in which the structure frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall be compatible within themselves and harmonious with their surroundings. 
6.  Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting or individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous appearance. 
b.  Statement of intent. These standards are intended to promote high quality creative development that will combine imagination, innovation and variety in the appearance of buildings and sites in the overlay corridors. These standards are further intended to preserve and enhance property values and to promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing for consistent and coordinated treatment of the property encompassed by the Georgia State Route 6, 6 Business and 61 Corridors. 
c.  Title. This portion of the zoning ordinance shall be known as the corridor overlay district of the City of Dallas, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-213. - Boundaries. 
(a)  State Route 6 (Jimmy Campbell Parkway). The boundaries of the State Route 6 corridor overlay district are located on either side of the centerline of State Route 6 and incorporate any parcel of land with right-of-way frontage on or that is visible from the highway corridor. 
(b)  State Route 6 Business (Merchants Drive, East Memorial Drive, West Memorial Drive and Buchanan Highway). The boundaries of the State Route 6 business corridor overlay district are located on either side of the centerline of State Route 6 business beginning at the east city limits of the City of Dallas, Georgia and ending at the west city limits. This corridor shall incorporate any parcel of land with right-of-way frontage on or that is visible from the highway corridor. 
(c)  State Route 61 (Nathan Dean Boulevard, Merchants Drive, East Memorial Drive and Confederate Avenue). The boundaries of the State Route 61 business corridor overlay district are located on either side of the centerline of State Route 61 beginning at the south city limits of the City of Dallas, Georgia and ending at the north city limits. This corridor shall incorporate any parcel of land with right-of-way frontage on or that is visible from the highway corridor. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-214. - Planning commission approval. 
    Approval by the City of Dallas Planning Commission or such agency designated by the mayor and council of the City of Dallas, Georgia shall be required for any proposed or revised development plan or NEW structure in the corridor overlay district. Prior approval of the architectural design, landscaping, sewerage, drainage, parking, signage, lighting and access to the property shall be necessary prior to: (1) the establishment of any use of the land; (2) the issuance of any improvement location permit; (3) the construction of any building(s) in the corridor overlay districts or (4) modification or revision of any site development plan. Any alteration to, or replacement of existing signage within the corridor overlay district shall conform to Section 5 of this section. 
    The City of Dallas Planning Commission, in reviewing applications, shall examine factors concerning the site, site plan, and the surrounding area, which include but are not limited to the following items: 
(1)  Topograhy; 
(2)  Zoning on site; 
(3)  Surrounding zoning and existing land use; 
(4)  Streets, curbs, gutters and sidewalks; 
(5)  Access to public streets; 
(6)  Driveway and curb cut locations in relation to other sites; 
(7)  General vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(8)  Internal site circulation including connectivity with adjoin parcels and developments[;] 
(9)  Special and general easements for public or private use; 
(10)  On-site and off-site surface and subsurface storm and water drainage; 
(11)  On-site and off-site utilities; 
(12)  The means and impact of sanitary sewage disposal and water supply technique; 
(13)  Dedication of City of Dallas approved streets and right-of-way; 
(14)  Protective restrictions or covenants and/or recorded commitments; 
(15)  Outdoor storage areas; 
(16)  Provisions for adequate and acceptable setbacks, lighting, signage, screening, landscaping, and compatibility with existing platted residential use; and 
(17)  Effects the proposed projects may have on the entire Corridor Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-215. - Building design standards. 
(a)  Architectural design requirements/non-residential. 
(1)  Exterior metal walls shall be prohibited on all buildings erected, constructed, altered, repaired or used in the overlay district, which abut are adjacent to, or are visible to State Routes 6, 6 Business or 61. 
(2)  Building facades may be constructed from masonry or glass, as defined below, or other materials or products which provide the same desired stability and quality. Products other than those listed below must be approved by the city. 
a.  Masonry construction : Which shall include all masonry construction th[at] is composed of solid, faced, or veneered-wall construction with standard brick size (excluding masonry boards and cinder blocks, unless otherwise approved by the city[)]. 
i.  Stone material used for masonry construction may consist o[f] granite, sandstone, slate, limestone, marble, or other hard or durable all weather stone. Ashlar, cut stone, and dimensioned stone construction techniques are acceptable. 
ii.  Brick material used for masonry construction shall be composed of hard fired (Kiln-fired) all weather standard brick or other all weather facing brick. 
b.  Glass walls : Which shall include glass curtain walls or glass block construction. Glass curtain wall shall be defined as an exterior wall which carries no floor or roof loads, and which may consist of a combination of metal, glass and other surfacing materials supported in a metal framework. 
c.  Wood construction . 
(3)  The materials and finishes of exposed roofs shall complement those used for the exterior walls. Exposed roofs shall be defined as that portion of a roof visible from ground level of the corridor or any adjacent public thoroughfare or residentially zoned or used area. 
(4)  Roof mounted equipment on exposed roofs shall be screened from view. The appearance of roof screens shall be coordinated with the building to maintain an unified appearance. 
(5)  All building mechanical and electrical equipment located adjacent to the building and visible from a public thoroughfare or a residentially zoned or used area shall be screened from view. Such screens and enclosures shall be treated as an integral element of the building's appearance. 
(6)  The exposed walls and roofs of buildings shall be maintained in a clean, orderly, and attractive condition; free of cracks, dents, punctures, breakage, and other forms of visible marring. Materials that become excessively faded, chalked or otherwise deteriorated shall be refinished, repainted or replaced. 
(7)  Refuse and waste removal areas, loading berths, service yards, storage yards, and exterior work areas shall be screened from view from public ways. 
(b)  Relationships of buildings to site. 
(1)  The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape and provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement and parking area. 
(2)  Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of zoning restrictions is encourage[d] to provide an interesting relationship between buildings. 
(3)  Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, building wall extensions, plantings, berms or other innovative means so as to attractively landscape and/or screen parking areas from view public ways. 
(4)  Without redistricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings. 
(5)  Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be underground. 
(c)  Minimum building height. All uses within the corridor overlay districts shall have minimum building heights of 14 feet with a minimum of 12 feet to the lowest eaves for a building with a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-216. - Signage standards. 
(a)  Residential subdivisions and multi-family complexes: These residential uses shall be permitted one freestanding sign (ground mounted) per main entrance, not to exceed two signs per development. Signs shall be monument in construction and limited to a maximum of 100 square feet per sign. Maximum sign height should not exceed 15 feet. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial uses: Each parcel shall be permitted one freestanding sign, provided all other standards are met. In addition, each structure shall be permitted one on-structure sign. For the purposes of this section, a shopping center or similar use shall be permitted one main freestanding sign; no freestanding signs shall be permitted for individual establishments in shopping centers or similar uses. Signs shall be monument construction and limited to a maximum of 100 square feet. Maximum sign height should not exceed 25 feet. Out-parcels located within an overall shopping center complex are allowed one monument sign not to exceed 50 square feet with a maximum height not to exceed 15 feet. 
(c)  Location: Signs shall be located ten feet off a street right-of-way and not obstruct sight distances nor shall signs impede pedestrian access. 
(d)  On-structure signs (wall signs): Signs (wall signs) shall not project above the eaves line for buildings with pitched roofs or above the roofline for buildings with flat roofs. In addition, the top of the wall sign shall be placed no higher than 20 feet above the ground nor extended from the wall more than 12 inches. 
(e)  Construction: Freestanding signs shall be ground mounted, monument type structures constructed of the same material as the principle building designed to complement the principle building architecture. Signs shall not have reflective backgrounds or reflective lettering. Digital or electronic controlled message components shall comprise no more than 50 percent of sign area. No flashing or scrolling text shall be permitted and with the exception of the date, time and temperature, no message shall be displayed for an interval of less than 30 seconds. Signs may be illuminated only by an externally located stationary light source, shielded and directed solely at the sign (one source per sign face). Colored lamps are not permitted. 
(f)  Landscaping: Landscaping shall be intergrated with installation of freestanding signs, provided sight distances and pedestrian access can be maintained. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-217. - Landscaping plan. 
(a)  A landscaping plan shall be submitted to the city for approval at the same time other plans (i.e. architectural design, lighting, parking, signage and site plans) are submitted to the city for review. This plan shall be drawn to scale, including dimensions and distance, shall delineate all existing and proposed structures, private parking areas, walks, ramps for handicapped, terraces, driveways, signs, lighting standards, steps and other similar structures; and shall delineate the location, size and description of all landscape materials. Landscape treatment for plazas, roads, paths, service and private parking areas shall be designed as an integral and coordinated part of the landscape plan for the entire lot. Additional information may be requested by the city for the filing of landscaping plans. 
(b)  Areas to be landscaped: 
(1)  Greenbelt. 
[a.]  (Non-Residential). The Greenbelt (located on the front-side of buildings) shall be suitably landscaped and shall be otherwise unoccupied except for steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lighting standards, and other similar structures, but excluding private parking areas. The Greenbelt shall be a minimum of ten feet wide. Mounding and other innovative treatments are to be especially encouraged in this area. 
[b.]  (Residential) The Greenbelt shall include a 20-foot landscaped strip along the site's frontage along the corridor and other public roads excluding curb-cut right-of-way(s). Landscaping shall include evergreen trees, other acceptable vegetative material, berms or a combination thereof. 
(2)  Peripheral planting. There shall be peripheral landscaping strip, four feet in depth, located along the side of any private parking area which abuts any side or rear property line. 
(3)  Planting within parking lots. All parking lot landscaping shall be a quality to improve and enhance the site and its surrounding area. Effective use of mounding and exiting topography is encourage[d]. Landscaping and planning areas shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the parking area and not less the five percent of a private parking lot shall be landscaped. (For purposes of this computation, landscaping in: 1) the Greenbelt; 2) adjacent to buildings; and 3) on the periphery of the lot shall not be included.) Landscaping shall be specifically provided at the ends of parking rows and as a means of separating parking from major circulation isles within lots. 
(c)  Landscaping standards. 
(1)  The interior dimensions, specifications and design of any planting area or planting medium proposed to be constructed shall be sufficient to protect the landscaping materials planted therein and to provide for proper growth. 
(2)  Primary landscaping materials used in the Greenbelt and adjacent to buildings shall consist of one of a combination of the following: shade trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, ground covers, grass, mulches, etc. 
(3)  The primary landscaping materials used in and around private parking areas shall be trees, which provide shade at maturity. Shrubbery, hedges and other planting material may be used to complement tree landscaping, but shall not be the sole contribution to the landscaping. 
(4)  All shade trees proposed to be used in accordance with any landscaping plan shall be a minimum of eight feet in overall height and have a minimum trunk diameter, 12 inches above the ground of two inches upon planting. They should be of a variety which will attain an average mature spread greater than 20 feet. The types of trees shall be approved by the city prior to installation. 
(5)  Landscaping materials selected should be appropriate to local growing and climatic conditions. Wherever appropriate existing trees should be conserved and integrated into the landscaping plan. Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, color and for its ultimate growth. Indigenous and other hardy plants that are harmonious to the design, and of good appearance shall be used. 
(6)  The landscaping plan shall ensure that sight distances are not obstructed for drivers of motor vehicles. 
(7)  Where natural or existing topography patterns contribute to beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification to topography shall be permitted where it contributes to good appearance. 
(8)  Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking and, if seating is provided, for sitting. 
(9)  Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, strengthening vistas and important axis, and provide shade. Spectacular effects shall be reserved for special locations only. 
(10)  Unity of designs shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials and by correlation with adjacent developments. 
(11)  In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrians or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards or other devices. 
(12)  Where building sites limit planting, the placement of trees in parkways or paved areas is encouraged. 
(13)  Screening of service yards and other places that tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of these. Screening shall be equally effective in winter and summer. 
(14)  In areas where general planning will not prosper, other materials such as fences, walls, and pavings of wood, brick, stone, gravel and cobbles shall be used. Carefully selected plants shall be combined with such materials where possible. 
(15)  Miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall be designed to be part of the architectural concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale shall be good, colors shall be in harmony with buildings and surroundings and proportions shall be attractive. 
(16)  Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall meet the criteria applicable to site, landscape, buildings and signs. 
(d)  Landscaping installation and maintenance. 
(1)  Installation. All landscaping required by the approved landscaping plan shall be installed prior to the issuance of a building certificate of occupancy permit if said permit is issued during a planting season, or within six months of the date an occupancy permit is issued during a non-planting season. If not planted, a bond shall be required for plantings for a period of one year (12 months) from the date of certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and their agencies to insure proper maintenance of the landscaping, in accordance with the standards set by this [chapter] and as indicated on the landscaping plan, which has been approved by the city. This is to include, but not limited to, replaced dead plantings with identical varieties or a suitable substitute, and keeping the area free of refuse and debris. 
(3)  Changes after approval. No landscaping which has been approved by the city may later be altered, eliminated or sacrificed, without first obtaining further approval from the city. 
(4)  Inspection. The city shall have the authority to visit any lot within the corridor overlay district to inspect the landscaping and check it against the approved plan on file. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-218. - Parking requirements. 
    Parking is to be discouraged between the required Greenbelt and the building(s) when other suitable areas for parking exist on the property; however, a maximum of 20 percent private parking may be permitted in the area between the Greenbelt and the planting on the periphery of the property. Efforts to break up large expanse of pavement are to be encourage[d] by the interspersing of appropriate planting areas wherever possible. The number of parking spaces required is established in the City of Dallas Zoning Ordinance, depending upon the zoning and the intended land use. Alternatives to the established parking requirements may be granted to developments which have a mixture of uses whose peak parking requirements do no[t] coincide in time and thereby may share parking spaces. The applicant shall provide expertly prepared justification for seeking such exception (i.e. a reference such as "share parking," Urban Land Institute). There shall be an appropriate number of parking spaces, accessible to the building(s) and identification as reserved for use by handicapped individuals, and these spaces shall be of sufficient width to accommodate their needs. All parking standards shall comply with the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-219. - Lighting requirements. 
    In reviewing the lighting plan for a lot proposed to be developed in the corridor overlay district, factors to be considered by the city shall include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Safety provided by the lighting; 
(2)  Security provided by the lighting; 
(3)  Possible light spillage or glare onto adjoining properties or streets. (Down-shielding is encouraged and spillage or glare onto adjoining properties is prohibited); 
(4)  Attractiveness of the lighting standards and their compatibility with the overall treatment of the property; 
(5)  Height amid placement of lighting standards considering the use (maximum height of 30 feet); and 
(6)  Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building and the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and building fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-220. - Access to individual sites. 
    The Corridor streets by their functional nature as primary thoroughfares, must have reasonable restrictions as to the number and location of access points within the overlay districts. 
    State Road 6 (Jimmy Campbell Parkway) represents a major thoroughfares, which must be controlled as to the number of access points ('curb cuts') permitted. 
    Therefore, in order to provide safe and sufficient traffic movement to and from adjacent lands and to protect the functional integrity of the corridors primary thoroughfares, in many cases frontage roads, access roads and distributors roads, will have to be built. Such roads shall be coordinated with those of continuous lots and designed to preserve the aesthetic benefits provided by the greenbelt areas. Access at the side or rear of buildings is encouraged. New access points onto the primary thoroughfares in the corridor shall be coordinated with existing access points whenever possible. The following curb cut policy shall apply throughout all corridors: 
    Access to proposed developments shall be provided per Georgia Department of Transportation and the City of Dallas access management standards, policies, guidelines and regulation. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-221. - State route access to potential development sites. 
    Stub streets shall be built in all cases where adjacent lots have reasonable potential for development. Reasonable potential shall include any adjacent parcel of adequate size for commercial or residential development or any adjacent parcel so determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 44-222. - Other standards. 
(a)  Outside storage. Outside display of merchandise will be limited to where the primary business is retail sales of outdoor merchandise including but not limited to power mowers, ATV's, landscape material and products, trees, plants, shrubs, decorative rock, pavers, etc. Excludes thrift stores, second hand stores and any other businesses whose merchandise is primarily for indoor use. 
(b)  Loading berth requirements. Loading berth requirements shall be a[s] specified in the underlying zone district(s) except that any loading or unloading berth or bay shall be screened from view beyond the site by landscaping or other screening. 
(c)  Accessory buildings and uses. All accessory buildings and uses which are permitted in the underlying zoning district(s) shall be permitted within the corridor overlay districts, except that any detached accessory building on any lot shall be designed to be architecturally designed and constructed with the same material as the principle building and to be compatible with the principle building which it is associated. All accessory buildings shall have a roof. 
(d)  Paving requirements. All parking areas shall be finished with a hard surface such as asphalt, concrete or other materials approved by the city. 
(e)  Utility requirements. All utilities including but not limited to electric, cable and phone services shall be underground unless otherwise approved by the city after written submittal providing justification for overhead utility services. 
(Ord. No. OA-2012-04, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. OA-2014-02, 5-5-2014) 
Secs. 44-223-44-237. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 44-238. - Applicability. 
    Except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  Use. No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, construed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Height and density. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered, unless a variance is obtained from the board of zoning appeals: 
a.  To exceed the height limits; 
b.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families or occupy a smaller lot area per family; or 
c.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces. 
(3)  Yard service to one building. No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about, or in connection with, any building for the purpose of complying with this chapter, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
(4)  Only one principal building. Every building or structure hereafter erected shall be located on a lot or tract as defined herein and there shall not be more than one principal building on one lot, plus its accessory buildings, except as provided in section 44-242(d). 
(5)  Reduction of lot area. No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or depth, front, side or rear yard, lot area per family, or other requirements of this chapter, are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public purposes. 
(6)  Street frontage. No principal building shall be erected on any lot which does not have immediate frontage on at least one public street or has a legal and binding easement from an adjoining property owner that does have frontage. The minimum width of said easement shall be 25 feet. 
(7)  Corner and double frontage lots. On lots having frontage on more than one street in residential districts, the minimum front yard shall be provided for each street in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(8)  Inspection of required buffers. In the event a screen, wall, fence, planted dividing strip, or any other type of buffer is required by this chapter for any use, such screen, wall, etc., will be subjected to periodic inspections by the building inspector to determine that such required walls, fences, etc., are being properly maintained. Failure to maintain such required walls, fences, etc., to an acceptable standard may be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(9)  Continuance of a nonconforming use. 
a.  Any building, structure, or use of land existing at the time of the original 1975 enactment or subsequent amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but not in conformity with its use regulations and provisions, may be continued subject to the limitations set forth in this subsection. A nonconforming use shall not be: 
1.  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
2.  Extended or enlarged except in conformity with this chapter; 
3.  Reestablished after discontinuance; or 
4.  Rebuilt, altered, or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of the value of the building. The value shall be computed from the amount the building is assessed for tax purposes by the city. 
b.  Newly annexed property. All property annexed to within the city shall be in compliance with O.C.G.A.  36-66-4(d) and shall be subject to the same procedures as an amendment to the city zoning maps as required in division 3 of article II of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1805; Ord. No. 96-17, 8-5-1996) 
Sec. 44-239. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(a)  Off-street automobile parking and storage. Except in the C-1 central business district, off-street automobile parking or storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established. Such automobile parking or storage space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirements for the specific uses as set forth below. Each off-street parking space shall be at least eight feet, six inches wide and 18 feet deep. 
(1)  If the required automobile parking or storage space cannot be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, the board of zoning appeals may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property provided such space is within 500 feet of such principal use. Such space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(2)  All off-street automobile parking and storage space in residential districts shall be so arranged that vehicles will not be required to back onto a public street, road, or highway when leaving the premises. 
(3)  Minimum parking requirements. Minimum parking requirements are set forth in the following table: 
Use Classifications Minimum Requirements Single-family residential dwelling unit One space for each structure Two-family and multifamily residential structures 11/2 spaces for each dwelling unit Roominghouses, boardinghouses, or hotels One space for every two units Churches, synagogues or other places of worship One space for each four seats in the main assembly room Fraternal organization and other places of public assembly One space for each four seats in main assembly room Tourist homes, tourist courts, or motels One space for each accommodation Hospitals, nursing homes, similar institutions One space for each two beds intended for patients plus one space for every three employees. Retail business One space for each 100 square feet of sales floor area Offices, including banks One space for each 200 square feet of total floor area Filling stations Two spaces for each gas pump plus three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility Mortuary or funeral parlor One space for each four seats in the chapel, one additional space for each two employees, one additional space for each resident family, and one space for each funeral vehicle Restaurant or similar eating establishment One space for each four seats provided for patron use and one additional space for each two employees Wholesaling One space for each two employees Industrial One space for each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift Schools, elementary or junior high One space for each six seats in the main assembly room High schools One space for each six seats in the main assembly room plus one additional space for every three faculty members or other persons employed at the school  
(b)  Off-street loading and unloading space. Every building or structure used for business, trade, or industry, shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the right-of-way of the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or if there is no alley, to a street. Such space shall have at least 14 feet of vertical clearance. Such space shall be so arranged that no vehicle is required to back onto a public street, road, or highway in order to leave the premises. 
(1)  Retail business: one space, ten feet by 25 feet, for each 3,000 square feet of floor area or any part thereof. 
(2)  Wholesale and industry: one space, ten feet by 50 feet, for each 10,000 square feet of floor area or any part thereof. 
(3)  Bus and truck terminals: sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1806) 
Sec. 44-240. - Conditional zoning. 
(a)  Policy and definition. The city recognizes that in certain instances, in order to provide compatibility of land use with the use of surrounding property and/or to provide buffer zones between dissimilar property uses, it is desirable that a change of property use from one use district to another (hereinafter referred to as a "rezoning") is subject to certain conditions which would limit the use to which such property could otherwise be put. For such reason, any rezoning of a tract of land from one use district to another may be made contingent upon certain conditions as may be deemed appropriate by the mayor and council. Such contingent rezoning shall be known as "conditional zoning." 
(b)  Procedure. Conditional zoning may take place at the request of the property owner or at the instance of the mayor and council, as hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  Whenever any application for rezoning is supported by specific plans and/or designs for a particular development and/or use, such application shall be deemed to be an application for conditional zoning. The mayor and council may, after public hearing and recommendation by the city planning commission, approve such rezoning as a conditional zoning. If such conditional zoning is granted, the building inspector shall issue a building permit for the development of such property only in strict compliance with the plans and/or designs submitted. 
a.  Whenever such conditional zoning is granted, the applicant shall furnish two copies of such specific plans and/or designs, one of which shall be made a part of the ordinance or resolution granting such conditional zoning, and the other of which shall be furnished to the building inspector for his use. 
b.  If for any reason the development and/or use of the subject property in accordance with the submitted plans and/or designs cannot be accomplished, such plans and/or designs shall not be altered, changed, or varied except after the express authority of the mayor and council. 
c.  Unless substantial progress has been made toward the development and/or use of the subject property within 12 months of the granting of the conditional zoning, the zoning classification of such property shall revert to its status immediately prior to the granting of the conditional zoning. 
(2)  Whenever any application for rezoning is made, whether or not accompanied or supported by specific plans and/or designs, the mayor and council shall have the right to condition the grant of such application on such reasonable conditions as it may deem necessary to ensure the compatibility of the use of such land with the use of surrounding land, and to ensure the use of such land in conformity with the overall land use scheme within the city. The conditions which may be placed upon the use of such property may be as follows: 
a.  The requirement of buffer zones or strips, as well as the size of such buffer zones and use of certain plants or fencing on such buffer zones; 
b.  Limitation as to the portion of the lot or tract upon which a building or buildings may be constructed; 
c.  The size of the building or buildings to be constructed thereon; 
d.  The density of land use; 
e.  Architectural design of the building or buildings to be constructed thereon; 
f.  Setback requirements; 
g.  Specific use to which the property may be put; 
h.  Limitation on the size, number, or design of signs which may be placed on such property. 
(3)  Whenever the mayor and council shall grant an application for rezoning and shall place conditions upon such rezoning, the rezoning shall be deemed to be a conditional zoning, and the subject property may be developed only in strict compliance with such conditions. Any such conditions placed thereon shall be made a part of the ordinance or resolution by which such conditional zoning is granted. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1807) 
Sec. 44-241. - Area, yard, and height requirement. 
(a)  Minimum lot size and minimum yard requirements. 
(1)  R-1 single-family residential district. 
a.  Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot size per dwelling: 15,000 square feet. 
c.  Minimum lot width: 90 feet. 
d.  Minimum front setback from a primary street: 35 feet. 
e.  Minimum front setback from other streets: 30 feet. 
f.  Minimum distance from side lot lines: ten feet. 
g.  Minimum distance from rear lot line: 20 feet. 
h.  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(2)  Residential district. 
a.  Minimum lot size: 7,500 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot size per dwelling: 7,500 square feet. 
c.  Minimum lot width: 65 feet. 
d.  Minimum front setback from a primary street: 35 feet. 
e.  Minimum front setback from other streets: 30 feet. 
f.  Minimum distance from side lot lines: ten feet. 
g.  Minimum distance from rear lot line: 20 feet. 
h.  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(3)  R-2 low-density multifamily residential district. 
a.  Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot size per dwelling: 5,000 square feet. 
c.  Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
d.  Minimum front setback from a primary street: 35 feet. 
e.  Minimum front setback from other streets: 30 feet. 
f.  Minimum distance from side lot lines: ten feet. 
g.  Minimum distance from rear lot line: 20 feet. 
h.  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(4)  R-3 high-density multifamily residential district. 
a.  Minimum lot size: 43,560 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot size per dwelling: 5,000 square feet. 
c.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
d.  Minimum front setback from primary street: 35 feet. 
e.  Minimum front setback from other streets: 30 feet. 
f.  Minimum distance from side lot lines: 20 feet. 
g.  Minimum distance from rear lot line: 20 feet. 
h.  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(5)  R-3 single-family attached residential (fee simple title). 
a.  Minimum lot size: 43,560 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot size per dwelling: 5,000 square feet. 
c.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
d.  Minimum front setback from a primary street: 35 feet. 
e.  Minimum front setback from other streets: 30 feet. 
f.  Minimum distance from side lot lines: 20 feet. 
g.  Minimum distance from rear lot line: 20 feet. 
h.  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(6)  Manufactured home parks. (See regulations in article V of this chapter.) 
a.  Minimum area required for park: five acres. 
b.  Minimum size of each home space: 3,000 feet. 
c.  Minimum front setback of park from all streets: 50 feet. 
(7)  C-1 central business district (old downtown district). There is no minimum lot size, lot width, setbacks, side or rear lot minimums, but there is a maximum height restriction of 35 feet. 
(8)  C-2, C-3 commercial districts and C-N neighborhood district. There is no minimum lot size, lot width or minimum lot size for each structure, but the following setbacks are required: 
a.  Minimum distance from a street when front parking is provided: 40 feet. 
b.  Minimum distance from a street when no front parking is provided: 30 feet. 
c.  Minimum distance from side lot lines when abutting a residential district: 20 feet. 
d.  Minimum distance from side lot lines when not abutting a residential district: 15 feet. 
e.  Minimum distance from rear lot lines when abutting a residential district: 20 feet. 
f.  Minimum distance from rear lot lines when not abutting a residential district: 15 feet. 
g.  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(9)  O-I office-institutional district. 
a.  Minimum lot size: 7,500 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
c.  Minimum front setback from a primary street: 35 feet. 
d.  Minimum front setback from other streets: 30 feet. 
e.  Minimum distance from side lot lines: ten feet. 
f.  Minimum distance from rear lot line: 20 feet. 
g.  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(10)  G general industrial district. 
a.  Minimum lot size: 7,500 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
c.  Minimum front setback from a primary street: 40 feet. 
d.  Minimum front setback from other streets: 30 feet. 
e.  Minimum distance from side lot lines when abutting a residential district: 40 feet. 
f.  Minimum distance from side lot lines when not abutting a residential district: 15 feet. 
g.  Minimum distance from rear lot lines when abutting a residential district: 40 feet. 
h.  Minimum distance from rear lot lines when not abutting a residential district: 15 feet. 
i.  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(b)  Setback requirements for outdoor advertising signs. The minimum yard requirements set out in subsection (a) of this section shall apply to outdoor advertising signs. Any outdoor advertising sign must be erected in an area properly zoned commercial or industrial and must be permitted by the state department of transportation, if required by state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1809) 
Sec. 44-242. - Exceptions and modifications. 
(a)  Lots of record. 
(1)  Single lots. Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived of his successor in title thereto does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this chapter, such lot may be used as a building site for a single-family residence in a district where residences are permitted. 
(2)  Adjoining lots. If two or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and such lots individually are too small to meet the yard, width, and area requirements of the district in which they are located, such groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size and the lots in one ownership shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Front yard setbacks for dwellings. The setback requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average existing building setback line on lots located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot, within the same block and zoning district, and fronting on the same side of the street as such lot, is less than the minimum setback required. In such cases, the setback on such lots may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, and in no case less than ten feet from the street right-of-way. 
(c)  Height limits. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flagpoles, radio towers, television towers, masts, aerials, and similar structures. 
(d)  Group projects. 
(1)  Such uses are limited to those permitted within the district in which the project is located; 
(2)  The distance of every building from the nearest property line shall meet front yard setback and side yard requirements of the district in which the project is located; 
(3)  The building heights do not exceed the height limits permitted in the district in which the project is located. 
(e)  Waiver of parking requirements in C-1 central business district. Minimum off-street automobile parking and storage space requirements as set forth in section 44-239 may be waived in their application to the C-1 central business district. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1810) 
Secs. 44-243-44-262. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

Sec. 44-263. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Manufactured home means: 
(1)  A new or used structure; 
(2)  Transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode; 
a.  Is eight body feet or more in width; 
b.  40 body feet or more in length; or 
(3)  When erected on site, is: 
a.  320 or more square feet; 
b.  Built on a permanent chassis; and 
c.  Designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation; 
connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(a)) 
Sec. 44-264. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose and scope of this article is to provide for locations within the city for development of planned manufactured home parks. These areas should be developed and so located as to provide safe and sanitary living conditions for park occupants and to be convenient to shopping centers, schools and other community facilities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(b)) 
Sec. 44-265. - Application for a manufactured home park. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain any manufactured home for living or sleeping purposes on any premises in the city limits unless it is contained within a planned manufactured home park duly permitted and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The planning commission may recommend approval of a planned manufactured home park when all provisions of this article have been met. An application and all accompanying plans and supporting data shall be filed in triplicate with the planning commission at least two weeks prior to a regular meeting of the commission. The application shall be in writing and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location and description of the boundaries of the property proposed for the planned manufactured home park development; 
(3)  A complete manufactured home park plan showing all existing conditions and proposed site development as required in this article including preliminary plans of all buildings, improvements and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the manufactured home park (on a topographic map with a minimum of five-foot contours); and 
(4)  Any other information requested by the planning commission to determine the proposed park's compliance with legal requirements, the effect which the proposed park may have on its environment and the compatibility of the adjacent areas for park development within the framework of long-range land development objectives. 
(c)  Dimensional and site development requirements. The manufactured home park plan shall show or propose all requirements listed in this article, and, in addition, all said requirements shall be complied with completely before a certificate of occupancy can be issued. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(c)) 
Sec. 44-266. - Minimum number of manufactured home spaces. 
    No park shall be permitted with less than 15 spaces. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(d)) 
Sec. 44-267. - Required lot size. 
    Well-defined manufactured home spaces shall be provided, consisting of a minimum of 3,000 square feet for each space. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(e)) 
Sec. 44-268. - Yard requirements. 
    Each space shall be at least 40 feet wide and clearly defined. There shall be at least a 15-foot side yard and a 15-foot clearance between manufactured homes, including manufactured homes parked end-to-end. No manufactured home shall be located closer than 15 feet to any building within the park; or within 20 feet of any exterior street or boundary line of the park. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(f)) 
Sec. 44-269. - Drainage. 
    The manufactured home park shall be located on a well drained and properly graded site. Necessary site drainage improvements as approved by the city shall be provided. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(g)) 
Sec. 44-270. - Interior drives and walkways. 
    All manufactured home spaces shall abut upon a hard-surfaced drive no less than 20 feet in width. Interior drives must be no less than 20 feet in width and shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway in accordance with ordinances of the city. Hard-surfaced walkways, no less than three feet wide, shall be provided from the manufactured home spaces to service buildings. All interior drives and walkways within the park shall be adequately maintained by the owner. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(h)) 
Sec. 44-271. - Off-street parking. 
    Each manufactured home space shall be provided with at least two off-drive parking spaces, paved and adequately marked. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(i)) 
Sec. 44-272. - Signs. 
    The following nonflashing and nonanimated signs are permitted under the conditions specified: 
(1)  Park identification sign. One park identification sign shall be permitted not to exceed 24 square feet in area for the purpose of denoting the name of the manufactured home park. 
(2)  Manufactured home occupant identification signs. One manufactured home occupant identification sign not exceeding one square foot in area shall be permitted for each manufactured home. Said sign shall indicate only the name and address of the occupant of the manufactured home. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(j)) 
Sec. 44-273. - Improvements to manufactured homes. 
    No permanent addition of any kind shall be built onto or become a park of any manufactured home. 
(1)  The owner of a manufactured home park shall provide a concrete patio of at least two inches thick on the access side of the manufactured home so as to lie beneath both doors, provided however, said patio shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and a minimum of 20 feet in length. 
(2)  No sign shall be located so as to impede vehicular visibility at any intersection of street lines with one another or the edge of driveways with street lines. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(k)) 
Sec. 44-274. - Special conditions and safeguards. 
    In recommending any planned manufactured home park, the planning commission may attach special conditions and safeguards to protect both the occupants of the park and the occupants of surrounding property, including such matters as protection against noise, lights and dust. Where required to serve these ends, walls, plantings, surfacing or other natural or artificial means for protection may be required as a part of such special conditions on which the recommendation for a manufactured home park is based. Failure to meet such conditions shall be grounds for refusal of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(l)) 
Sec. 44-275. - General requirements. 
(a)  Minimum size of manufactured homes. No manufactured home shall be placed in a planned manufactured home park which has less than 350 square feet of floor space and does not contain a built-in bathroom with water closet, lavatory and shower or tub which are in working condition. Section 44-139(3)a prohibits any manufactured home constructed prior to 1976 to be located within the city. 
(b)  Water, sewerage and electricity. Each manufactured home space shall be provided with and each manufactured home shall be connected to the sanitary sewers and water supply system of the city. Electrical outlets shall be provided as specified by the city building inspector. 
(c)  Lighting. All interior drives and walkways within the park shall be lighted at night with lighting as approved by the city. 
(d)  Refuse collecting facilities. Individual refuse containers shall be used on each manufactured home site. Stands must be provided to hold the cans upright or buried. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(m)) 
Sec. 44-276. - Development compliance. 
    At least 15 spaces of a planned manufactured home park must be completely constructed, according to the manufactured home park plan approved by the planning commission, within two years after the planned manufactured home park is established. The failure of the developer or applicant to construct this minimum phase completely within the specified period of time may be cause for the planning commission to reconsider the planned manufactured home park. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-1820(o)) 
Secs. 44-277-44-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- The ordinance from which this article is derived, Ord. No. 03-21 was passed on 12-1-2003, but the effective date was delayed due to court challenge. 

Sec. 44-301. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which is offered for sale any book or publication, film, video, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct. 
    Adult movie house means any movie theater which on a regular, continuing basis shows films rated "X" by the Motion Picture Coding Association of America or any movie theater which presents for public viewing on a regular, continuing basis so-called "adult films" depicting sexual conduct. 
    Explicit media outlet means any commercial establishment which has an inventory of goods that is composed of at least 50 percent of books, pamphlets, magazines, or other printed publications, films, or other media which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct. 
    Sexual conduct means acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sodomy, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person is female, breast which, to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value and predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful, or morbid interest in nudity or sex. 
    Sexually explicit nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less than a full opaque covering or the depiction of covered or uncovered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state which, to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value and predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful, or morbid interest in nudity or sex. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-401(c.1); Ord. No. 03-21, 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 44-302. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of operation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-401(c.3); Ord. No. 03-21, 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 44-303. - Location of adult entertainment establishments. 
    All adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses shall be located only in commercial or industrial zoned districts; provided, however, that no adult bookstore, explicit media outlet or adult movie house shall be located within 1,000 feet of any school building, school grounds, college campus, public place of worship, or area zoned primarily for residential purposes. As used in this article, the term "school building" shall only apply to public or private school buildings. In determining the distance requirement provided in this chapter, the measurement shall be from the closest property line of the adult bookstore, explicit media outlet or adult movie house to the closest property line on which any school building, school grounds, college campus, public place of worship, or area zoned primarily for residential purposes, is located. 
(Comp. Ords. 2005,  5-401(c.2); Ord. No. 03-21, 12-1-2003) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE/2005 COMPILED ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2005 Compiled Ordinances, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 2005 Compiled Ordinances, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances included herein, see the table immediately following this table. 
2005 Compiled Ordinances 
Section Section  
this Code 1-101-1-103 1-1-1-3 1-104-1-107 1-5-1-8 1-108, 1-109 1-10, 1-11 2-101-2-105 2-37-2-41 2-201-2-204 2-1-2-4 2-301, 2-302 12-2, 12-3 2-302(a) 12-1 2-401-2-405 2-5-2-9 3-16 2-234 3-101-3-104 2-103-2-106 3-105, 3-106 2-126, 2-127 3-107, 3-108 2-153, 2-154 3-109-3-111 2-177-2-179 3-140 2-197 3-150-3-165 2-218-2-233 3-181, 3-182 2-263, 2-264 3-183 2-262 3-184-3-189 2-265-2-270 3-194 2-271 3-200, 3-201 2-71, 2-72 3-301-3-305 14-1-14-5 3-401-3-406 36-1-36-6 3-501-3-507 2-291-2-297 4-101, 4-102 30-1, 30-2 4-104, 4-105 30-3, 30-4 4-106 30-9 4-107 30-5 4-108 30-8 4-109, 4-110 30-6, 30-7 4-111-4-115 30-10-30-14 4-301-4-306 26-1-26-6 4-501, 4-502 40-19, 40-20 4-504-4-511 40-22-40-29 4-512.1 40-47 4-512.2-4-512.8 40-49-40-55 4-512.9 40-48 4-512.10- 
4-512.13 40-56-40-59 pt. 5, ch. 16 34-27 5-1 4-1 5-3-5-17 4-2-4-16 5-31-5-42 4-36-4-47 5-56 4-68 5-71-5-76 4-95-4-100 5-91-5-98 4-129-4-136 5-110-5-112 4-156-4-158 5-201 6-1 5-203-5-205 6-3-6-5 5-207 6-6 5-209 6-2 5-210 6-7 5-301 8-1 5-303 8-3, 8-4 5-304 8-5 5-400.1 10-20 5-400.2 10-19 5-400.3- 
5-400.11 10-21-10-29 5-400.13- 
5-400.16 10-30-10-33 5-400.18, 
5-400.19 10-34, 10-35 5-400.21- 
5-400.26 10-36-10-41 5-400.29, 5-400.30 10-42, 10-43 5-401(a), 5-401(b) 10-44, 10-45 5-401(c.1) 44-301 5-401(c.2) 44-303 5-401(c.3) 44-302 5-414(b), 
5-414(c) 10-110, 10-111 5-415 10-136 5-415.1 10-137 5-416(a)- 
5-416(f) 10-159-10-164 5-417(a), 
5-417(b) 10-182, 10-183 5-501-5-506 28-1-28-6 5-600 16-19 5-601-5-605 16-46-16-50 5-606-5-611 16-78-16-83 5-612, 5-613 16-22, 16-23 5-614, 5-615 16-84, 16-85 5-616 16-51 5-617 16-21 5-618 16-52 5-619 16-20 5-901-5-917 20-1-20-17 5-1001 22-20 5-1002 22-19 5-1003-5-1006 22-21-22-24 5-1101 38-1 5-1103-5-1107 38-2-38-6 5-1200 10-246 5-1201 10-245 5-1202-5-1205 10-247-10-250 5-1301-5-1307 10-280-10-286 5-1308 10-279 5-1501 42-1 5-1503-5-1510 42-2-42-9 5-1600 34-21 5-1602 34-19 5-1603-5-1606 34-22-34-25 5-1607 34-20 5-1620 34-26 5-1803 44-1 5-1804(a)- 
5-1804(c) 44-117-44-119 5-1805- 
5-1807 44-238-44-240 5-1808(a) 44-137 5-1808(b) 44-139 5-1808(c) 44-166 5-1808(c)(1)-(6) 44-140 5-1808(c)(7) 44-141 5-1808(e)- 
5-1808(i) 44-167-44-171 5-1809, 5-1810 44-241, 44-242 5-1811(a)- 
5-1811(g) 44-23-44-29 5-1811(h) 44-2 5-1811(i) 44-30 5-1812(a)- 
5-1812(g) 44-51-44-57 5-1813(a)- 
5-1813(f) 44-88-44-93 5-1814 44-94 5-1815 44-31 5-1816(A)- 
5-1816(L) 44-196-44-207 5-1820(a)- 
5-1820(o) 44-263-44-276 6-103, 6-104 24-1, 24-2 6-109-6-114 24-3-24-8 6-116 24-10 6-201-6-212 24-39-24-50  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE/ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances adopted since, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code  3- 2-1992(Ord.) 2-218-2-234 92-20 11- 2-1992 44-1 93-06  6-29-1993 8-1 94-02  2- 7-1994 40-28 94-04  3- 7-1994 2-228 94-12 10- 3-1994 10-19-10-43 95-01  1- 9-1995 38-6 95-03  3- 6-1995 2-1 2-222 95-14 10- 2-1995 10-19 10-27 10-29 10-36 10-43 95-21 10- 2-1995 10-111 96-17  8- 5-1996 44-89 44-238 96-18  8- 5-1996 34-25 96-22 10- 7-1996 30-1 30-3 30-14 98-06  6-18-1998 44-167 99-06  8- 2-1999 40-19 99-04 10- 4-1999 44-140 12- 6-1999(Ord.) 6-1-6-7 95-15 1995 38-5 98-17 11-1998 24-10 38-4 00-06  3-2000 6-1-6-7 00-09  5-2000 40-28 00-11  8-2000 28-5 00-18 10-2000 10-283 01-06  3- 4-2001 34-25, 34-26 01-04  6-12-2001 44-137 01-17 10- 1-2001 22-19-22-24 01-20 10- 1-2001 10-158-10-164 1-18 10-20-2001 20-17 01-23  1- 7-2002 40-20 02-04  7- 1-2002 2-262-2-271 03-11  7- 7-2003 44-1 44-137 44-139 03-21 12- 1-2003 10-45 44-301-44-303 04-04  5- 3-2004 2-228 04-08  8- 1-2004 34-25 04-17  1- 3-2005 28-4  7-12-2005(Ord.) 5-1901- 
5-1907       Added 21-70-21-76 05-09  6- 6-2005 5-1808(a)       Added 44-142 44-167(l) 5-1808(g)       Rpld 44-168(10)       Added 44-168(10), (11) 5-1808(h) 44-169(2)c., d. 5-1808(k)(1) 44-171(a) 5-1808(I)       Added 44-172 5-1808(i)(1)-(11)       Added 44-212-44-222  2- 6-2006(Ord.) I-VIII       Added 24-101-24-107 06-13  4- 3-2006 40-59  7-10-2006(Ord.) (intro)       Added 16-286 1-7       Added 16-287-16-293 06-17  7-10-2006 1(1.1)-1(1.3) 18-2-18-4 1(1.4), 1(1.5) 18-6, 18-7 2 18-1 3(3.1)-3(3.3) 18-33-18-35 3(3.4) 18-5 4(4.1), (4.2) 18-59 4(4.3)-4(4.6) 18-60-18-63 5(5.1)-5(5.6) 18-85-18-90 6(1)-(8) 18-109 6(9) 18-110 6(10)-(12) 18-109 7(7.1), 7(7.2) 18-135, 18-136 7(intro.) 18-134 06-25  7-10-2006 24-10 06-26  7-10-2006 4-99 4-135 06-27  7-10-2006 42-2 42-9 06-28  7-10-2006 44-168 44-171 06-20  8- 7-2006 1(1.1)-1(1.4) 16-200-16-203 1(1.6) 16-204 2 16-199 3(3.1)-3(3.8) 16-231-16-238 4-6 16-239-16-241 7 (7.1), 16-262, 16-263 7(7.2) 7(intro.) 16-261 06-16 10- 2-2006 1-4 34-56-34-59 06-19 10- 2-2006 1 16-120 2 16-118 3, 4 16-121, 16-122 5 16-119 06-21 10- 2-2006 2 16-172 3 16-171 4-11 16-173-16-180 06-35 12- 4-2006 1 40-20 07-05  5- 7-2007 II 16-143 III-VI 16-145-16-148 VII 16-144 VIII, IX 16-149, 16-150 X(C) 16-151  5- 7-2007(Ord.) 16-19  5- 7-2007(Ord.) 16-84  6- 4-2007(Ord.) 24-10 2008-04  4- 7-2008 5-20.1-5-20.9 22-52-22-60 2008-05  4- 7-2008 3-601.1- 
3-601.3 2-329-2-331 3-601.4 2-328 3-601.5- 
3-601.7 2-332-2-334 3-601.9- 
3-601.16 2-335-2-342 0A-2008-01  4- 7-2008 5-430.1 10-207 5-430.2 10-205 5-430.3- 
5-430.12 10-208-10-217 5-430.13 10-206 5-430.14 10-218 OA-2008-02  9- 8-2008 I(4-512.5(f)) 40-77 I(4-512.51)- 
I(4-512.57) 40-78-40-84 I(4-512.58) 40-86 I(4-512.59) 40-120 I(4-512.510)- 
I(4-512.512) 40-121-40-123 I(4-512.513) 40-85 I(4-512.514)- 
I(4-512.517) 40-124-40-127 I(4-512.518), 
I(4-512.519) 40-87, 40-88 I(4-512.520) 40-128 10- 6-2008(Ord.) I(4-512.5(f)) 40-77 I(4-512.51)- 
I(4-512.57) 40-78-40-84 I(4-512.58) 40-86 I(4-512.59) 40-120 I(4-512.510) 40-121 I(4-512.512) 40-123 I(4-512.513) 40-85 I(4-512.514)- 
I(4-512.517) 40-124-40-127 I(4-512.518), 
I(4-512.519) 40-87, 40-88 I(4-512.520) 40-128 2008-11 12- 1-2008 5-22.1- 
5-22.3 10-81-10-83 OA-2008-05 12- 1-2008 24-9 2009-02  1- 5-2009 1(1.1), 1(1.2) 32-2, 32-3 1(1.3) 32-1 1(2.1)-1(2.5) 32-25-32-29 1(3.1)-1(3.8) 32-47-32-54 1(4.1)-1(4.5) 32-84-32-88 1(5.1), 1(5.2) 32-120, 32-121 1(6.1)-1(6.3) 32-141-32-143 1(7.1) 32-55 1(8.1)-1(8.3) 32-170-32-172 1(9.2)-1(9.4) 32-173-32-175 2009-01  2- 2-2009 6-117 24-11 2009-09  4- 6-2009 4-202 2-374 4-203 2-373 4-204-4-212 2-375-2-383 OA-2009-01  5- 4-2009 4-520 40-174 4-520.1- 
4-520.5 40-177-40-181 4-520.6, 
4-520.7 40-221, 40-222 4-520.8 40-176 4-520.9 40-175 4-520.10- 
4-520.13 40-258-40-261 4-520.14(A) 40-287 4-520.14(B) 40-286 4-520.14(C), 
4-520.14(D) 40-288, 40-289 4-520.15- 
4-520.20 40-312-40-317 4-520.21, 4-520.22 40-338, 40-339 OA-2009-04 11- 2-2009 10-36 OA-2009-05 11- 2-2009 4-45 OA-2010-01  1-28-2010 5-1702 16-143 5-1703-5-1706 16-145-16-148 5-1707 16-144 5-1708, 5-1709 16-149, 16-150 5-1710(C) 16-151 OA-2010-02  3-29-2010       Rpld 16-118-16-122 5-800- 
5-813       Added 16-118-16-131 2010-08  7-12-2010       Added Adopting Ord., pg. xi 2010-06  8-30-2010       Added 8-1(a)(15) 2010-15 12-20-2010       Added 40-182 2011-01  2- 7-2011       Added 40-30 2011-09  4-11-2011       Added 2-73 OA-2011-01  4-11-2011 16-46 OA-2011-02  6- 6-2011       Rpld 22-55-22-58       Added 22-55-22-58 OA-2011-03  6- 6-2011 4-3 OA-2011-04  6- 6-2011       Rpld 6-1, 6-2       Added 6-1, 6-2 OA-2011-05  6- 6-2011       Rpld 10-19-10-45       Added 10-1-10-45 OA-2011-06  6- 6-2011       Rpld 20-1-20-17       Added 20-1-20-16 2009-10  8- 3-2009 5-1817.1- 
5-1817.6       Added 21-91-21-96 OA-2011-11  1- 9-2012       Rpld 28-1-28-6       Added 28-1-28-22 OA-2012-02  3- 5-2012 2-197 OA-2012-03  3- 5-2012 44-51 OA-2012-04  3-19-2012 44-1       Rpld 44-137-44-141       Added 44-137-44-142       Rpld 44-166-44-171       Added 44-166-44-172 44-212-44-222 OA-2012-05  5- 7-2012       Rpld 10-245-10-250       Added 10-245-10-261 OA-2012-06  6- 4-2012       Rpld 10-43       Added 10-43 OA-2012-07  8-27-2012       Rpld 42-1-42-9       Added 42-1-42-23 OA-2012-08 11- 5-2012       Rpld 40-19-40-30       Added 40-19-40-32 OA-2012-09 12- 3-2012 40-19 40-27 2012-10  8-27-2012       Added 38-7 OA-2013-01  2- 4-2013 38-2(e) OA-2013-02  2- 4-2013 44-168 44-170 OA-2013-03  4- 1-2013       Rpld 28-1-28-22       Added 28-1-28-23 OA-2013-04  3- 4-2013       Rpld 38-4       Added 38-4 OA-2013-05  9- 9-2013       Rpld 6-1       Added 6-1 OA-2013-06 11- 4-2013       Rpld 6-1-6-7       Added 6-1-6-123 OA-2013-07 11-25-2013 4-98(b)-(d)       Added 4-98(e) OA-2013-08 12- 2-2013 4-68(o)       Added 4-68(r) OA-2014-02  5- 5-2014 44-222 OA-2014-03  6- 2-2014       Added 10-1-10-11 OA-2014-04  5- 5-2014 40-177 OA-2014-05  6-16-2014       Added 34-28 OA-2014-06  6-16-2014 16-263 OA-2014-07  6-16-2014 40-32 OA-2014-08  8- 4-2014 16-119, 16-120 OA-2014-09  6-16-2014       Added 30-15 OA-2014-10  8- 4-2014       Added 4-48 2014-10  8- 4-2014       Added 7-1-7-13 OA-2014-11  9- 8-2014       Dltd 40-120-40-128       Added 40-120-40-128 OA-2014-12  9- 8-2014       Dltd 4-36-4-47       Dltd 4-68       Added 4-36-4-47       Added 4-68 OA-2014-01  6- 2-2014       Dltd 8-1-8-5       Added 8-11-8-40 OA-2015-01  3- 2-2015 22-21(b) OA-2015-02  6- 1-2015       Dltd 42-1-42-23       Added 42-1-42-20 OA-2015-03 11- 2-2015       Dltd 4-1-4-158       Added 4-1-4-117 OA-2015-04  7- 6-2015 10-40 OA-2015-05  8-31-2015       Dltd 36-1-36-6       Added 36-1-36-6 OA-2015-06  8-31-2015       Dltd 40-174-40-182       Added 40-174-40-183 OA-2015-07  8-31-2015 40-47 40-50 OA-2016-01  3- 7-2016       Dltd 2-218-2-234       Added 2-218-2-234 OA-2016-02  5- 2-2016       Dltd 30-1-30-15       Added 30-1-30-13 OA-2016-04  6- 6-2016       Added 22-21(g)(3)       Added 22-57(c) OA-2016-03  7-11-2016 1       Dltd 32-1-32-3 32-25-32-29 32-47-32-55 32-84-32-88 32-120, 32-121 32-141-32-143 32-170-32-175       Added 32-1-32-3 32-25-32-29 32-47-32-54 32-84-32-88 32-120, 32-121 32-141-32-143 32-170 32-197-32-199 32-226-32-229 OA-2016-05  8-29-2016 10-283 OA-2016-07  8-29-2016       Added 2-235       Added 2-236 OA-2016-08 10- 3-2016       Added 40-184       Added 40-185       Added 40-186 40-312 OA-2017-01 12-11-2017 44-139(6) OA-2017-02 12-11-2017 34-25(f) 34-26(f)(6)(c) OA-2009-02  8- 3-2009 5-430- 
5-430-14       Rpld 10-205-10-218       Added 10-205-10-217 OA-2011-12 12- 5-2011 21-72 OA-2018-01  3- 5-2018       Rpld 24-6(b), (c), (d) OA-2018-02  4- 2-2018 40-259 OA-2018-03  4- 2-2018 34-26 OA-2018-04  6- 4-2018 22-52 22-54 OA-2018-05  6- 4-2018       Added 38-8 OA-2018-06  8- 6-2018       Added 26-2(5) OA-2018-08 10- 1-2018       Added 40-32(f) OA-2018-09 10- 1-2018 40-184(a)(4) OA-2018-10 10- 1-2018 21-72(c)(3) OA-2018-11 12- 3-2018 10-29(a) OA-2019-01  6- 3-2019       Rpld 18-1-18-7, 18-33-18-35, 18-59-18-63, 18-85-18-90, 18-109, 18-110, 18-134-18-136       Added 18-1-18-9, 18-33-18-35, 18-59-18-63, 18-85-18-90, 18-109, 18-110, 18-134-18-136  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 
O.C.G.A. 
Section Section 

this Code 1-3-1 1-2 1-3-3 1-2 40-182 16-145 2-10-105 10-35 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 4 3-3-23 Ch. 4 3-4-3 Ch. 4 3-4-40 et seq. Ch. 4 3-5-4 4-105 3-5-38 4-21 3-6-20 4-104 3-9-3 4-104 3-9-4 4-104 3-9-5 4-104 3-11-2(e) 4-100 ch. 4 22-21 4-8-24 6-3 4-8-43 6-3 6-6 4-11-2 6-1 4-11-9.2 et seq. 6-3 6-6 4-11-10 6-4 4-11-18 6-3 6-4 5-3-29 22-21 5-4-1 18-109 8-2-1 et seq. 22-19 8-2-1-8-2-3 40-175 8-2-25(c)(1) 8-1 9-6-20-9-6-28 10-255 10-1-370 et seq. 4-11 12-2-8 16-146 12-4-72 16-145 12-5-20 et seq. 16-143 16-146 12-5-23(a)(5) 16-147 12-5-30 16-146 12-5-30(f) 16-143 16-146 12-5-440 et seq. 16-143 16-146 12-7-1 et seq. 16-146 12-7-6 16-145 12-7-6(b) 16-143 16-146 12-7-7(e) 16-148 12-7-7.1 16-145 12-7-8(a) 16-143 16-147 16-148 12-7-17(9), (10) 16-147 12-7-19 16-143 12-7-20 16-147 16-149 12-8-2 40-52 12-8-24 30-13 12-8-30.9 Ch. 30 12-15-20 40-77 12-15-20 et seq. 40-80 12-15-23 40-80 13-2-1 et seq. 22-19 15-6-67 34-23 15-11-2 24-41 16-6-8 10-251(f) 16-7-21 24-11 24-104 16-7-23 24-104 16-7-51(6) 16-119 16-8-14 24-9 16-11-41 Ch. 4 16-12-80 28-9 17-10-3 24-9 tit. 21, ch. 3 Char.  5.10 Char.  5.13 21-3-51 Char.  5.11 21-5-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 25-2-1 et seq. 22-19 25-9-6 32-88 31-3-5.2 40-182 32-6-51 Ch. 28 32-6-70 et seq. Ch. 28 32-6-150 34-23 33-3-5 10-158 33-3-5(1) 10-163 33-8-4 10-162 33-8-8 et seq. 10-35 33-8-8-1 10-162 33-8-8.2 10-163 33-8-8.2(a) 10-163 35-1-12 2-177 35-8-1 et seq. 2-73 36-1-20 32-1 36-1-20(a) 18-9 36-8-5 2-73 36-18-1 16-145 36-32-2 2-71 36-32-4 24-40 36-32-9 24-9 36-32-10 Ch. 4 36-32-10.1 24-11 36-34-2 2-103 36-34-2(7) 10-111 36-35-3 2-103 36-35-4 Char.  2.13 36-35-6(2)(A) Char.  4.13 36-35-6(a)(2) 1-11 36-37-6.2 2-223 36-40-41 2-223 36-43-4 Ch. 10, Art. II 36-66-4 44-88, 44-89 36-66-4(d) 44-238 36-67A-3 44-94 36-67A-4 44-94 36-71-2(8) 10-19 38-3-27(b) 12-2 40-1-1 38-1 40-5-100 et seq. 4-116 40-6-1- 
40-6-395 38-1 40-6-183(a) 38-2 40-6-372 38-1 40-6-391 Ch. 4 40-6-393 38-1 40-6-394 38-1 41-1-6 22-59 41-2-1 22-59 41-2-1 et seq. 22-55 22-56 22-58 41-2-5 22-21 41-2-7 et seq. 22-21 41-2-7- 
41-2-17 22-19 41-2-12 22-21 42-1-12 10-249 42-12-35 24-105 tit. 43 10-31 43-17-1 et seq. 7-5 7-6 43-17-2(3) 7-6 44-3-3 34-23 44-10.1-44-10.5 21-72 44-10-2 21-71 tit. 46, ch. 3 10-35 46-5-1 et seq. 10-82 46-5-1(b)(8), (9) 10-81 46-7-15 10-35 48-2-40 36-5 48-2-41 10-212 48-2-43 10-212 48-4-1 et seq. 22-21 48-4-75 et seq. 22-24 48-4-78 22-21 48-5-40 36-5 48-5-350 et seq. Ch. 36 48-5-355 10-35 48-5-356 10-35 48-6-93 10-35 10-182 48-6-93(d) 10-183 48-8-50 4-34 48-13-5- 
48-13-26 10-28 48-13-7 10-20 10-22 48-13-9 10-21 10-43 48-13-9(c)(1)-(22) 10-26 48-13-41 10-209 48-13-50 et seq. 10-206 48-13-51(a)(3) 10-209 48-13-55 10-35 tit. 50, ch. 14 2-332 50-14-1 2-38 50-18-99 et seq. 2-264 50-18-99(c) 2-262 512-15-20 et seq. 40-84  
