THE CODE OF THE CITY OF EASTMAN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
EASTMAN, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jack Burnham 
Chairman 
____________ 
James H. (Buddy) Pittman, Jr. 
Vice-Chairman 
____________ 
Faye Jessup 
Idelle Walker 
David Rawlins 
City Council 
____________ 
Ivelyn Lampkin 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Bea Edge 
City Manager 
____________ 
Milton Harrison 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Eastman, Georgia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Eastman City Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Michael E. Raabe, Code Attorney, and Jack Renfroe, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ivelyn Lampkin, City Clerk, and Milton Harrison, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Eastman, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Eastman, Georgia. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Eastman, Georgia. 2010. 
ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF EASTMAN, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "CODE OF THE CITY OF EASTMAN, GEORGIA," or "EASTMAN CITY CODE," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 40 and Appendices A and B, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 28, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 28, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective December 13, 2010. 
    INTRODUCED the 22 day of November, 2010. 
    ADOPTED the 13 day of December, 2010. 
CITY OF EASTMAN By:  Jack Burnham  CHAIRPERSON, CITY COUNCIL Attest:  Ivelyn Lampkin  CITY CLERK  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Date Adopted 
Ord./Res. Include/ 
Omit Supp. No.  6-30-2010(Ord.) Include 1  7-12-2010(Ord.) Include 1  9-27-2010(Ord.) Include 1 12-13-2010(Ord.) Include 1 12-28-2010(Ord.) Include 1 12-12-2011(Ord.) Include 2  6-30-2011(Ord.) Include 2  4-23-2012(Ord.) Include 3  5-14-2012(Ord.) Include 3 11-13-2012(Ord.) Include 3  2-11-2013(1)(Ord.) Include 3  2-11-2013(2)(Ord.) Include 3  5-13-2013(Ord.) Include 4  6-10-2013(Ord.) Include 4  9- 9-2013(Ord.) Include 4 12- 9-2013(Ord.) Include 4  3-24-2014(Ord.) Include 5  9- 8-2014(Ord.) Include 5  1-12-2015(Ord.) Include 5 11-23-2015(Ord.) Include 6  4-11-2016(Ord.) Include 7  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the city, as adopted on April 3, 2002 (2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 711), page 5395), and amended in 2003 by 2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 332), page 4610. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by editor's history notes following amended provisions. The absence of an editor's history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
    The City of Eastman, in Dodge County, Georgia, is reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and is hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Eastman, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)	The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the City Clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Eastman, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)	The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)	This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)	The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it is specifically provided that the city shall have the powers set out in Section 1.13 of this charter. 
Sec. 1.13. - Examples of powers. 
(a)	Animal Regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter. 
(b)	Appropriations and Expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized to expend money by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city. 
(c)	Building Regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades. 
(d)	Business Regulation and Taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by O.C.G.A. Title 48 or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees. 
(e)	Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in O.C.G.A. Title 22 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(f)	Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations. 
(g)	Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(h)	Environmental Protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment. 
(i)	Fire Regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(j)	Garbage Fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges. 
(k)	General Health, Safety, and Welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(l)	Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose. 
(m)	Health and Sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(n)	Jail Sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials. 
(o)	Motor Vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city. 
(p)	Municipal Agencies and Delegation of Power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same. 
(q)	Municipal Debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(r)	Municipal Property Ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city. 
(s)	Municipal Property Protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(t)	Municipal Utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same. 
(u)	Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property. 
(v)	Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(w)	Planning and Zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community. 
(x)	Police and Fire Protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency. 
(y)	Public Hazards: Removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public. 
(z)	Public Improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under O.C.G.A. Title 22 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(aa)	Public Peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances. 
(bb)	Public Transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial. 
(cc)	Public Utilities and Services. To grant franchises or make contracts for, or impose taxes on, public utilities and public service companies and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(dd)	Regulation of Roadside Areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances. 
(ee)	Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city. 
(ff)	Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so. 
(gg)	Sewer Fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system. 
(hh)	Solid Waste Disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items. 
(ii)	Special Areas of Public Regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors. 
(jj)	Special Assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements. 
(kk)	Taxes: Ad Valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation. 
(ll)	Taxes: Other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law. 
(mm)	Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles. 
(nn)	Urban Redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program. 
(oo)	Other Powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security. good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
    All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city and its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
    The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of five councilmembers. The city council established shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. The councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office. 
    The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of election of members of the council; and each shall continue to reside therein during that member's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)	Vacancies. The office of councilmember shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, O.C.G.A. Title 45, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)	Filling of Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment if less than 12 months remain in the unexpired term and otherwise by an election as provided for in Section 5.17 of this charter and in accordance with O.C.G.A. Title[s] 21 and 45, or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
    The councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)	Fiduciary Capacity. Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)	Conflict of Interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)	Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(2)	Engage in or accept private employment, or render services for private interests, when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(3)	Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.), concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body in which that person is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of that person or others; 
(4)	Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to that person's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body in which that person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)	Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)	Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which that person has financial interest. 
(c)	Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the city council. Any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that person shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)	Use of Public Property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(e)	Contracts Voidable and Rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(f)	Ineligibility of Elected Official. Except where authorized by law, no councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which that person was elected. No former councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that official was elected. 
(g)	Political Activities of Certain Officers and Employees. No appointive officer of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon election to any public office in this city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)	Penalties for Violation: 
(1)	Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)	Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit an office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
    Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
    The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment facilities, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof; and for such purposes property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational meetings. 
    The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the second Monday in January of each year. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
    "I do solemnly (swear)(affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)	The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)	Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)	All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible as provided by O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)	The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)	All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the city council chairperson and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council chairperson. The city council chairperson shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
    Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. An abstention shall be counted as an affirmative vote. 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)	Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Eastman" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)	An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 2.24 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
    Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
(a)	To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of three councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least a majority of councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)	Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)	The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.22 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.26 of this charter. 
(b)	Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)	The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)	The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Eastman, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)	The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable for reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 2.27. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
    The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the manager's compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. 
Sec. 2.28. - Removal of city manager. 
(a)	The city council may remove the manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)	The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the manager; 
(2)	Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the manager, the manager may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The manager may file with the council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)	If the manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the manager has requested a public hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the public hearing. 
(b)	The manager shall continue to receive a salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
Sec. 2.29. - Acting city manager. 
    By letter filed with the city clerk, the manager shall designate, subject to approval of the city council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during the manager's temporary absence or physical or mental disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the manager shall return or the manager's disability shall cease. 
Sec. 2.30. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
    The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the manager's charge by or under this charter. As the chief executive and administrative officer, the manager shall: 
(1)	Appoint and, when the manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the manager appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. The manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)	Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)	Attend all city council meetings, except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline, or removal of the city manager, and have the right to take part in discussion but not to vote; 
(4)	See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council subject to enforcement by the manager or by officers subject to the manager's direction and supervision are faithfully executed; 
(5)	Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)	Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)	Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)	Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the manager deems desirable; and 
(9)	Perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 2.31. - Council interference with administration. 
    Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.15 of this charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 2.32. - Selection of chairperson and vice-chairperson. 
    By a majority vote of all its members the city council shall elect councilmembers to serve as chairperson and vice-chairperson, and both shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. Both shall continue to vote and otherwise participate as councilmembers. 
Sec. 2.33. - Powers and duties of chairperson. 
    The chairperson shall: 
(1)	Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)	Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)	Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; and 
(4)	Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing. 
Sec. 2.34. - Vice-chairperson. 
    During the absence or physical or mental disability of the chairperson for any cause, the vice chairperson, or in the vice chairperson's absence or disability for any reason any one of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the city council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the chairperson and shall perform the duties of the office of the chairperson so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. The vice chairperson or selected councilmember shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the chairperson has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in Section 2.14 of this charter. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties of and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)	All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)	There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(e)	All appointive officers and directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the city council. All appointive officers and directors shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the city manager unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)	The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function as the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)	All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)	The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)	Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)	Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)	No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that member's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the chairperson of city council or his or her designee. 
(g)	All members of boards, commissions, and authorities serve at will and may be removed at any time by a vote of three members of the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
    The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, city manager, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
    The city manager shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager. 
Sec. 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans. 
    The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
    All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
    There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Eastman. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)	The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)	No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)	Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)	Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)	Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the chairperson of city council or his or her designee, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.20 of this charter. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
    The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)	The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)	The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)	The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi, at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)	The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)	The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)	Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
    The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Dodge County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
    With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
    All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the "Georgia Election Code," Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Division of city into districts. 
    For the purpose of electing five council members to the city council, the city has been divided into five districts which are described and delineated on a map which is a permanent part of the documents of the City of Eastman and is maintained and kept in the clerk's office of the City of Eastman. Said map or drawing is also on permanent display at City Hall and those election districts shall be in correspondent to those five numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this ordinance and further identified as "Plan: Eastman-prop 4-2013, plan type: local, client: Eastman," and the attached block equivalency report. 
    Those members of the City Council of the City of Eastman who are serving as such on the effective date of this ordinance and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. 
    The elections district 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 as they exist immediately prior to effective date of this ordinance shall continue to be designated as election districts 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, respectively, but as newly described under this ordinance, and on and after the effective date of this ordinance such members of the city council serving the most former election district shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective election districts as newly described under this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 5.12. - Election of the city council. 
(a)	There shall be a municipal general election biennially in odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)	There shall be elected three councilmembers at one election and at every other election thereafter. The remaining city council seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created. 
Sec. 5.13. - Nonpartisan elections. 
    Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Sec. 5.14. - Selection of councilmembers by district. 
    One councilmember shall be elected from each of the five districts described in Section 5.11 of this charter. The councilmember from each respective district shall be elected by the voters of that particular district in which they reside as described in Section 5.11 of this charter. 
Sec. 5.15. - Residence requirements of candidates for councilmember. 
    In order to be eligible to be elected as a councilmember from a district, the candidate therefor must be a resident of such district on the date he or she qualifies to run for office and at the time of election thereto. 
Sec. 5.16. - Election by majority vote. 
    The members of the city council shall be elected by a majority vote of the votes cast for each position. 
Sec. 5.17. - Special elections; vacancies. 
    In the event that the office of any councilmember shall become vacant as provided in Section 2.12 of this charter, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the "Georgia Election Code," Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.18. - Other provisions. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the "Georgia Election Code," Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.19. - Removal of city councilmembers. 
    Any councilmember may be removed or suspended from office in the manner provided by general law. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
    The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government and providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
    The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
    The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
    The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)	The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)	If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
    The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
    The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes and fees. 
    This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
    The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fa.'s; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
    The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
    Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
    The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
    The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies, provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13 or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
    The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.24. - Preparation of budgets. 
    The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope; content, and form of such budgets and plans. 
Sec. 6.25. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
    On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.26. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)	The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)	The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the thirty-first day of December of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.24 of this charter. 
(c)	The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.27. - Tax levies. 
    The city council shall levy, by ordinance, such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinances shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
    The city council, by ordinance, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital budget. 
(a)	On or before the date fixed by the city council but no later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget. The city council shall not authorize an[sic] expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.24 of this charter. 
(b)	The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the thirty-first day of December of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.30. - Independent audit. 
    There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.31. - Contracting procedures. 
    No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)	It is in writing; 
(2)	It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)	It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.20 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.32. - Centralized purchasing. 
    The city council may, by ordinance, prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale and lease of city property. 
(a)	The city council may sell and convey, or lease, any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)	The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)	Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the city manager to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilities the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
    The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
    Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 180 days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 7.13. - Pending matters. 
    Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.14. - Construction. 
(a)	Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)	The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)	The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ga. Laws 
Year Page Act No. Section Section 
this Charter 2002 5395 711 arts. I-VII Arts. I-VII 2003 4610 332 Arts. I-VII  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
  
 Date Section  Section 
this Charter  6-10-2013 1 5.11  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Eastman, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Eastman City Code" or the "City Code." 
(Code 1982, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter; provided, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such definition or construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they are bound thereby. 
    City. The term "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Eastman, Georgia," followed them. 
    City officials, officers, employees, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, et cetera, by title only, i.e., "clerk," "recorder," "planning commission," or any other such designation, such reference shall be deemed to be to officials, et cetera, of the city be deemed to be grants of such powers and authority to their respective duly designated subordinates. 
    Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege, or the discharge of any duty, the first day to be counted shall be the day after the date from which said number of days is prescribed to be counted, and if the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge such duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in the Georgia Code, as amended, or additionally as designated by the city council, enumerating public and legal holidays, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise such privilege or to discharge such duty; however, when said following day shall be a Saturday or Sunday, the party shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge such duty. 
    Council, city council, governing body. Wherever the terms "council," "city council" and "governing body" are used, the same means the city council of Eastman, Georgia. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Dodge County, Georgia. 
    Gender. A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to the other genders, including firms, partnerships and corporations as well as individuals. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
    May. The term "may" shall be deemed as permissive. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken. An affirmation has the same force and effect as an oath. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and" and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, societies, clubs, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
    Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
    Real property, real estate, land. The terms "real property," "real estate" and "land" include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" preceding the name of any agency or officer, and the terms "the state" and "this state" mean the State of Georgia. 
    Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads and all other public ways in the city, and shall embrace all parts thereof within the designated right-of-way. In those instances where the public records are silent, the term shall embrace all of the area between the off-street edge of the sidewalk or walkway on each side of the street, including the grassplots or other divisional areas lying between the sidewalk and walkway and street. 
    Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1982, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(5). 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of Code. 
    In all interpretations of this Code, and ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(Code 1982, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to state laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances, etc. 
    The provisions of this Code, so far as they are in substance the same as those ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuing and superseding those ordinances and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1982, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Matters not repealed or affected by adoption of Code. 
    The repeal provided for in the ordinance adopting this Code shall not affect: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such ordinance. 
(2)	Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation made or assumed by the city. 
(3)	Any right or franchise granted by the governing body of the city to any person. 
(4)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, or improving any street or public way in the city. 
(5)	Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying any tax. 
(6)	Any ordinance establishing and prescribing street or sidewalk grades. 
(7)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(8)	Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or excluding territory from the city. 
(9)	Any ordinance establishing subdivision regulations or dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(10)	Any zoning ordinance or any ordinance amending the zoning map or zoning or rezoning any specific property. 
(11)	Any administrative ordinance of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(12)	Any ordinance providing for compensation of city officers or employees, and not inconsistent with this Code. 
(13)	Any housing authority ordinance. 
(14)	Any ordinance making any act or failure to do any act an offense against the city, when such ordinance is authorized under the state law and is not inconsistent with such Code. 
(15)	Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as zones of no parking, limited parking, stop intersections, yield intersections, one-way streets, through streets, etc., when not in conflict with or inconsistent with this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1982, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code, and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted in the Code; 
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1982, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	Whenever in this Code, or in any ordinance of the city, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city or county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	Violations of this Code may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(c)	The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)	Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)	Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)	Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(d)	The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(Code 1982, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Sec. 1-9. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(Code 1982, § 1-9) 
State Law reference- Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert, or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1982, § 1-10) 
State Law reference- Alteration, etc., of public records constitutes a misdemeanor, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Substantive compliance with Code. 
    A substantial compliance with any requirement of the Code, or ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment. 
(Code 1982, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1982, § 1-12) 
State Law reference- Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Meetings. 
(a)	Regular meetings. The regular meetings of the city council shall be held as follows: The second and fourth Mondays of each month at the hour of 6:00 p.m. in the council room of the city hall. 
(b)	Special meetings. Special meetings may be held and conducted pursuant to the provisions of section 2.19(b) of the Charter of the city which became effective on July 1, 2002. 
(c)	Pre-meeting sessions. At each and every regular scheduled meeting, the city council may convene 30 minutes prior to the time fixed for the beginning of each of its regular meetings for the purpose of conducting a pre-meeting session. 
(Code 1911, § 115; Code 1982, § 2-1; Res. of 6-11-2007; Ord. of 11-9-2009, § 2.19) 
State Law reference- Due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-2. - Preparation of agenda. 
    An agenda shall be prepared prior to each meeting of the city council. The city manager or, at the direction of the city manager, the city clerk, shall prepare the agenda unless the city council directs another officer or employee to prepare the agenda. On the agenda shall be listed each item intended to be brought up at the meeting for discussion or action. Matters shall be placed on the agenda at the request of any member of the city council, any elected officer, or the city manager. Matters shall be placed on the agenda at the request of any member of the public intending to appear at the city council meeting to present any matter. The city manager or, at the direction of the city manager, the city clerk, shall cause copies of the agenda to be prepared in advance and posted and filed in accordance with all state laws and city ordinances relating to open meetings. Any agenda item not reported to the city manager or the city clerk at least four hours before the time such posting and filing is required, may, at the discretion of the city manager, be left off the agenda and placed on the agenda of the next regular or special meeting. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2009, § 2.20-1) 
Sec. 2-3. - Emergencies. 
    In case of any emergency matter arising after the posting and filing referred to in section 2-2, the city manager or, at the direction of this city manager, the city clerk shall prepare a supplemental agenda and shall provide as much advance posting and filing as is possible under the circumstances, complying with applicable provisions of open meeting laws on emergencies. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2009, § 2.20-2) 
Sec. 2-4. - Comments from the public invited. 
    Comments from the public shall be invited at each city council meeting. Comments from the public shall be invited on each agenda item, before a final vote is taken on the agenda item. At the close of each council meeting (i.e., following the adjournment of the meeting), the chairperson or other person presiding at the meeting shall ask for and permit comments on any subject, provided that no action shall be taken by the city council, except in cases of emergency, on any item not appearing on the agenda. All state laws and city ordinances relating to open meetings, and to posting and filing copies of the agenda, shall be complied with. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2009, § 2.20-3) 
Sec. 2-5. - Disruptions prohibited. 
    Nothing herein shall permit any person or group to disrupt any meeting of the city council. Any person disrupting any meeting shall be advised by the chairperson, the sergeant at arms or any police officer to cease the disruption. If the person fails to cease the disruption, the person may be ejected from the meeting, and any person so disrupting a meeting shall be fined not less than $25.00 or more than $500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2009, § 2.20-4) 
Sec. 2-6. - Recognition by chairperson; time limits. 
    Members of the city council and other persons desiring to speak at a meeting of the city council, shall obtain recognition of the chairperson before speaking. Unless otherwise ordered by a majority of the members of the city council present at a meeting, no person shall speak to the city council for more than five minutes on any one topic. Council members are permitted to speak twice on each topic but their time limitation on each occasion shall be limited to five minutes. The same person may address the city council for five minutes each on more than one topic. When more than one person desires to speak on any one topic, then the total time for each side of the topic (i.e., pro and con) shall not exceed 15 minutes. When any person has the floor, he or she shall not be interrupted by any other person except the chairperson on points of order. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2009, § 2.20-5) 
Sec. 2-7. - City officers and employees. 
    When a member of the city council is speaking on any topic, his or her comments should be directed to the chairperson or the person presiding. Comments back and forth between council members or other persons desiring to speak at a meeting of the city council shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2009, § 2.20-6) 
Sec. 2-8. - Comments on each agenda item. 
    During the discussion of each agenda item, the chairperson or other person presiding at the meeting shall recognize any persons present at the meeting desiring to comment on the particular item. The chairperson or other person presiding may limit the time taken per person for such comments. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2009, § 2.20-7) 
Sec. 2-9. - Robert's Rules of Order. 
    Except when in conflict with the foregoing provisions, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the deliberations of the council. 
(Code 1911, § 115; Code 1982, § 2-2; Ord. of 11-9-2009, § 2.20-8) 
Sec. 2-10. - Order of business of council. 
    The following order of business shall be observed by the council: 
(1)	Reading of the minutes. 
(2)	Petitions and communications. 
(3)	Reports of standing committees. 
(4)	Reports of special committees. 
(5)	Reports of officers. 
(6)	Resolutions, orders and ordinances. 
(7)	Accounts and salaries. 
(8)	Miscellaneous and new business. 
(Code 1911, § 115; Code 1982, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-11. - Ordinances need not be published. 
    It shall not be necessary to publish or otherwise give notice of any ordinance regularly passed, in order for the same to become binding and operative, but the same shall be binding and of force from the time of its adoption. 
(Code 1911, § 131; Code 1982, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-12. - Holding municipal court. 
(a)	The municipal court shall operate as necessary to the trial and punishment of violators of any city ordinance, law or regulation within its jurisdiction. 
(b)	Every individual charged with an offense within the jurisdiction of said court shall have the right to appear and plead by counsel, in person, or both. 
(c)	All proceedings before said court shall conform to the due process of law as granted under the constitution of the state and the United States Constitution, except there shall be no right to jury trial before said court. 
(Code 1911, § 32; Code 1982, § 2-5; Ord. of 1-14-1991, § 1(2-5)) 
Sec. 2-13. - Personnel policy and program, retirement and social security. 
    All current ordinances and resolutions, and all amendments thereof, prescribing personnel policies and programs, retirement benefits, and disability benefits, classifications and pay plans, are hereby continued in full force and effect, and incorporated herein by reference as fully as though set out at length herein. Copies thereof are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 2-6) 
Sec. 2-14. - Policy for planning and zoning board. 
(a)	Applications for zoning, variances, special exceptions and administrative reviews are to be filed at the city hall during normal business hours. 
(b)	A minimum of 15 days must lapse for necessary review and evaluation by city personnel prior to initial consideration by the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)	A copy of each application with a brief summary is to be mailed to each planning and zoning board member, as soon as the city review and evaluation is complete. Copies of all such applications must be in the hands of planning and zoning board members no later than one working day before the scheduled meeting at which the application is to be considered. 
(d)	The planning and zoning board will only consider applications that are complete in writing. Should an applicant be unable to furnish specifics of a certain requirement or deem it irrelevant to the particular application, such must be so stated in writing and the reason therefor. 
(Ord. of 2-13-1989) 
Secs. 2-15-2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREE COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-36. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as the City of Eastman tree commission and to be herein referred to as the "commission" for the purpose of regulating the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs in public places; providing for the pruning and removal of trees on private property which endanger public safety and to generally improve the general welfare and health of the people of the city and county. 
(Ord. of 10-28-1991, § 1) 
Sec. 2-37. - Members, terms. 
(a)	The commission shall consist of seven members representing these organizations: 
Regional Development Center Forestry commission Garden Club Chamber of Commerce City of Eastman Georgia Power Electric Membership Corporation  
To serve a one-year term with yearly appointments by the commission. 
(b)	Each organization must have representation at board meetings. 
(Ord. of 10-28-1991, § 2) 
Sec. 2-38. - Powers of commission. 
    The commission herein created shall have the power and authority: 
(1)	To study and determine the problems and needs of the city for the planting of trees and shrubberies in public places; 
(2)	To recommend to the proper authorities and officials of the city, the types and kinds of trees or shrubs to be planted upon the right-of-way of municipal streets, public parks, and public facilities; 
(3)	To assist the city and parks and recreation department in a program to protect and maintain existing trees, shrubs and green areas on all city-owned property and public properties; 
(4)	To recommend to the city manager and council removal of any trees or shrubbery deemed to be hazardous to the public safety or public health; 
(5)	To assist the proper officials and make available to and educate the general public news and information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of trees, shrubbery and other greenery within the corporate limits of the city: to recommend from time to time as necessary ordinances and other programs that will be beneficial to protect and maintain existing trees, shrubs and green areas and to encourage the development of private property owners of landscaped areas with trees and shrubs. 
(Ord. of 10-28-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 2-39. - Officers and meetings. 
    Upon appointment of the initial commission by the city council, said commission shall meet and elect one of its members as chairperson and one of its members as secretary. The commission shall then provide for the rules and procedures for the holding of regular and special meetings of the commission as deemed advisable and necessary. 
(Ord. of 10-28-1991, § 4) 
State Law reference- Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 
Secs. 2-40-2-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PURCHASING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(a); appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance or budget resolution, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

Sec. 2-67. - City manager's authority. 
    The city manager shall have the authority to make expenditures in accordance with the city manager's duty and responsibility to fulfill the day to day needs and requirements of the city of any monies up to a maximum of $2,500.00 without prior governing body approval. 
(Ord. of 3-23-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 2-68. - Bids and proposals. 
    All supplies, materials, equipment, repairs and contractual services, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed $2,500.00 may be purchased after due notice inviting proposals. 
(1)	A notice inviting bids shall be published at least five days preceding the last day set for the receipt of such bids. 
(2)	The newspaper notice shall include a description of the equipment or services to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. 
(3)	When deemed necessary by the governing body bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of each required security. 
(4)	Bids shall be submitted sealed to the city clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope; shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice; and a tabulation of all bids received shall be provided to all bidders. 
(5)	The governing body shall have the authority to reject all bids, or parts of all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(6)	The governing body shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this article. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, with the exception of professional services only. In this case only, qualifications and experience to the benefit of the city shall receive first consideration. Upon determination of these factors, a price or fee may be negotiated. 
(Ord. of 3-23-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 2-69. - Waiver. 
    The governing body of the city, by majority vote, may waive any provision of this article when deemed appropriate in cases of emergency or in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-23-2009, § 4) 
Secs. 2-70-2-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CODE OF ETHICS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of March 24, 2014, amended article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article IV, §§ 2-97-2-100, pertained to ethics, and derived from an ordinance of December 28, 2009. 

Sec. 2-97. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)	Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)	Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)	Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)	Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. of 3-24-2014, § 1) 
Sec. 2-98. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. 
    Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the charter. 
(Ord. of 3-24-2014, § 1) 
Sec. 2-99. - Definitions. 
    Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
    City official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the city council. 
    Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
    Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
    Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
    Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
    Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
    Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)	The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
(2)	The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed (a) $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or (b) ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)	The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)	The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. of 3-24-2014, § 1) 
Sec. 2-100. - Prohibitions. 
(a)	No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)	No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)	No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)	No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)	No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)	This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)	This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)	Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make the interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)	All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)	Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)	No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)	If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)	No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)	No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)	A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)	A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)	A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)	No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. 
(p)	No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the municipal court of the City of Eastman nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the City of Eastman on any matter pending before the municipal court of the City of Eastman. 
(Ord. of 3-24-2014, § 1) 
Sec. 2-101. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)	A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)	A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the city manager and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)	Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. of 3-24-2014, § 1) 
Sec. 2-102. - Board of ethics. 
(a)	The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of three residents of the city to be appointed as follows: the city manager and councilmembers shall designate five qualified citizens to provide a pool of five individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of three years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. The city clerk shall maintain a listing of these qualified citizens. Upon receipt of a properly verified complaint and timely forwarding of that complaint to the city official charged in the complaint, the city manager and council, at the next regularly scheduled public meeting or at a specially called public meeting, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until three members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chair. 
(b)	All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at lease one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. 
(c)	All members of the board of ethics shall serve a three-year term. 
(d)	No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. 
(e)	Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. 
(f)	The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(g)	No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. 
(h)	No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the City of Eastman. 
(i)	Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to the qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. 
(j)	Members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of the city governing authority. 
(k)	Members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of the city governing authority for cause including, but not limited to, failure to maintain any requirement for qualification to serve on the board of ethics. 
(Ord. of 3-24-2014, § 1) 
Sec. 2-103. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)	All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the city clerk in written form. The city clerk will retain the original and within seven working days shall forward a copy of the complaint to the chairperson of the board of ethics and a copy to the city official or officials charged in the complaint. 
(b)	All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. 
(c)	Upon receipt of a complaint in proper for, the board shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)	Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(e)	The board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)	The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(g)	Findings of the board of ethics shall be submitted to the city council for action. 
(h)	To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, ethic complaints against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, which are filed between the date of qualifying for municipal office and the date of certification of the election results will be held and will not be processed until the election results for that office have been certified. 
(Ord. of 3-24-2014, § 1) 
Sec. 2-104. - Service of complaint. 
    The city clerk or board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven working days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it established but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to city council within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation to submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of the time deadlines in this section of the article shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power of jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. of 3-24-2014, § 1) 
Sec. 2-105. - Right to appeal. 
(a)	Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)	An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Dodge County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. of 3-24-2014, § 1) 
Sec. 2-106. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)	Public reprimand or censure by the city council; or 
(2)	A fine greater than $100.00 but less than $500.00; or 
(3)	Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-24-2014, § 1) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. III, § IX, ¶ VI(e); Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age, use of false identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391; local regulation of alcoholic beverage manufacture, distribution, and sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq.; signs advertising alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Beer includes malt liquor. 
(Code 1982, § 3-1) 
Sec. 4-2. - Drinking publicly on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to publicly drink any alcoholic beverage on private property located within the city without the consent of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2; Ord. of 8-23-1971, § 1) 
State Law reference- Public intoxication, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 4-3. - Possession by minor. 
    It is unlawful for any person who is under the age of 21 years to have in such person's possession, or under such person's control, at any place whatsoever in the city, any whiskey, wine, beer or other intoxicating beverages. 
(Code 1982, § 3-3; Ord. of 2-8-1971, § 1; Ord. of 7-23-1984(1)) 
State Law reference- Purchase by minors, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 4-4. - Liquor sales prohibited. 
    It shall not be lawful for any person to keep in any quantity whatever in any house, booth, stall or any other place in the city, for the purpose of sale, any alcoholic beverage, other than permitted beer and wine in licensed establishments. 
(Code 1911, § 91; Code 1982, § 3-4) 
Sec. 4-5. - Carrying alcoholic beverage upon the person for purpose of sale. 
    It shall not be lawful for any person to have or carry about the person any quantity whatever, for the purpose of sale, of any spirituous, alcoholic, malt, fermented, vinous or intoxicating beverage. 
(Code 1911, § 91; Code 1982, § 3-5) 
Sec. 4-6. - Drinking publicly on city property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to publicly drink any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, or public recreation areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-23-1984(2)) 
Sec. 4-7. - Public display of alcoholic beverage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to publicly display any alcoholic beverage in any container on the streets, sidewalks, parking lots open to the public, or public recreation areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1985) 
Secs. 4-8-4-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BEER AND WINE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local licensing of the sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-42; local licensing of the sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-10-40. 

Sec. 4-34. - Licenses and fees required. 
(a)	Licenses required for beer and wine sold and manufactured. No malt beverage, vinous liquors, spirituous liquors or any other alcoholic beverage shall be sold or manufactured in the city except under a license issued under this chapter by the city clerk. 
(b)	Chapter provisions prevail; supplemental to business license requirements. The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code; and if other provisions of this Code conflict with this chapter, then this chapter shall control. 
(c)	Type of licenses issued; fees. Licenses which may be issued under this chapter include: 
(1)	Wholesale businesses. 
a.	Malt beverages 
b.	Vinous liquors 
c.	Spiritous liquors 
(2)	Retail. Malt beverages and vinous liquors ..... $1,500.00 
(3)	Consumption on the premises. 
a.	Malt beverages and vinous liquors .....  1,500.00 
b.	Spirituous liquors: restaurants only .....  1,500.00 
(Ord. of 4-10-2006, § 11A) 
Sec. 4-35. - Excise tax. 
    In addition to license fees, it shall be the duty of the local retailer to collect excise tax on each can, bottle, keg or case of beer and wine sold by such dealer. This tax must be remitted to the city and shall be in the amounts below set forth: 
(1)	Beer. 
Containers Case Rate Draft Rate 6 oz. $1.20 1 1/3 gal. $0.436 7 oz.  1.40 21/4 gal.  0.871 8 oz.  1.20 1/8 bbl. 1.50 10 oz.  1.00 1/4 bbl. 3.00 12 oz.  1.20 1/2 bbl. 6.00 14 oz.  1.40 16 oz.  1.60 32 oz.  1.60  
(2)	Wine. Per litre: $0.22. 
(Code 1982, § 3-21; Ord. of 5-12-1981, § 2) 
Sec. 4-36. - License application; granting or denying. 
    Individuals desiring a beer, wine, or beer and wine license may obtain the proper application form at the city hall. This application must be filled out completely and returned to the city hall, along with a certified check payable to the city, in an amount equal to the fees for the license applied for. The city council shall have 90 days to grant or deny the license and its decision shall be final. In the event that an application is denied, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant. However, the amount of money spent by the city to investigate an application may be deducted from the amount of license fees refunded to the applicant. In no event shall the city withhold an amount greater than $100.00 as charges for investigating an application. 
(Code 1982, § 3-22; Ord. of 5-12-1981, § 6) 
Sec. 4-37. - License renewal. 
    Renewal for yearly beer, wine, or beer and wine license must be paid by January 10 of each year. 
(Code 1982, § 3-23; Ord. of 5-12-1981, § 9) 
Sec. 4-38. - Persons and establishments ineligible for license. 
    When contrary to the public interest and welfare, no license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be issued by the city to or for: 
(1)	Any person determined by the city by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, record of arrest or reputation in any community in which he has resided is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)	Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony or crime involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately preceding the filing of application for such license. 
(3)	Any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude including, but not limited to, those involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or tax law violations if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(4)	A location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the city because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties or on the neighborhood. 
(5)	A location at which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been revoked or suspended and where, in the judgment of the city, the problems which have arisen from the operation of an alcoholic beverage license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location. 
(6)	Which the granting of such license would constitute a violation of state law or regulations. 
(7)	Any person who is an official of or employee of the city. 
(8)	Any person to operate a restaurant or club except as defined in section 6-1. Consumption on the premises sales shall be made in no other places or establishments. 
(9)	All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent with the application. 
(10)	A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
a.	Before the city shall deny any application for a license or shall revoke any existing license, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, shall be given notice in writing from the city clerk to show cause before the city council at a time and place specified therein not less than three days nor more than ten days from the date of service of the notice, why such application for license should not be denied or why such license should not be revoked, as the case may be, stating the grounds therefor and, at the appointed time and place, the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exists, why such application should not be denied or such license revoked, after which the city shall take such action as it, in its judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. The hearing on a revocation herein provided for need not be at a regular meeting of the city council but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice. All decisions denying, approving, suspending or revoking any permit, license or application shall be in writing with the reasons therefor stated and mailed or delivered to the applicant. In addition, at any hearing as provided herein, the party afforded the hearing shall have the opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
b.	Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city is a privilege and not a right and the issuance of a license hereunder shall not create any property rights in the license holder. 
(Code 1982, § 3-24; Ord. of 5-12-1981, § 7(A-D)) 
Sec. 4-39. - Advertising restricted. 
    All establishments engaged in the sale of beer or wine shall restrict their advertising in the following manner: 
(1)	Each establishment shall be limited to one exterior or window sign advertising the sale of a particular brand or brands of beer, malt liquor or wine. This one sign shall not exceed four feet by six feet in size and may be single or double face in structure. The use of neon type signs is prohibited. Flashing signs are prohibited. A second sign advertising the name of business will be allowed. Beer and wine advertising will not be allowed in such second sign. 
(2)	No establishment selling beer or wine may advertise these products by referring to them as "beer," "malt liquor," or "wine." However, they may refer to their products as "beverages," "alcoholic beverages," "canned or bottled drinks" and other such terms. 
(Code 1982, § 3-26; Ord. of 5-12-1981, § 5(A, B)) 
Sec. 4-40. - Revocation of license; hearing. 
(a)	Any retailer who violates the regulations, local, state or federal, shall at the option of the city council have such retailer's local license revoked and at such time such retailer shall discontinue the sale of beer and wine. 
(b)	The retailer shall have the right to appear before the city council in such retailer's own behalf should such license be challenged by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 3-27; Ord. of 5-12-1981, § 4) 
Sec. 4-41. - Examination of stock of beverages. 
    The city reserves the right to examine the stock of beer and wine of any licensed business operated within the city at any time. 
(Code 1982, § 3-28; Ord. of 5-12-1981, § 8) 
Sec. 4-42. - Proximity of establishment to church, school, funeral home, hospital, nursing home or residence. 
(a)	No establishment shall be within 400 feet of the premises of a church, school, funeral home, hospital or a nursing home; or within 150 feet of the premises of an apartment building or private home, whether or not said apartment building or private home is zoned for commercial use. 
(b)	This restriction shall not apply to those establishments whose quarterly sales of beer and wine amount to 50 percent or less of its entire gross sales per quarter. 
(c)	Each establishment claiming an exemption by reason of the fact that it's quarterly beer and wine sales are 50 percent or less of its total gross sales shall furnish to the city manager a statement of the dollar amount of it's sales of beer and wine, and of its total gross sales, for the proceeding quarter, within 15 days from the close of each calendar quarter year. 
(Code 1982, § 3-29; Ord. of 5-12-1981, § 7(E)) 
Sec. 4-43. - Retail business zoning. 
    All licenses issued must be for retail businesses whose buildings or outlets lie within the commercial zone. 
(Code 1982, § 3-30; Ord. of 5-12-1981, § 1) 
Sec. 4-44. - Drinking in establishment. 
    There shall be no drinking of any alcoholic beverage in any licensed establishment. 
(Code 1982, § 3-31; Ord. of 5-12-1981, § 7(F); Ord. of 4-4-1986, § 1) 
Sec. 4-45. - Rules subject to change. 
    Rules and regulations for the sale of beer and wine are subject to change. 
(Code 1982, § 3-32; Ord. of 5-12-1981, § 10) 
Secs. 4-46-4-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALE AT RETAIL BY RESTAURANTS OF BEER AND WINE FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 4-63. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Beer or malt beverage means and includes all malted, fermented or brewed beverages of any name or description, manufactured from malt, wholly or in part. 
    Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, the place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and a seating capacity of at least 25 people, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating and the serving of these meals shall be the principal business conducted. The serving of prepared food must equal not less than 50 percent of any such restaurant's monthly gross sales as certified to by the proprietor and his accountant. This certificate shall be given quarterly to the city manager or the city clerk and shall state the total gross sales of such establishment during the period, gross sales of prepared food and gross sales of beer and wine. 
    Spiritous liquors means all beverages containing alcohol, obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including fortified wines. 
    Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include fortified wines containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 2; Ord. of 4-10-2006, § 1A) 
Sec. 4-64. - Penalty. 
(a)	Any person who acquires a license or a renewal thereof in violation of this article by any misrepresentation or fraudulent statement, or who, after acquiring a license is found to have violated any of the provisions of this article, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided for by the charter of the city. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)	Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material omission left out of an original, renewal, or transfer application for a license shall be cause for the denial thereof and, if any license has been granted under these circumstances, these shall be cause for revocation. 
(c)	The city council may revoke or suspend a license or impose a fine against the licensee for any violation of this article. Such fine may be imposed by the city council in the maximum amount of $500.00 for the first violation of this article, $750.00 for the second violation, and $1,000.00 for the third violation. Such revocation or suspension shall be for a maximum of 24 months, the period to be determined at the discretion of the council. A total of three separate and unrelated violations shall constitute grounds for permanent revocation. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 16) 
Sec. 4-65. - Purpose. 
    This article has been enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of on-premises consumption of malt beverages and wine, as defined herein; to protect those of minor age in the community; and to preserve certain residential areas with reasonable considerations to the character of the areas and peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhood and property values. The business of selling beer and wine by restaurants for consumption on the premises is declared to be a privilege granted by this city and is not a right. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 4-66. - Consumption sales only. 
    Persons holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not sell alcoholic beverages by the package. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2006, § 2A) 
Sec. 4-67. - Qualifications of applicants. 
    All applicants for licenses and all applications for renewal must attach to their applications evidence of their legal status in the state: all corporations must include proof of registration with the state's secretary of state's office; all businesses must include their business license. No license, whether original or renewal, shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation organized for pecuniary gain where the owner or operator of same, or any individual having over 50 percent interest, general or limited, or a stockholder whose interest exceeds 50 percent, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere for any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude of any state or of the United States within two years immediately prior to the filing of the application or application for renewal. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 3) 
Sec. 4-68. - Regulations as to employees; permit. 
    The following regulations regarding employees shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general requirements for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2006, § 3A) 
Sec. 4-69. - Application contents. 
(a)	All applications for licenses, both original applications or applications for renewal, in addition to other requirements as contained in this article, must be submitted to the city clerk or city manager and must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interests, as determined in section 4-68, in establishments which sell beer and wine at retail for consumption on the premises. The application or application for renewal shall include: 
(1)	The names and addresses of all persons and/or entities interested in the ownership of the business applying for a license to sell beer and wine, together with the interest of each person or member of his immediate family in any other business licensed to sell beer or wine; 
(2)	The ownership of the land and building where the business is to be operated and the location of the building; 
(3)	Payment in cash or its equivalent in the amount of the fixed license fee; 
(4)	A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant. 
(b)	Any change in any relationship herein declared must be filed with the city manager or city clerk when the change is made, and failure to so file within a period of 30 days after the change is made, shall be grounds for suspension or revocation by the council. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 4) 
Sec. 4-70. - Open area and patio sales. 
    The consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in open areas and patios provided that such open areas and patios are not visible from the exterior of the premises, and further provided that the licensee is in compliance with all other appropriate regulations as to the safe and orderly operation of such establishment, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2006, § 4A) 
Sec. 4-71. - Term of license. 
(a)	Licenses shall be issued as of the beginning of the year or of the date of beginning of operation, whichever date is later and shall terminate on December 31 of each year. 
(b)	Any licensee making proper application, with all supporting documents, for a license to operate during the following calendar year and having filed the application prior to November 1 shall be permitted to continue to operate pending final approval or disapproval of the licensee's application for the following year if final approval or disapproval is not granted prior to January 1. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 5) 
Sec. 4-72. - Lighting of premises; sanitary facilities. 
(a)	Each building in which the licensee's place of business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located, so as to reveal all of the outside premises of the building. 
(b)	All premises for which a license for consumption on the premises shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by customers therein. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2006, § 5A) 
Sec. 4-73. - Transferability of license; transfer of location. 
(a)	Licenses shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided herein. In the case of the death of any person holding a license or any interest therein, the same may, in the discretion of the city manager, be transferred to the administrator, executor, or a lawful heir of the decedent upon application of same for license transfer. The executor, administrator, or lawful heir shall have 30 days from the deceased's date of death within which to apply for a license transfer. 
(b)	Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. 
(c)	Should the location of the premises be changed, the licensee shall apply for a transfer of location to the city council and shall comply with the provisions set forth governing new licenses. 
(d)	Should a transfer of location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee or business tax and the new location shall be considered as a new license hereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 6) 
Sec. 4-74. - Sales restricted to premises. 
    No licensee shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any person except in the licensee's place of business. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2006, § 6A) 
Sec. 4-75. - Procedure when license is denied by state. 
    In the event the applicant is denied a license for consumption on the premises by the state, upon proof of that refusal, he shall be entitled to a refund of the license fee or business tax less the investigative fee as required plus an additional charge of $25.00 to cover the clerical costs for granting a license. This refund may be made by the city manager without the necessity of any action by the council. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 7) 
Sec. 4-76. - Purchases from city-licensed wholesaler. 
    No liquor shall be possessed or sold or held for sale for consumption on the premises except liquor purchased from a wholesaler licensed to make sales in the city. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2006, § 7A) 
Sec. 4-77. - Granting or refusal, suspension or revocation of permit or license. 
(a)	The granting or refusal and the suspension or revocation of a permit or license shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated and shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant. 
(b)	Upon application within ten days of the date of decision any applicant not granted a license may request a hearing before the city council at which time the applicant may respond to and challenge such decision, to present witnesses under oath, evidence, and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(c)	Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license, for consumption on the premises, the city license to deal in that product shall automatically become invalid without any action by the city manager or any municipal officer. 
(d)	Except as provided for herein, no license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any person under this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause as defined in this section and after a hearing and upon prior ten days' written notice to a holder of a license of the time, place and purpose of a hearing and a statement of the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. The licensee shall have an opportunity at this hearing to respond to and challenge such charges, to present witnesses under oath, to confront and cross examine opposing witnesses under oath and to have a verbatim written transcript made upon his own initiative and expense. 
(e)	Due cause for suspension or revocation of a license, or for the imposition of a fine against the licensee shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating the business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating the business, or for violation of any state or federal law involving moral turpitude, or for the violation of any city ordinance except traffic violations. 
(f)	All hearings shall be conducted before the city council. 
(g)	In the event of revocation or suspension, no refund or any portion of the license fee or business shall be returned. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 8) 
Sec. 4-78. - Gambling; disorderly conduct. 
    No gambling, slot machines, or boisterous or disorderly conduct shall be permitted in the licensee's place of business. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2006, § 8A) 
Sec. 4-79. - Prevention of evasion; records; inspections. 
(a)	Upon demand by the city clerk or city manager, it shall be the duty of any licensee to allow these city officials or their designee, during business hours, inspection of all portions of the place of business for the purpose of enabling the city officials or their designees to ascertain and gain any information as may be necessary for determining the percentage of gross receipts from the sale of prepared food and the percentage of gross receipts from the sale of beer and wine. Upon demand by these city officials, it shall also be the duty of any licensee to furnish the city officials during regular business hours at the licensee's place of business, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and other memoranda containing entries showing amounts of purchase, sale receipts, inventory, copies of sales tax returns to the state, copies of the state and federal income tax reports, and other information from which the correct percentage of gross receipts from the sale of prepared food as opposed to beer and wine can be obtainable. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of any licensee of the city to secure, preserve, maintain and keep for a period of three years the records and documents enumerated and referred to in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any licensee or for any employee of the licensee to fail or refuse to perform any duty herein imposed upon the licensee to obstruct or interfere with any city official in obtaining information necessary for determining the aforesaid percentage of sales. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 9) 
Sec. 4-80. - Promotions prohibited. 
(a)	Definitions. As used in this section, the phrase "customarily charged" means the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. 
(b)	No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)	The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage; 
(2)	The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; 
(3)	Selling, offering to sell or delivering to any person any alcoholic beverage at a price less than one-half the price customarily charged for such alcoholic beverage, provided, nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit reducing the price of a drink by up to one-half the price customarily charged; 
(4)	Requiring or allowing the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed, by any one person; 
(5)	Increasing the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2006, § 9A) 
Sec. 4-81. - Prohibited hours of operation. 
(a)	No license holder shall sell, give away or otherwise dispense beer and wine for consumption either on or off the premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 11:00 a.m. on the following morning and on Sundays, election days and any other days prohibited by state law. 
(b)	The prohibition against the dispensing of beer and wine on election days shall apply only within the territorial boundaries for which the election day is being held. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 10) 
Sec. 4-82. - Closing, clearing of premises. 
    All owners, managers, operators, representatives, agents or employees of a holder of an alcoholic beverage license shall cease the sales, offer to sell, give, dispense, or distribute any alcoholic beverages on or from the premises for which a license has been issued by the city and/or the state as of 2:00 a.m. each week day and 12:00 midnight on Sunday, except those days and hours noted in section 4-81, and shall require all patrons or parties to vacate the premises from which a license has been issued by 2:30 a.m. each week day and 12:30 a.m. on Sunday. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2006, § 10A) 
Sec. 4-83. - Employees. 
(a)	No licensee shall employ on the premises where beer and wine are sold under this article any person under the age of 18 years to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverages, nor shall any licensee employ any individual who has been found guilty or has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude of any state or of the United states within two years immediately prior to the date of employment. Employment of such persons subjects the licensee to a suspension or revocation of the license. 
(b)	Beer and wine for consumption on the premises shall be served only by employees of the establishment. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 11) 
Sec. 4-84. - Condition of premises. 
    All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of the premises used for storage and sale of food for human consumption. It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace of obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices on the premises. No beer or wine and/or spirituous liquors shall be dispensed in any establishment operating bowling alleys, slot machines and similar mechanical devices. 
(1)	Beer and wine and/or spirituous liquors may be dispensed in restaurant establishments operating pool tables and/or billiard tables, provided said establishment derives at least 50 percent of any such restaurant's monthly gross sales as set forth in Eastman City Code section 4-63, and provided further that said restaurant establishment: 
a.	Is licensed to sell beer and wine and/or spirituous liquors pursuant to the Eastman City Code; 
b.	Is licensed by the State of Georgia to operate pool tables and/or billiard tables; 
c.	Pays a license fee to the City of Eastman in the same amount as is required by the State of Georgia to operate a pool table and/or billiard table, currently in the amount of $25.00, per year, per pool table and/or billiard table; and 
d.	Said restaurant establishment shall not allow the operation of pool tables and/or billiard tables after 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, nor after 12:00 midnight on Saturday, of each week. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 12; Ord. of 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 4-85. - Location of premises. 
    The proximity of the establishment to church, school, funeral home, hospital, nursing home or residence shall be governed by section 4-84. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 13) 
Sec. 4-86. - Sales outside of licensed premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any sale to be made outside of the building, premises or place of business licensed for sales. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 14) 
Sec. 4-87. - Application of Code. 
    All provisions of article II of this chapter, except those in conflict herewith, are applicable to this article. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1989, § 15) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- City's and county's authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const., art. IX, § II, ¶ 3(a)(3); livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Bird sanctuary-City designated. 
    The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1; Ord. of 3-23-1959) 
Sec. 6-2. - Same-Prohibited activities; abatement of nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests; provided, however, if starlings or other birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper authorities of the city, such authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, or as many of said organizations as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three days actual notice of the time and place of said meeting to the representatives of said organizations. If as a result of said meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, said birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by said city authorities under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1982, § 4-2; Ord. of 3-23-1959) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 6-3. - Livestock at large. 
    It shall not be lawful for any owner or person in charge of any horse, mule, hog, sheep, goat or other livestock to permit or allow the same to be at large within the city at any time. 
(Code 1911, §§ 149, 186; Code 1982, § 4-3) 
State Law reference- Livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-4. - Livestock-Turning out. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to turn out onto the streets or other public places of the city, any livestock. 
(Code 1911, §§ 151, 194; Code 1982, § 4-4) 
Sec. 6-5. - Same-Impounding and sale. 
    The city police department shall impound all livestock found at large in the city and notify the owner (if found) as early as practicable. The owners of such impounded animals may, on proof of ownership, redeem the same by paying to the city $10.00 per head and all expenses of impounding, feeding and keeping the same, and not otherwise. The chief of police shall at once advertise in writing, by posting at three public places in the city, or by advertising one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, offering, on not less than three days' notice, for sale to the highest bidder, for cash, all livestock thus impounded and unredeemed, such notice to give description, marks and brand (if any), and if the same remains unredeemed at day of sale it shall be by the chief of police sold to the highest bidder for cash, and, after deducting the charges and expenses aforesaid, the remainder of purchase price shall be turned over to the owner of the livestock, if known; if no owner is found, the surplus to be turned over to the city treasurer for the use of the city. 
(Code 1911, §§ 150, 151; Code 1982, § 4-5) 
Sec. 6-6. - Poultry at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any chicken or other poultry belonging to such person to go upon the streets or other public places in the city, or to permit or allow any chicken or other poultry belonging to such person to go upon lands of others in which such person has no ownership or right of possession. 
(Code 1982, § 4-7; Ord. of 12-31-1945, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 6-7. - Keeping hogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have or keep any hog at any place within the city. 
(Code 1911, § 184; Code 1982, § 4-8) 
Sec. 6-8. - Impoundment-Records. 
    The animal control officer designated by the city shall keep a record of all animals impounded and an accurate description of the same, when impounded, when released, when sold, to whoever sold and the price paid. 
(Ord. of 7-22-1996, § 4-20) 
Sec. 6-9. - Same-Fees. 
    The animal control officer designated by the city shall be entitled to impounding fees for equine animals, bovine animals, hogs, sheep or goats in an amount determined by the city council from time to time and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 7-22-1996, § 4-21) 
Secs. 6-10-6-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-39. - Definitions. 
(a)	As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
    Board means the animal control board. 
    City governing authority means the city council. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)	Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989; 
(2)	Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification; or 
(3)	That has been determined to be a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog under the authority of section 6-72. 
    Dog control officer means an individual selected by the city governing authority pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22 to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
    Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within this city. 
    Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that without provocation bites a human being on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989, or has been determined to be such under the authority of section 6-72. 
    Property enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
    Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state or local court; or records of a dog control officer as provided in this article and by the laws of the state. 
    Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
(b)	The terms "dangerous dog" and "potentially dangerous dog" shall not include the following: 
(1)	A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties; and 
(2)	A dog who inflicts an injury within the meaning of this article if the injury was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1990, § 4-27) 
Sec. 6-40. - Rabies inoculation, tag and leashing required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit or allow any dog owned by such person to leave or be off of the premises of the owner or custodian unless the dog shall be wearing at such time a collar with a current rabies inoculation tag affixed thereto in such a manner as to be plainly visible to an observer. The dog shall be firmly held by a chain or leash (or under control), which chain or leash shall at all times be held by some person strong enough to control the movements of the dog. 
(b)	The inoculation referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be done each year. 
(Ord. of 7-22-1996, § 4-22) 
State Law reference- Requirement to regulate or license animals in the control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3. 
Sec. 6-41. - Running at large; impoundment. 
(a)	The fine shall be $50.00 for the first violation; $100.00 for the second violation and $300.00 for the third violation of this section. 
(b)	Any dog found running at large within the city, and found without a collar and rabies inoculation tag affixed thereto, and not firmly held with a chain or leash, which chain or leash is held by a person strong enough to control the movements of such dog, shall be subject to be impounded by the city for a period not to exceed five days. Any dog found running at large within the city, and found with a collar and rabies inoculation tag affixed thereto, shall be subject to be impounded by the city for a period not to exceed five days. Such dogs, whether collared and tagged as directed by city ordinance or without collar and tag shall be subject to seizure by the enforcement officer and impounded by the city. During such period, the lawful owner may redeem such dog by paying the city $5.00 per day for the impounding. If such dog is not redeemed within the period, it may be destroyed by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. of 7-22-1996, § 4-23; Ord. of 2-10-1997) 
Sec. 6-42. - Payment to veterinarian for keeping impounded dogs. 
    The city is authorized to pay the veterinarian keeping dogs impounded, as provided in this article, for the period not exceeding five days, at a rate in an amount to be determined by the city council from time to time and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained in the city clerk's office, should such dogs not be redeemed by their owners or be destroyed as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 7-22-1996, § 4-24; Ord. of 2-10-1997) 
Sec. 6-43. - Preventing nuisance; restraint of dogs; impounding authorized. 
(a)	The owner or keeper of each dog or cat within the city shall keep it from becoming a nuisance and from endangering or injuring any person. 
(1)	Dogs shall at all times: 
a.	Be kept within a proper enclosure from which it cannot escape; 
b.	Be restrained upon the owner's property by a substantial chain, cable, rope or other device from which it cannot escape so as to not reach any adjoining property or public right-of-way; or 
c.	Be restrained on a leash and accompanied by the owner or other responsible person. 
(2)	Except in areas authorized for agriculture, the maximum number of dogs and cats that may be kept on a single premises shall not exceed three (exception: licensed veterinary hospitals, kennels and grooming parlors); A litter of cats or dogs will be permitted to remain on the premises for a period of eight weeks after their birth. 
(3)	Animals committing the following acts shall be deemed a nuisance: 
a.	Molests passersby or passing vehicles. 
b.	Attacks other animals. 
c.	Trespasses on private or public property. 
d.	Is repeatedly at large. 
e.	Damages private or public property. 
f.	Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continual or untimely fashion. 
(b)	Whenever a dog or cat is kept in such manner, as constitutes a nuisance, a proceeding to abate the nuisance may be brought by the party aggrieved, pursuant to law. An animal found by the court to constitute a nuisance may be impounded by the city if the owner, after reasonable opportunity to do so, fails to abate the nuisance as ordered by the court. 
(c)	Whenever a dog is allowed to roam free, in violation of this section, impoundment of the animal is authorized. Upon identification of the owner, a citation shall be issued for violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
Sec. 6-44. - Cleaning up after pets. 
(a)	Any person owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any dog or cat shall promptly remove and dispose of all feces left by the dog or cat on any public property and on any private property not owned by such person or lawfully occupied by such person. 
(b)	Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $25.00 or more than $100.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. of 2-28-2000, § 4-25B, C) 
Sec. 6-45. - Dogs in heat. 
(a)	Any dog under any circumstances shall not be permitted to run at large on any public property or on any private property while in heat. Such animals shall be confined to an enclosed area at all times and, while in the process of breeding, shall be in a concealed area out of view of the public. 
(b)	Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each occasion on which a violation occurs. 
(Ord. of 2-28-2000, § 4-25D, E) 
Sec. 6-46. - Animal control board. 
(a)	There is created and established an animal control board. The purpose of the board shall be to conduct the hearings provided for in section 6-71. 
(b)	The board shall consist of three members. All members shall be appointed by the city governing authority. The initial terms of members shall be as follows: one member to serve for one year; one member to serve for two years; and one member to serve for three years. Thereafter, all members appointed to the board by the city governing authority shall be appointed for terms of three years and until their successors are appointed. 
(c)	No member of the board shall participate in a hearing on any matter in which such member previously participated in the classification of the dog at issue. In the event that a member of the board is disqualified to participate in a hearing by reason of the foregoing provision, the city governing authority shall appoint an individual, pro tempore, to participate as a member of the board in any matter creating such disqualification of a member of the board. In the event of a vacancy during the term of any member by reason of death, resignation, or otherwise, the appointment of a successor by the city governing authority shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of such member. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1990, § 4-28) 
Sec. 6-47. - Dog control officer. 
(a)	The city governing authority shall appoint a dog control officer who shall serve at the pleasure of the city governing authority. The dog control officer's compensation shall be established from time to time by the city governing authority. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly hinder, interfere, harass or otherwise obstruct the performance of the dog control officer in the official performance of his duties and shall upon conviction thereof in the municipal court be punished as provided for in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1990, § 4-29) 
Sec. 6-48. - Article not to impose additional duties or waive immunity. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq., to implement the duties for which the city is responsible under state law. This article shall not be construed to impose any additional duties or liability on the city or its officers and employees or to waive any immunity which is currently provided by law. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1990, § 4-34) 
Secs. 6-49-6-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOGS, POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 6-71. - Procedures for classifying dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs; notice; hearing. 
(a)	The dog control officer, upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the city from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, or county board of health, shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to determine the validity of such report and whether the dog should be classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or reclassified as a dangerous dog if previously classified as a potentially dangerous dog. 
(b)	Should the dog control officer determine that a dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the dog control officer shall classify such dog accordingly. The dog control officer shall then notify the dog's owner of such classification. The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
(2)	The notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)	The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)	The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the animal control board; 
(5)	The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)	The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the board. 
(c)	When the animal control board receives a request for a hearing as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence. In addition, the board shall receive at the hearing such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's classification of the dog. 
(d)	Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the animal control board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1990, § 4-30) 
Sec. 6-72. - Requirements for possessing a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(a)	No one shall have, own, or possess within the city a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration. 
(b)	The dog control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the dog control officer or the dog control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)	A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; and 
(2)	The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall receive such sign from the dog control officer at the time the owner pays the annual registration fee as required in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)	In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the dog control officer evidence of: 
(1)	A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
(2)	A surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog. 
(d)	The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual registration fee at the time the annual certificate of registration is issued. The annual registration fee shall be in the amount of $100.00. Certificates of registration shall be renewed in the month of the initial registration. 
(e)	The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer if the owner is moving from the city. 
(f)	The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register such dog as required by this article within 30 days after becoming a resident of the state and the city. 
(g)	The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves to the city from any other municipality or county within the state shall register such dog as required by this article within ten days after becoming a resident of the city. 
(h)	The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the dog control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1990, § 4-31) 
Sec. 6-73. - Restrictions on permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs outside of a proper enclosure. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person but not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1990, § 4-32) 
Sec. 6-74. - Confiscation; grounds; disposition. 
(a)	A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the dog control officer if: 
(1)	The owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or surety bond required by section 6-72(c); 
(2)	The dog is not validly registered as required by this article; 
(3)	The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as defined in this article; or 
(4)	The dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 6-73(a). 
(b)	A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if: 
(1)	The dog is not validly registered as required by this article; 
(2)	The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as defined in this article; or 
(3)	The dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 6-73(b). 
(c)	Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article as determined by the dog control officer and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog is confiscated, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(d)	In addition to the foregoing grounds for confiscation under subsection (a) or (b) of this section, a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog which aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of a human being, without provocation, under circumstances constituting a violation of this article, shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or another person authorized by the dog control officer and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the county board of health, and, thereafter, the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1990, § 4-33) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION; IMPROVEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; authority to adopt codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - State minimum standards adopted. 
(a)	It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council to enforce and adopt the state minimum standards codes as defined by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9). The adoption also includes the latest edition of the following state minimum standard codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, for all permits approved after December 31, 2014: 
International Building Code 2012 Edition International Residential Code 2012 Edition International Plumbing Code 2012 Edition International Mechanical Code 2012 Edition International Fuel Gas Code 2012 Edition International Fire Code 2012 Edition National Electrical Code 2014 Edition 
(w/no GA amendments) International Property Maintenance Code 2012 Edition 
(w/GA amendments) International Existing Building Code 2012 Edition 
(w/GA amendments) International Swimming Pool and Spa Code 2012 Edition International Energy Conservation Code 2009 Edition  
(b)	The following appendices of said codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)	International Mechanical Code: Appendix C. 
(2)	International Plumbing Code: Appendices C (state version), H, I (state version). 
(3)	International Residential Code: Appendix G. 
(4)	International Energy Conservation Code: Appendix A, B, C, D (new per the state DCA). 
(c)	Amend the following adopted codes to reflect missing or jurisdictional information referenced through adoption: 
(1)	International Building Code. Revise section 1612.3 to include:" The flood insurance study for the county countywide FIRM and FIS effective May 7, 2001. 
(2)	International Plumbing Code. 
a.	Revise section 305.6.1 to insert "12 inches." 
b.	Revise section 305.9 to include "Components of a plumbing system installed along alleyways, in yards, or lawns, driveways, parking garages or other locations exposed to damage shall be recessed into the ground, wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner." 
(3)	National Electrical Code. 
a.	When a residential service change is installed, all receptacle outlets that are required under the current state adopted electrical code to be GFI outlets shall be modified to provide such protection, including bathrooms, kitchen counters, and outdoor receptacles. 
b.	When a residential service change is installed, all smoke alarms required for new construction must be installed per the requirement in the adopted residential code. 
c.	A reinspection permit and reinspection shall be required before power is restored to any residence or building where power has been disconnected for six months or more. 
(4)	International Residential Code. Revise Table 301.2(1) in Chapter 3 shall be completed by adding the following information to the blank spaces: 
a.	Ground snow load (lbs. per square foot) - 8. 
b.	Wind speed (fastest mile) - 90. 
c.	Seismic design category B. 
d.	Weathering - Moderate. 
e.	Frost line depth - Yes, 12 inches minimum. 
f.	Termite damage - Yes, very heavy. 
g.	Winter design temp. for heating facilities - 22 degrees F. 
h.	Ice barrier underlayment required - No. 
i.	Flood hazards - Yes. 
j.	Air freezing index - 225. 
k.	Mean annual temperature - 55 degrees F to 60 degrees F. 
(d)	Should the state adopt new versions of the above codes, such adoptions shall be valid for the city as well. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2012; Ord. of 12-9-2013; Ord. of 1-12-2015) 
Sec. 8-2. - Permit procedure-Established. 
(a)	In order to receive a building permit, the property owner or such owner's agent shall: 
(1)	Stake the corners of building and driveway, or otherwise define on-site location of structure or addition; 
(2)	Submit the following documents to the city clerk: 
a.	Two complete sets of design plans and specifications; 
b.	Two site plans showing where the proposed structure will be located on the site, including distances and dimensions; the related site improvements which will be made in conjunction with the structure; and 
c.	Two lists of materials of exterior finishes which will be used on the structure and related site improvements. These lists shall include information concerning the nature of the materials and their colors. 
(b)	Upon submittal of the required documents, the city clerk shall make a notation on each set as to the date of submittal, then forward all documents to the building inspector during the same working day, time permitting; otherwise immediately on commencement of the following working day. 
(c)	The building inspector shall approve issuance of a building permit when an on-site inspection indicates the following: 
(1)	Site plan specifications have been accurately represented; 
(2)	All zoning ordinance requirements are being satisfied; 
(3)	There has been compliance with the requirements of the city manager; 
(4)	Payment of the required fee has been made. 
(d)	Notation of approval or denial, and the signature of the building inspectors, shall be affixed to each set of documents within three days after they have been submitted to such inspector: 
(1)	Upon approval, one set of documents shall be returned to the owner or owner's agent, the other retained by the building inspector. 
(2)	Upon denial, both sets of documents shall be returned to the owner or owner's agent. 
(e)	Amendments to construction plans and specifications will be made according to the preceding procedure. Until approval of a proposed amendment is granted in writing, the previously approved plans and specifications will remain in effect and will be enforced. 
(Code 1982, § 5-2) 
Sec. 8-3. - Same-Appeal from denial. 
    The denial of a building permit may be appealed to the city council. If required, a called meeting of the city council will be held within three days for consideration of such an appeal, and if not so held, the application will be deemed approved. 
(Code 1982, § 5-3) 
Sec. 8-4. - Permit fees. 
    Building permit fees shall be as prescribed from time to time by the governing body, and filed in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1982, § 5-4) 
Sec. 8-5. - Certificate of occupancy; connection of electric current; inapplicability of section provisions. 
(a)	The owner, contractor, or prospective occupant, prior to the occupancy of a new building requiring building permits in the city shall secure from the city clerk a permit of occupancy. 
(b)	The city clerk shall issue to applicants the permit of occupancy upon being furnished all final inspection reports; and a list of all contractors and subcontractors involved in the construction, all of whom must have complied with the provisions of this Code requiring a city business license. 
(c)	Permanent electric current may be connected to new buildings on the certification of approval of the final electrical inspection by the city electrical inspector, irrespective of the status of completion and inspection of work of other crafts. 
(d)	This section is not applicable to additions and repairs to existing buildings already occupied. 
(Code 1982, § 5-5) 
Sec. 8-6. - Fire limits defined. 
    The entire area within the corporate limits shall be the fire limits of the city. 
(Code 1911, § 68; Code 1982, § 5-6) 
Secs. 8-7-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSE AND BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM 

Sec. 8-21. - Numbering required. 
    All lots, buildings and structures in the city shall be numbered in accordance with the following plan. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 8-22. - Chart. 
    The city clerk shall keep a chart showing the proper street number of every lot in the city which shall be open to inspection by anyone interested. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2000, § 2) 
Sec. 8-23. - Numbers of houses, lots and buildings. 
    It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every house, building and lot in the city to have placed thereon, in a place visible from the street, figures at least three inches high, showing the number of the house, lot or building. Such figures shall be neatly displayed on permanent material such as wood, aluminum, metal or plastic. It shall also be permissible to place such figures on mailboxes so that such numbers will be easily visible on either side of the inhabitant's mailbox. Such figures shall also be placed in a visible location on the front of each home or business or on a sign in each yard. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2000, § 3) 
Sec. 8-24. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation failing to so number any house, building or other structure occupied by him, or if after receiving notice to do so from the clerk or other authorized agent of the city shall continue in his failure to so number such house, building or structure, shall be fined not more than $5.00 for each day during or on which a failure to so number continues. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2000, § 4) 
Secs. 8-25-8-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL 

Sec. 8-39. - Permits. 
(a)	No permit for electrical work shall be issued to anyone except licensed electricians of the state. In the case of an owner, a permit will be issued to the owner; it is not transferable to electricians. 
(b)	Fees for permits shall be as prescribed from time to time by the governing body, and filed in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1982, § 5-21) 
Secs. 8-40-8-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING 

Sec. 8-67. - Permit fees. 
    Plumbing permit fees shall be as prescribed from time to time by the governing body, and filed in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1982, § 5-51) 
Sec. 8-68. - Unlawful use of services; injury to and interference with property of utilities. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Intentionally and without authority and permission from the owner thereof to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, pole, lamp, manhole cover, fireplug or any accessories thereto belonging to the city or any other public or private utility (hereinafter called owner) engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, the furnishing of sanitary sewer service, or other public services without the intent to pay the fair cost of repair or replacement thereof; 
(2)	Intentionally and without authority and permission from the owner utilize any such service or consume any such product with intent to not pay the regular charge therefor to the owner, but with the intent to deprive the owner thereof; 
(3)	Intentionally and without authority prevent a meter from registering the quantity of such service or product supplied with the intent to deprive the owner of its regular charge therefor; 
(4)	In any way interfere with the proper action of any such owner with intent to divert any service or product so as to deprive the owner of the regular charge therefor; or 
(5)	Otherwise intentionally and without authority use or cause to be used, without the consent of such owner, any product or service furnished, manufactured, sold or distributed by such owner with intent to deprive the owner of its regular charge therefor. 
(b)	Proof that a person performed any of the acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section or proof that a person knowingly received the benefits of such acts or proof that any of the acts specified in subsection (a) of this section were done on the premises in possession of a person, with that person's knowledge, shall be prima facie evidence that such person is responsible for such prohibited acts. 
(c)	Every person convicted in the municipal court of the city of a violation of any provision of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 3-15-1995(2)) 
Chapter 10 - DEFENSE AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local participation in Georgia Emergency Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or other state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitations, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1; Ord. of 10-24-1977, § I) 
Sec. 10-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 6-6; Ord. of 10-24-1977, § VI) 
Sec. 10-3. - Office of emergency management; appointment, duties of coordinator. 
    In agreement with the city officials, there is hereby established the city emergency management office. The council, with concurrence of other city officials, shall nominate, for appointment by the governor, a coordinator of emergency management for the city. When appointed, the coordinator is charged with the following duties: 
(1)	To represent the governing body of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)	To assist city officials in organizing city departments, for emergency operations. 
(3)	To develop, in conjunction with city departments and agencies, the city plan for emergency functions set forth in section 10-1. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing body and thence to the state director for approval. 
(4)	To maintain the emergency management office in carrying out the day-to-day administration of the city preparedness and disaster program including the rendering of required reports to the state office. 
(5)	To render reports such as financial, daily activity, etc., as required by the governing body in keeping with good business practices. 
(6)	To procure, with the authority of the governing body, a facility to be used as the city emergency operating center. 
(7)	To coordinate the activities of the city emergency operating center staff during periods of a declared emergency, and under the supervision of city officials. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2; Ord. of 10-24-1977, § II(A-G)) 
Sec. 10-4. - Emergency management organization. 
(a)	The city emergency management organization shall be established around existing city departments and agencies and the emergency functions listed in section 10-1 are assigned as follows: 
Department Emergency Functions Executive-City manager and city 
elected officials Direction and control public information supply-Finances Police control-Police chief and city 
police department Security, movement, search, communications, warning Fire control-Fire chief and city fire 
department Fire control rescue damage assessment Public works and engineering-Direct- 
or of public works Utilities and public services restoration hazards analysis Human resources, including: Human needs, including: Division of family and children 
services Welfare Division of physical health Health control Hospital services Medical and mortuary services Ambulance services Casualty transport Emergency assistance-Civil defense 
director Shelter radar rescue assistance in industrial and institutional emergency planning  
(b)	Heads of departments listed in subsection (a) of this section are responsible for developing the plan for their assigned emergency function. Such plans will be submitted through the coordinator to the chairperson of the council and governing officials of the city for approval. 
(Code 1982, § 6-3; Ord. of 10-24-1977, § III) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish organization, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 10-5. - Emergency powers. 
    In the event of manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the chairperson of the council and the governing officials of the city may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(1)	To enforce all rules, laws, and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. 
(2)	To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any property for the protection of the public. 
(3)	To sell, lend, give, or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the city; to maintain a strict accounting of property and supplies distributed and for funds received for such property and supplies. 
(4)	To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well being of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 6-4; Ord. of 10-24-1977, § IV) 
Sec. 10-6. - Volunteers. 
    All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Code 1982, § 6-5; Ord. of 10-24-1977, § V) 
Sec. 10-7. - National Incident Management System. 
    The city hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the United Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in the city to train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2006) 
Chapter 12 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Registration of voters, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-210 et seq.; precincts and polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-260 et seq.; voting by ballot, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-280 et seq.; absentee voting, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-380 et seq.; preparation for and conduct of primaries and elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-400 et seq.; returns, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-490 et seq. 

Sec. 12-1. - Adoption of state election law. 
    The city council recognizes the applicability of the state municipal election code as codified in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq, to the conduct of all elections held in said city and does hereby incorporate by reference herein all pertinent parts of the state municipal election code as the same now exists and as the same may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. of 8-23-1999) 
Sec. 12-2. - Declarations of candidacy. 
    The filing of declarations of candidacy for all persons seeking election to the city council is hereby supplemented and amended as follows: 
(1)	The undersigned, a resident and qualified elector of the ____________ district of the city and State of Georgia, does hereby announce that he is a candidate for council member of the ____________ district in the forthcoming election to be held and conducted in the city and I further declare that if elected to such office that I will qualify and serve by taking the required oath or affirmance of office. 
(2)	I further declare that I am not indebted to the city for any overdue indebtedness of any nature whatsoever. 
(3)	I further declare that if elected to the office which I am seeking that I will not during the term of my office own any indebtedness to the city which would be classified as past due or delinquent. 
(4)	At the end of each supplemental notice of candidacy, each candidate must sign the following statement: "I understand that any false statement knowingly made by me in this supplemental notice of candidacy and affidavit will subject me to criminal penalties as provided by law." 
(Ord. of 12-28-2009) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of September 9, 2013, in effect repealed the former article II, §§ 14-26-14-32, and enacted a new article II as set out herein. The former article II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance of September 10, 2001. 
State Law reference- Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-14; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17; local land-disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; minimum standards for ordinances regulating land-disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; permits for land-disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-7, 12-7-9. 

Sec. 14-21. - Title. 
    This article will be known as the "City of Eastman Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 9-9-2013, § I) 
Sec. 14-22. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means these include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
    Board means the board of natural resources. 
    Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
    Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
    CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
    Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
    Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
    Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of means engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
    Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
    District means the region 4 soil and water conservation district. 
    Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
    Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
    Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 14-24(c) of this article. 
    Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
    Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
    Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 14-23(5). 
    Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
    Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
    Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
    Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
    NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
    NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
    Operator means the party or parties that have means (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
    Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
    Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
    Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
    Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the region 4 soil and water conservation district. 
    Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
    State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
    Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
    Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
    Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2013, § II) 
Sec. 14-23. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the Local Issuing Authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs of subsections 14-24(c)(15) and (16) of this title, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2013, § III) 
Sec. 14-24. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the article and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 14-24(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)	Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in subsections 14-24(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)	A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)	The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection (c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)	The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 14-24(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)	Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)	Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 14-24(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)	The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2013, § IV) 
Sec. 14-25. - Application/permit process. 
(a)	General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)	Application requirements. 
(1)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of City of Eastman without first obtaining a permit from the code enforcer to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the code enforcer and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 14-25(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsection 14-24(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 14-24(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 14-25(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)	Plan requirements. 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 14-24(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)	Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)	Permits. 
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 14-24(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 14-25(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)	The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 9-9-2013, § V) 
Sec. 14-26. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)	The code enforcer will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)	The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)	The code enforcer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)	The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)	The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2013, § VI) 
Sec. 14-27. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)	Stop-work orders. 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)	All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; 
(4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 14-25(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties. 
(1)	Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2013, § VII) 
Sec. 14-28. - Education and certification. 
(a)	Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)	For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)	Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)	If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(1)(b), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(4)(b) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2013, § VIII) 
Sec. 14-29. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within ten days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Oconee Circuit. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2013, § IX) 
Sec. 14-30. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)	Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 23 rd day of September, 2013 
(b)	Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)	Liability. 
(1)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)	No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2013, § X) 
Secs. 14-31-14-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER CONSERVATION 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
    Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of any existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
    Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1992, § 1) 
Sec. 14-67. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)	This article shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector of the city. 
(b)	Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1992, § 6) 
Sec. 14-68. - Residential construction prohibitions. 
    On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated with the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)	Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1991; 
(2)	Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)	Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)	Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minutes; or 
(5)	Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1992, § 2) 
Sec. 14-69. - Commercial building requirements. 
    On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated with the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of section 14-68(1) through (5). 
(Ord. of 4-1-1992, § 3) 
Sec. 14-70. - Residential and commercial repairs, renovations or additions. 
    The requirements of section 14-68 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involved the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building which such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1992, § 4) 
Sec. 14-71. - Exemptions. 
(a)	New construction and the repair or renovation of any existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 14-68 through 14-70 when: 
(1)	The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; or 
(2)	When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; or 
(3)	Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)	Units to be installed are: 
a.	Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.	Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.	Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)	The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee of $50.00 shall be charged for inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1992, § 5) 
Secs. 14-72-14-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESTRICTION ON OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE 

Sec. 14-81. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
    Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)	Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)	Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)	Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)	Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)	Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)	Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)	Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2010) 
Sec. 14-82. - Enforcement. 
(a)	No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this division. 
(b)	The water department shall be the enforcement authority for this division. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)	Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this division may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court/municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2010) 
Sec. 14-83. - Repealer. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this division are repealed. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2010) 
Secs. 14-84-14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-111. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)	Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)	Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)	Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)	Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)	Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)	Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)	Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 1.1) 
Sec. 14-112. - Applicability. 
(a)	This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)	New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)	Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)	Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the code enforcer to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)	Land development activities that are smaller than the applicability criteria set forth in items (1) and (2) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)	The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)	Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)	Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)	Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)	Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the code enforcer. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 1.2) 
Sec. 14-113. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
    The code enforcer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 1.3) 
Sec. 14-114. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
    The ordinance from which this article is derived is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards from human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 1.4) 
Sec. 14-115. - Severability. 
    If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 1.5) 
Sec. 14-116. - Stormwater design manual. 
    The City of Eastman will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (www.georgiastormwater.com) any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 1.6) 
Secs. 14-117-14-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 14-121. - Definitions. 
    Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the (local jurisdiction) or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
    Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
    Detention facility means a detention basing or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
    Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
    Development means a land development or land development project. 
    Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
    Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
    Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
    Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
    Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
    Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
    Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
    Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
    Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
    Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
    Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
    Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
    Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
    New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
    Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
    Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plant that provided for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
    Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
    On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
    Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
    Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the (local permitting authority) to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
    Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
    Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
    Project means a land development project. 
    Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
    Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
    Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
    Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
    Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
    Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
    Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
    Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
    Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
    Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
    Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 2) 
Secs. 14-122-14-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-131. - Permit application requirements. 
    No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
    Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the City of Eastman a permit application on a form provided by the local issuing authority for that purpose. 
    Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)	Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 14-132; 
(2)	Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 14-133; 
(3)	Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 14-134, if applicable; 
(4)	Performance bond in accordance with section 14-135, if applicable; and 
(5)	Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 14-136. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 3.1) 
Sec. 14-132. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
    Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer meet with the City of Eastman for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. The consultation meeting should take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
    To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)	Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)	Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)	Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
    Local watershed plans and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 3.2) 
Sec. 14-133. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
    The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in division 4 below. 
    This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and be prepared under the direct supervisory control of either a registered professional engineer or a registered landscape architect licensed in the state of Georgia. Subsections (3), (4), (5) and (6) shall be prepared under the direct supervisory control of a registered professional engineer, who shall seal and sign the work. Portions of the overall plan may be prepared and stamped by a registered land surveyor licensed in the state of Georgia as appropriate, such as boundary surveys, contour maps, erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
    The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the Stormwater Management Site Plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)	Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)	Vicinity map. 
(3)	Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: A topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment site, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)	Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 4; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in division 4 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)	Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 4; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)	Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)	Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)	Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: The arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)	Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)	Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)	Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Eastman as provided in section 14-134 below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with section 14-134. 
(12)	Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the City of Eastman that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 3.3) 
Sec. 14-134. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
    Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the City of Eastman requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Eastman, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
    The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the City of Eastman prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
    The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
    As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
    In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Eastman may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in division 6 of this article. 
    The City of Eastman, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement of otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 3.4) 
Sec. 14-135. - Application procedure. 
(a)	Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the City of Eastman. 
(b)	Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 14-131 above (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(c)	The City of Eastman shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(d)	If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the City of Eastman shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subparagraph (c) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(e)	Upon a finding by the City of Eastman that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the City of Eastman may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)	Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)	The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)	The City of Eastman shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspection of the project; 
(4)	No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the City of Eastman; and 
(5)	Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 14-152. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 3.5) 
Sec. 14-136. - Application review fees. 
    The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the City of Eastman and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 3.6) 
Sec. 14-137. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
    The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream an downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
    A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the City of Eastman which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
    To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City of Eastman that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)	Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)	Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)	Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)	Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)	Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 3.7) 
Secs. 14-138-14-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 
    The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article. 

Sec. 14-141. - Water quality. 
    All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)	It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)	Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)	Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the City of Eastman are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 4.1) 
Sec. 14-142. - Stream channel protection. 
    Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)	Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)	24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
(3)	Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 4.2) 
Sec. 14-143. - Overbank flooding protection. 
    Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under section 14-142 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 4.3) 
Sec. 14-144. - Extreme flooding protection. 
    Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 4.4) 
Sec. 14-145. - Structural stormwater controls. 
    All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the City of Eastman before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City of Eastman may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
    Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 4.5) 
Sec. 14-146. - Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. 
    The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 14-141 The applicant may, if approved by the City of Eastman, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 4.6) 
Sec. 14-147. - Drainage system guidelines. 
    Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)	All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
(3)	Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 4.7) 
Sec. 14-148. - Dam design guidelines. 
    Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposed a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 4.8) 
Secs. 14-149, 14-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 14-151. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
    Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City of Eastman or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the City of Eastman. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
    All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)	The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)	Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)	Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)	Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
    If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 5.1) 
Sec. 14-152. - Final inspection and as built plans. 
    Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction are completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the City of Eastman is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 5.2) 
Secs. 14-153-14-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND PRACTICES 

Sec. 14-161. - Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
    Stormwater management facilities and practices included in stormwater management plans which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
    A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City of Eastman shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Eastman, may correct the violation as provided in section 14-164 hereof. 
    Inspection programs by the City of Eastman may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections, random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 6.1) 
Sec. 14-162. - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
    The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City of Eastman to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 6.2) 
Sec. 14-163. - Records of maintenance activities. 
    Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the City of Eastman. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 6.3) 
Sec. 14-164. - Failure to maintain. 
    If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Eastman, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City of Eastman may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 6.4) 
Secs. 14-165-14-169. - Reserved. 
SECTION 7. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND EFFECTIVE DATE 

Sec. 14-170. - In general. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 7) 
Sec. 14-171. - Notice of violation. 
    If the City of Eastman determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
    The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)	The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)	A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City of Eastman by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 7.1) 
Sec. 14-172. - Penalties. 
    In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Eastman shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Eastman may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)	Stop work order. The City of Eastman may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)	Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City of Eastman may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City of Eastman may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City of Eastman may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)	Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the City of Eastman shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the City of Eastman has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City of Eastman may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)	Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the City of Eastman may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 7.2) 
Sec. 14-173. - Effective date. 
    The ordinance from which this article is derived shall become effective on this the 30 th day of June, 2011. 
(Ord. of 6-30-2011, § 7.3) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local fire departments, generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-12 et seq.; regulation of blasting operations generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-8-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; regulation of fire extinguishers and suppression systems, O.C.G.A. § 25-12-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Fire code adopted; penalty for violating. 
(a)	There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the prevention of fire and explosion, including permits, that certain building code known as the 2009 International Fire Code and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are in conflict with this Code, or are hereafter deleted, modified or amended, of which a copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, with the above exceptions, and from the date on which the ordinance from which this section is derived shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city. 
(b)	Any person violating any of the provisions of the fire code shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1; Ord. of 8-14-1972) 
Sec. 16-2. - Building fires on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without permission first obtained from the fire chief, to make, build or have any fire in the streets, alleys or enclosures, in the city. 
(Code 1911, § 61; Code 1982, § 8-2) 
Sec. 16-3. - Burning garbage, etc. 
    No person shall burn or cause to be burned any garbage, rubbish, trash or refuse within the city for any purpose without first obtaining the permission of the fire chief and the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 8-3; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 5) 
Sec. 16-4. - Fireworks; shooting. 
    It shall be illegal for any person to explode or shoot fireworks within the city. 
(Code 1911, § 197; Code 1982, § 8-4) 
State Law reference- Fireworks control, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Secs. 16-5-16-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE HYDRANTS 

Sec. 16-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire hydrant means any fire hydrant belonging to the city either inside or outside of the city limits. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 16-28. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)	This article shall be enforced by the city building inspector and the city police department. 
(b)	Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1994, § 3) 
Sec. 16-29. - Opening. 
    On or after June 13, 1994, no one other than authorized city employees will be allowed to open and close a fire hydrant belonging to the city. Anyone desiring to obtain water from a fire hydrant shall contact the city hall. Arrangements will be made for a representative of the city water department to meet at a selected site and open the hydrant. A $15.00 fee plus the cost of water will be imposed. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1994, § 2) 
Chapter 18 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the city manager's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 18-6. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the computed elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during the base flood. BFEs are shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and on flood profiles. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before August 19, 2010. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report by the federal insurance administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
b.	Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) , as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after August 19, 2010, and included any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 12, 2008, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD), as corrected in 1988, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. 
(1)	The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement' includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(2)	The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include: 
a.	Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
b.	Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 6; Ord. of 6-30-2010) 
Sec. 18-2. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to potential flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 18-3. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health; 
(2)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)	To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 18-4. - Penalty. 
    Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $300.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 2, § H) 
Sec. 18-5. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 18-6. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated August 19, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
    For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated August 19, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Dodge County are hereby adopted by reference. 
    Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. (No such areas known) 
    The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at Eastman City Hall. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 2, § B; Ord. of 6-30-2010) 
Sec. 18-7. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 18-8. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 18-9. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 18-10. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 18-11. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 2, § G) 
Secs. 18-12-18-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 18-49. - Designation of administrator. 
    The city manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 18-50. - Permit procedures. 
(a)	Application for a development permit shall be made to the planning and zoning board on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage. 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 18-77(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(b)	Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
(c)	The city manager shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 18-51. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
(a)	Duties of the city manager shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-6, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 18-50. 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 18-50. 
(7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 18-50(1)c and section 18-77(2) or 18-79(2). 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(b)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the city manager and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 18-52-18-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 18-76. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.	So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 18-77. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation, which provides an additional level of protection referred to as "freeboard." Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-76(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 18-51(a)(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on individual lots or parcels, in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Refer to section 18-76(6).) 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.	Meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a and c of this section. 
(4)	Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-6 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 18-78. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
(a)	Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-6, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-6, then the city manager shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-76(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
(b)	The city manager shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 18-79. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-6 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-76(4). The city manager shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 18-50(b)(1)c and (b)(2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 18-80. - Standards for subdivisions. 
    Following are the standards for subdivisions: 
(1)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 18-81. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 4, § F) 
Secs. 18-82-18-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 18-105. - Procedure. 
(a)	The planning and zoning board as established by the city manager shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city manager in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning board may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this chapter are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the planning and zoning board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)	Conditions for variances. 
(1)	A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.	A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)	The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The city manager shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
(i)	Upon consideration of the factors listed in this section and the purposes of this chapter, the planning and zoning board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008, art. 5) 
Chapter 20 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REFUSE ACCUMULATIONS; LITTERING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42; junkyard regulations, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-60-4 et seq., 43-43-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-19. - Unauthorized accumulations. 
    Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse, garbage, or waste at any time on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation thereof as provided in this article for other nuisances shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1911, § 82; Code 1982, § 9-20; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 8) 
Sec. 20-20. - Placing refuse on public or private property or in waters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place refuse in any street, alley, or other public place or upon private property, or in any body of water, in the city, whether or not owned by such person, except as authorized by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9-21; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 7) 
Sec. 20-21. - Preventing scattering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or onto any occupied premises within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9-22; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 9) 
Sec. 20-22. - Animal carcasses. 
(a)	Every owner of an animal dying in the city shall lawfully dispose of the carcass thereof within 12 hours from the time of death of such animal. 
(b)	Every owner or occupier of premises in the city shall lawfully dispose of any dead animal found thereon within 12 hours after death of such animal. 
(Code 1911, § 84; Code 1982, § 9-23; Ord. of 8-29-1944, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference- Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq. 
Secs. 20-23-20-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 20-40. - Abandoning of vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful to abandon any vehicle of any type within the city, or leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(Code 1982, § 9-30; Ord. of 4-27-1970, § 1) 
Sec. 20-41. - Nonoperating vehicle-Leaving on street. 
    It shall be unlawful to leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street, lane or highway with the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9-31; Ord. of 4-27-1970, § 2) 
Sec. 20-42. - Same-Leaving on private premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent thereof, to permit or allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle of any kind or character to remain on such property within the city longer than 15 days unless said vehicle is stored in an enclosed building or located on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place or manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, or such vehicle is stored in an appropriate place and maintained in a lawful manner. 
(Code 1982, § 9-32; Ord. of 4-27-1970, § 3) 
Sec. 20-43. - Removal of vehicles from streets by city. 
    Upon violation of any provision of this division, the police department or any appropriate official designated by the city manager shall be authorized to have any vehicle thus abandoned on the streets or public ways of the city removed, impounded and stored immediately pending the sale or other disposition thereof as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1982, § 9-33; Ord. of 4-27-1970, § 4) 
Sec. 20-44. - Notice to remove vehicle. 
    When such vehicles are thus abandoned, stored, parked or left on any vacant lot, property or premises within the city for a period of more than 15 days, notice shall be served personally by the police department or authorized official designated by the city manager to the owner or person in charge of said property or premises if occupied or if unoccupied by certified U.S. mail to the owner or person in charge of said property or premises, with an additional notice posted on said vehicle, to remove, store or dispose of the same within ten days from the date of said notice. Such notice shall set forth the fact that the vehicle is abandoned, improperly stored, or parked in violation of this division and that upon failure to remove, properly store, house or otherwise dispose of the same, that it will be removed, sold or disposed of by the city manager and that any proceeds arising from the sale thereof will be applied first to payment of expenses incurred in connection with the removal and sale of said vehicle and any remaining balance paid to the owner thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 9-34; Ord. of 4-27-1970, § 5) 
Sec. 20-45. - Sale of vehicle. 
(a)	Upon failure of the owner to claim said vehicle within 30 days after it has been impounded by the police department or authorized official, it shall be advertised and sold by the city manager. Such advertisement shall be published on three consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which official city notices are published and shall describe and identify the vehicle to be sold, the fact that it has been impounded by the police department as an abandoned vehicle and will be sold at the place where stored to the highest bidder for cash on a date certain, ten days after the publication of the last notice unless said vehicle shall have been claimed by the owner and all costs incurred in connection with the removal, storage and advertisement thereof are paid prior thereto. 
(b)	Any such vehicles removed from the streets or public ways of the city pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be similarly posted with the notice as provided herein and a copy thereof sent by certified mail to the owner of said vehicle if known or capable of ascertainment. 
(Code 1982, § 9-35; Ord. of 4-27-1970, § 7) 
Sec. 20-46. - Reclaiming vehicle by owner. 
    Any owner claiming a vehicle removed and stored prior to the disposition thereof by the city manager shall present proof of ownership and pay all charges and costs incurred in connection with removal, storage and advertisement thereof before said vehicle shall be returned to the owner. 
(Code 1982, § 9-36; Ord. of 4-27-1970, § 7) 
Chapter 22 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed below: 
    Nuisance means anything which causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another provided that the hurt, inconvenience or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable man; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
    Nuisance per se means an act, occupation or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
    Private nuisance means a nuisance limited in its injurious effect to one or a few individuals. 
    Public nuisance means a nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Abatement. 
    Any nuisance existing within the corporate limits of this city shall be abated pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-1 through 41-2-17 as set forth therein and same are hereby adopted by reference with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-2) 
Secs. 22-3-22-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED PROPERTY 

Sec. 22-23. - Abandonment prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any vehicle or appliance of any type within the city nor shall any vehicle or appliance be left at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle or appliance reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-19) 
Sec. 22-24. - Dismantled vehicles prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle or appliance on any street, lane or highway within the city. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-20) 
Sec. 22-25. - Duty and responsibility of owner, occupant. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent thereof, to permit or allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle or appliance of any kind or character to remain on such property within the city longer than 15 days unless said vehicle is stored in an enclosed building, or located on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place or manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, or such vehicle or appliance is stored in an appropriate place and maintained in a lawful manner. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-21) 
Sec. 22-26. - Removal authorized. 
    Upon violation of any provision of this article, the police department or other appropriate official designated by the city manager shall be authorized to have any vehicle or appliance thus abandoned on the streets or lanes of the city removed, impounded and stored immediately pending the sale or other disposition thereof as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-22) 
Sec. 22-27. - Notice to remove. 
    When such vehicles or appliances are thus abandoned, stored, parked or left on any vacant lot, property or premises within the city for a period of more than 15 days, notice shall be served personally by the police department, or other authorized official designated by the city manager to the owner or person in charge of said property or premises, if occupied, or if unoccupied, by certified U.S. mail to the owner or person in charge of said property or premises, with an additional notice posted on said vehicle or appliance, to remove, store or dispose of the same within ten days from the date of said notice. Such notice shall set forth the fact that the vehicle or appliance is abandoned, stored or parked in violation of this article and that upon failure to remove, properly store, house or otherwise dispose of the same, that it will be removed, sold or disposed of by the city police and that any proceeds arising from the sale thereof will be applied first to payment of expenses incurred in connection with the removal and sale of said vehicle or appliance, and any remaining balance paid to the owner thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-23) 
Sec. 22-28. - Sale authorized. 
    Upon failure of the owner to claim said vehicle or appliance within 30 days after it has been impounded by the police department or other authorized official, it shall be advertised and sold by the city. Such advertisement shall be published once in the newspaper in which official city notices are published and shall describe and identify the vehicle or appliance to be sold, the fact that it has been impounded by the police department as an abandoned vehicle or appliance, and will be sold at the place where stored to the highest bidder for cash on a date certain ten days after the publication of the notice, unless said vehicle or appliance shall have been claimed by the owner and all costs incurred in connection with the removal, storage and advertisement thereof are paid prior thereto. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-24) 
Sec. 22-29. - Property posted. 
    Any such vehicles or appliances removed from the streets or lanes of the city pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be similarly posted with the notice as provided herein, and a copy thereof sent by certified mail to the owner of such vehicle, or appliance known or capable of ascertainment. Any owner claiming a vehicle or appliance removed and stored prior to disposition thereof by the city police shall present proof of ownership and pay all charges and costs incurred in connection with removal and storage thereof before said vehicle or appliance shall be returned to the owner. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-25) 
Secs. 22-30-22-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 

Sec. 22-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicable codes means: 
(1)	Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)	Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; and 
(3)	Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. after October 1, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
    Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
    Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-2 et seq., known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
    Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8, and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
    Parties in interest means: 
(1)	Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)	Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)	Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)	Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
    Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
    Public officer means the officer who is authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by ordinances adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances or any agent of such officer. 
    Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
    Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-31) 
Sec. 22-48. - Findings. 
(a)	It is found and declared by the city that there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with the applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the jurisdiction where the property is located; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. It is found and declared that in the counties and municipalities of this state where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. Whenever the governing authority of the city finds that there exists in said city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of such city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, power is conferred upon such city to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings, or structures in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17. 
(b)	All the provisions of this section and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17, including method and procedure, may also be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that said property is in violation of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-30) 
Sec. 22-49. - Purpose, enforcement and remedies. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the identification of buildings, dwellings, structures or premises which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and are inimical to the welfare and which are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and to provide for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, structures or premises pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-1 through 41-2-17. 
(1)	a.	It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances; 
b.	The city building inspector is hereby appointed or designated as the public officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this article; 
c.	Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing; 
d.	After such notice and hearing, if the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
1.	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
2.	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction; 
e.	If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."; 
f.	If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; 
g.	The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(2)	a.	The lien provided for in subsection (1)g of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically chapter 4 of title 48; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the county or municipality whose ordinance is being enforced. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
b.	The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by this article unless such costs are waived by resolution of the county governing authority. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(3)	The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(4)	Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(5)	In addition to the procedures and remedies in this chapter, a governing authority may provide, by ordinance, that designated public officers may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(6)	Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-32) 
Sec. 22-50. - Notice and service of summons. 
(a)	Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)	Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the county or municipality whose ordinance is being enforced; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)	Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-60 et seq.; or 
(3)	Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)	If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)	Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)	In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)	In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)	In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)	A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)	Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-33) 
Sec. 22-51. - Intent. 
    In adopting the ordinance from which this article is derived, it is the intent of the governing authority of the city to take full advantage of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-1 through 41-2-17. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-36) 
Sec. 22-52. - Burned structures. 
(a)	In the event that a structure burns or has substantial fire damage (i.e., that which is more than 50 percent damaged), the building official or fire official may declare that the structure constitutes a public hazard if in its after condition, it is a fire hazard, pursuant to the city building and/or fire codes, to the health, safety and welfare of the public and is considered to be an unsafe building pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Upon service of this notice, either by a duly appointed police officer, process server or by certified mail, the property owner shall within ten days of the notice submit a written plan of corrective action to the fire official and building official according to the specifications contained in the notice. 
(c)	The building official and fire official shall then make a determination if the plans, as submitted, comply with all local, state and federal codes, laws, regulations and ordinances. If they are not in compliance, the applicant can then have five days from receipt of comments and suggested revisions to resubmit the final corrected plans for rehabilitation. Once the plans, as submitted, are approved, the building official and the applicant shall agree on a rehabilitation schedule for said building. The city has five days from receipt of the plans to approve, disapprove or return for corrections. 
(d)	If plans are not submitted or are not approved or have not been approved within 30 days from receipt of the notice as provided for in this section, the city is authorized to begin condemnation proceedings under this article. 
(e)	Any denial of plans and/or variances may be appealed to the planning and zoning board within ten days of the denial. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2001, § 10-38) 
Secs. 22-53-22-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WEED AND VEGETATION GROWTH 

Sec. 22-81. - Notice to cut or remove. 
    Whenever there exists on any lot, tract, parcel of land or premises in the city any debris, weeds, junk, trash or rank vegetation, which, in the opinion of the health officer, might endanger the public health or welfare, the health officer shall notify the owner of this property to cut or remove the debris, weeds or rank vegetation. The terms "weeds" and "rank vegetation," as used herein, shall include poison ivy; plants with obnoxious odors; weeds and grasses causing hay fever, those which serve as a breeding place for mosquitoes or as a refuge for snakes and rats, or a hiding place for filth; and any growth that creates a fire or traffic hazard or a nuisance due to unsightliness; provided that nothing herein shall be applicable to this undergrowth less than one-half a feet in height, nor to this undergrowth more than 150 feet from any building, structure, recreational area (not including the width of any intervening street) or to this undergrowth more than 125 feet from a street right-of-way. The health officer shall give personal notice in writing by certified mail to any property owner whose address is known. If a property owner's address is not known and cannot be found by city agents upon the exercise of a reasonable diligence, the health officer shall give his notice by causing a copy thereof to be published in the legal organ of the county once a week for four weeks. The notice, whether personally given or given by publication, shall direct the property owner to cut or remove the debris, weeds, junk, trash or rank vegetation within 15 days of receipt of the personal notice or within 15 days of the date of the last publication, whichever shall be appropriate. This notice shall further state that failure to cut or remove the debris, weeds, junk, trash and grasses within the 15 days shall empower the city to enforce the penalty as stated in section 22-82. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 9-1) 
Sec. 22-82. - Cutting or removal by city. 
(a)	If the property owner receiving notice as provided in section 22-81 fails to have the debris, weeds, junk, trash or vegetable growth or abandoned structures cut and removed from his property within 15 days after the notice, a penalty of $10.00 per day will be imposed after the 15th day. In the case of an absentee landowner, the city manager shall cause the appropriate city department to cut or remove them and charge the expenses thereof, including inspection, advertisement, labor and equipment costs to the owner. 
(b)	If these charges are due and remain unpaid for a period of 30 days after the fine has been assessed or the work is completed, the city manager shall issue an execution against the owner of these premises from which the debris, weeds, junk, trash or vegetable growth or abandoned structures are cut and removed, or such other persons as may be liable therefor, which execution shall be a lien upon the premises and when recorded in the general execution docket of the county, shall be a lien on all of the property of the defendant in execution from the date of this record. 
(c)	This execution shall be levied and the property sold in the manner now provided for the levy and collection of executions issued by the city as provided in the city Charter and the proceedings and provisions for the filing of an affidavit of illegality by the defendant in execution, as well as the proceedings for the filing of a claim to the property levied upon by a third person, shall in all respects be similar to the proceedings and provisions of the law applicable to the levy of executions as provided in the city Charter. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 9-2) 
Sec. 22-83. - Prohibited businesses. 
    No person shall operate any business within the corporate limits of the city which is a public nuisance; nor shall any person keep on his premises, or the premises occupied by him, within the corporate limits of the city, any nuisance, or any animal, vegetable or other matter that may be injurious to the health of any of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 9-3) 
Sec. 22-84. - Abatement. 
(a)	Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the city manager that any person is maintaining a nuisance, or that any person is keeping or maintaining within the corporate limits of the city any animal, vegetable or other matter that may be dangerous to the health of any of the citizens of the city, this official shall report the case to the next regular meeting of the city manager and council, or if he deems it advisable, he shall call a special meeting of the city manager and council, and report the case to the meeting, after giving at least 24 hours' notice to the person charged with maintaining this nuisance, or keeping or maintaining this matter that may be dangerous to the health of the citizens of the city. 
(b)	Should the city manager and council, at the meeting, find that such person is maintaining any animal, vegetable or other matter that may be dangerous to the health of any of the citizens of the city, this person shall be notified to abate the nuisance, or to dispose of and cease keeping the animal, vegetable or other matter within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)	Should such person fail to dispose of the animal, vegetable or other matter within 24 hours after serving of the notice, the chief of police shall remove or dispose of the matter, at the expense of the person keeping it. 
(d)	Any person failing to abate this nuisance, or to dispose of and cease keeping any animal, vegetable or other matter, within the corporate limits of the city, as provided in this section, or any person in any manner violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 9-4) 
Sec. 22-85. - Abandoning refrigerators or iceboxes. 
    No person shall discard, abandon or store any refrigerator or icebox from which the doors or latch have not been removed, outside of any building or in any open garage or carport within the city. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 9-5) 
Sec. 22-86. - Accumulation of stagnant water prohibited. 
    All lots, cisterns, vats, vessels and ponds in the city shall be by the owners and occupants kept in such condition as not to allow any water to stagnate, or as to allow the generation of mosquitoes or other insects, or otherwise become offensive or unhealthful. 
(Code 1911, §§ 25, 48; Code 1982, § 9-3; Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 9-6) 
Sec. 22-87. - Obstruction of ditches. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any trash or other thing whatsoever into, or obstruct in any way whatsoever, any ditch, gutter, or drain, in the city, or in any way impede or prevent the free flow of water through such drain, ditch or gutter. 
(Code 1911, § 83; Code 1982, § 9-5; Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 9-7) 
Chapter 24 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-5. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL TAX AND REGULATORY FEE 

Sec. 24-6. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S.: 1099. 
    Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
    Occupational tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business and enacted by a local government as a revenue-raising ordinance or resolution. 
    Occupational tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax. 
    Practitioners of professions and occupations means those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
    Regulatory fee means a fee which approximates the cost of regulatory activity by the city. 
(Ord. of 12-22-1997(1), § 1(11-1)) 
Sec. 24-7. - Regulatory fee. 
(a)	Businesses and individuals engaging in the occupations or businesses set forth in Appendix 1-A, as kept and maintained by the clerk, must pay a nonrefundable regulatory fee in accordance with the rate set forth in Appendix 1-A, as kept and maintained by the clerk. 
(1)	Carnivals, per set up ..... $500.00 
(2)	Peddlers, per year .....  100.00 
(3)	Others not specified by this chart shall be presented to the city manager for his approval and fees applicable. 
(b)	Building and construction contractors, subcontractors and workers: 
(1)	0-25,000: $250.00. 
(2)	Over 25,000: Fee will be 0.1 percent of total cost of building permit up to $100,000.00. 
(c)	Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this chapter shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer (or other person charged with enforcing this chapter) upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-22-1997(2)) 
Sec. 24-8. - Occupation tax levied; limitations. 
(a)	An occupation tax based upon number of employees in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state in accordance with the following schedule: 
1-5 employees $  150.00 6-10 employees    300.00 11-25 employees    500.00 26-75 employees    900.00 76+ employees  1,100.00  
(b)	The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(c)	Each occupation tax certificate shall be in the same name of the person to whom the same is issued, and each tax levied by this article shall be a registered tax, due and payable on January 1 for all persons engaged in business in the city on that date. 
(d)	A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this chapter shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
(1)	If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provided to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business' or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(2)	A business or practitioner with no location or office in the state shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in the state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)	A business or practitioner which has locations in the state subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government. 
(4)	If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(e)	If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. 
(f)	Any new business that is established after November 15 of a year will not be liable for an occupation tax until January 1 of the following year. 
(g)	If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than February 1, the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city council. 
(h)	Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this chapter only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(i)	Any persons advertising by sign, cards, circulars, newspapers, or in any other manner, and engaged in any established business location in the city, shall be held liable for the occupation tax required for such business. 
(j)	Any person engaged in any business in the city, not specified in this Code, shall pay such tax as shall hereafter be fixed by the council, and the city manager may issue a temporary permit to do business until the next regular meeting of the council. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 11-3; Ord. of 12-12-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 24-9. - Occupation tax certificate. 
    Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this chapter shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer (or person charged with enforcing this chapter) upon request. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 11-4) 
Sec. 24-10. - Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
    Practitioners of professions and occupations as defined in this chapter shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 24-3 or shall pay an occupation tax of $400.00 per practitioner. On the tax return for 1995 or such later time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 11-5) 
Sec. 24-11. - Exemptions. 
(a)	No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)	Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)	Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; 
(3)	Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.; 
(4)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)	Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)	Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)	Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)	Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(10)	Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)	Permits to do business may be issued by the city manager on a regular occupation tax form to a qualified veteran who produces evidence of exemption eligibility. 
(c)	The exemptions and limitations contained in this chapter shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 11-6) 
Sec. 24-12. - Transfer of occupation tax. 
    Any occupation tax issued under this article shall be transferable on change of ownership: a fee of ten percent of the occupation tax shall be paid therefor. The new owner shall register as herein required for a new business, provided that no transfer shall be made except for a continuing business at the same location. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 11-7) 
Sec. 24-13. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
    Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43 by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 11-8) 
Sec. 24-14. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)	Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificate of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)	Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 11-9) 
Sec. 24-15. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)	On or before February 1 of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to this chapter shall file with the city clerk on a form approved by and available from the city a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
(b)	Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available within the city on or before November 1 such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fee, by the charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 11-10) 
Sec. 24-16. - Confidentiality. 
    Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 11-11) 
Sec. 24-17. - Date due; penalty. 
(a)	Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this chapter shall be due and payable annually on January 1. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
(b)	Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this chapter which is unpaid for 30 days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 11-12) 
Sec. 24-18. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)	It is the duty of the city manager to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this chapter and to summon violators of this chapter to appear before the municipal court, and upon conviction, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-8. The city manager may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)	The city manager shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city manager of the city upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code and the Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided. 
(c)	When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charged whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(d)	Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this chapter shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-8. 
(e)	Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-8 and/or a suspension of occupation tax to conduct business. 
(f)	All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this chapter shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such person business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain or make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, §§ 11-10, 11-13) 
Sec. 24-19. - Public hearing. 
    After January 1, 1996, the city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate specified in section 24-3. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 11-14) 
Sec. 24-20. - Prior ordinance. 
    To the extent that any occupation taxes or regulatory fees are owed pursuant to an ordinance passed prior to the one codified in this chapter, such amounts remain due and owing and the provisions of that prior ordinance will remain in effect with respect to such unpaid occupation taxes or regulatory fees until such time as they are paid in full. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 11-15) 
Sec. 24-21. - Telephone companies. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Recurring local service revenues means: 
(1)	Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.	Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.	The guarantee portion of the charge for semipublic pay station services; 
c.	Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and 
d.	Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service. 
(2)	Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)	All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by CATV companies. 
(b)	Telephone companies shall pay on or before February 15 of each year an occupational license tax for that year in the amount of three percent of recurring local service revenues received by the company from subscribers located within the city. The annual amount due may be computed by annualizing the taxable revenues billed during the month of June preceding the date of payment. Any amount of license tax previously paid and absorbed by the company, which is applicable to any period subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be credited against the amounts imposed herein, or by subsequent ordinance. 
(Res. of 12-13-1971) 
Sec. 24-22. - Hours of operation of dancehall. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any public dancehall or public dance within the fire limits of the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 4-21-1958, § 1) 
Sec. 24-23. - Junkyards. 
(a)	No person shall be granted a license to conduct in the city the business commonly referred to as a "junkyard," the same including the buying and selling, either for such person or for others, of scrap iron, tin, steel or other metal, automobiles, and other such vehicles, where such vehicles are bought either for the purpose of resale or for the purpose of dismantling the same and the obtaining of various parts thereof for sale or other use or disposition, except upon compliance with the following conditions, the compliance with which shall be precedent to the right to conduct such business: 
(1)	The business shall be conducted only within the enclosure of a building (the entire prosecution and conduct of the business to be conducted entirely within such building and not on adjacent property thereto, except upon compliance with other portions of this section as to enclosing such business) or, if conducted upon vacant or unimproved property, only with proper enclosure thereof with a fence to be constructed of wood, masonry or other suitable building material and to be of sufficient height to entirely obstruct the view of persons using the streets adjacent or near to such property, such fence to completely surround the lot. 
(2)	No loading, unloading or storing of any such property shall be permitted outside such building or enclosure; nor shall any automobile or other vehicle be dismantled outside such building or enclosure; nor shall the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other ways in the city be used for the storing, loading or unloading or dismantling of any such materials except only insofar as the use of said streets, sidewalks, alleys or other ways may be necessary to obtain ingress and egress to such building or enclosure. 
(b)	Before a license to conduct such business shall be issue to any person, such person shall produce satisfactory evidence to the city manager of such person's ability and willingness to perform the regulations prescribed by this section. 
(Ord. of 1-18-1937) 
Secs. 24-24-24-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE BUSINESS 

Sec. 24-32. - Insurers' license fees. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2013 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Eastman, Georgia in the amount of $50.00 for each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 24-33, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the City of Eastman, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $50.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. 33-3-5. 
(Code 1982, § 11-20; Ord. of 10-27-1969, § 1; Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 11-20; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 1; Ord. of 2-11-13(1)) 
Sec. 24-33. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
    For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $17.50 per location for the year 2013 and for each year thereafter. 
(Code 1982, § 11-21; Ord. of 10-27-1969, § 2; Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 11-21; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 2; Ord. of 2-11-13(1)) 
Sec. 24-34. - Insurers' agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2013 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 24-32 in the amount of $50.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 11-22; Ord. of 10-27-1969, § 3; Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 11-22; Ord. of 2-11-13(1)) 
Sec. 24-35. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2013 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 24-32 of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 11-23; Ord. of 10-27-1969, § 4; Ord. of 9-25-1978, § 1; Ord. of 10-8-1979, § 1; Ord. of 12-10-1979, § 1; Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 11-23; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 3; Ord. of 2-11-13(1)) 
Sec. 24-36. - Gross premiums tax imposed upon all other insurers. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2013 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than a insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in of O.C.G.A. 33-3-5(1), doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in the section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 24-32 of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 11-24; Ord. of 10-27-1969, § 5(A), (B); Ord. of 12-10-1979, § 2; Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 11-24; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 4; Ord. of 2-11-13(1)) 
Sec. 24-37. - Due date for license fees. 
    License fees imposed in sections 24-32 and 24-33 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of January and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Code 1982, § 11-25; Ord. of 10-27-1969, § 5(C)-(E); Ord. of 9-25-1978, § 2; Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 11-25; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 5; Ord. of 2-11-13(1)) 
Sec. 24-38. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article, or engaging in any of the businesses licensed hereunder without the payment of the fees and license herein prescribed, shall, upon conviction in the municipal court be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1982, § 11-27; Ord. of 10-27-1969, § 7) 
Secs. 24-39-24-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 24-65. - Going uninvited on premises-Registration and licensing. 
    No solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of merchandise, shall go in and upon any private residence, or into any building in a business district, in the city, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of said private residence, or building in a business district, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of, or peddling or hawking the same, until such person shall have registered with the chamber of commerce and with the city at the city hall and paying a proper business license, and, in a book to be kept by the city manager for this purpose, giving the name of such solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of merchandise, the name of the employer of such solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or transient vendor, the names of the articles sought to be sold or orders of which to be solicited, the age of solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or transient vendor, and the probable frequency of such visits to the city. 
(Code 1982, § 11-30; Ord. of 3-23-1980, § I) 
Sec. 24-66. - Same-Medical certificate. 
    No solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or transient vendor of merchandise shall go in and upon any private residence, or into a building in a business district, in the city not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of said private residence, or building in a business district, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of, or peddling or hawking the same, until such person shall have presented to the city manager, a certificate from a doctor, licensed to practice medicine in the state, setting forth that such solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or transient vendor of merchandise, has been examined by such doctor, that such person is in sound physical condition, and is not a carrier of contagious or infectious diseases. Each such medical certificate must be renewed each 30 days. 
(Code 1982, § 11-31; Ord. of 3-23-1980, § II) 
Sec. 24-67. - Same-Prohibited hours. 
    No solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of merchandise, shall go in and upon any private residence, or into a building in a business district, in the city not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of such private residence, or building in a business district, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of, or for the purpose of peddling or hawking the same, between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(Code 1982, § 11-32; Ord. of 3-23-1980, § III) 
Sec. 24-68. - Same-Bond. 
(a)	No solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or transient vendor of merchandise shall go in and upon any private residence, or into a building in a business district, in the city not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of said private residence, or building in a business district, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of, or peddling or hawking the same without first depositing with the city manager, a good and sufficient bond, with sureties thereon subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of the county, payable to the city, and conditioned to pay to the city, or any one else suing in its name for such person's use, for injuries or damages received on account of dishonest or fraudulent conduct on the part of said solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant and transient vendor of merchandise. 
(b)	The amount of said bond shall be the sum of $500.00, and shall be given for each fiscal year of the city. Said bond shall provide that any persons injured by the dishonest, fraudulent, or improper conduct of said solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of merchandise, may sue on said bond for their own use and the recovery, if any, shall be payable to said persons. 
(Code 1982, § 11-33; Ord. of 3-23-1980, § IV) 
Secs. 24-69-24-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 24-95. - Business license tax levied. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions. The term "gross receipts" means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. of 12-27-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 24-96. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)	Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. 
(b)	The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1, 1984, and April 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. of 12-27-1983, § 1) 
Secs. 24-97-24-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOTELS AND LODGING EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 24-120. - Penalty. 
    A violation of the terms of this article shall be a misdemeanor and upon conviction in the municipal court shall be punished by fine of not more than $100.00 a day for each day's violation and not more than two days in jail for each day's violation. 
(Ord. of 11-25-1985, § 6) 
Sec. 24-121. - Levied. 
    For the purpose of providing funds available to the city for public purposes and for the purpose of promoting, attracting, stimulating and developing conventions and tourism in the city, there is hereby levied, beginning January 1, 1986, an excise tax for the furnishing for value to the public of any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. All persons, firms or corporations doing business within the limits of the city, are required to pay a business or occupation tax to the city for the operation of a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value a tax of five percent of the aggregate amount charged for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations to the public. 
(Ord. of 11-25-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 24-122. - Exception-Government officials. 
    No tax shall be levied upon the charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of five or more consecutive days for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Ord. of 11-25-1985, § 2) 
Sec. 24-123. - Same-Regular accommodations. 
    No tax shall be levied upon the charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations regularly furnished to an individual for a period of more than ten consecutive days. 
(Ord. of 11-25-1985, § 3) 
Sec. 24-124. - Written report. 
    No later than the tenth day of the following month, the owner or operator of such hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or other place in which rooms are regularly furnished, shall make a written report to the city manager of the city upon such form as the city manager may prepare from lodgings, less sales taxes and taxes levied hereunder, and shall at that time pay to the city the percentage of such charges so received as herein levied. 
(Ord. of 11-25-1985, § 4) 
Sec. 24-125. - Failure of owner or operator to make reports or pay license fees. 
    Upon failure by the owner or operator of such lodging place to make proper reports or pay the license fees herein assessed, the city manager shall, within ten days thereafter, notify such owner or operator of the alleged deficiency and shall also notify him that an execution will be issued for an estimated amount of taxes in which event, the owner or operator shall have authority to then appear before the city manager within ten days from the receipt of such notice by personal delivery, certified or registered mail to contest liability or the amount of it. After a hearing on such issue, the city manager shall make a determination and issue an execution for the proper amount against such defaulting owner or operator. The defaulting owner or operator shall have the right to appeal within ten days from the final decision of the city manager to the council to determine its liability and the amount of it. 
(Ord. of 11-25-1985, § 5) 
Sec. 24-126. - Monies reserved; expenditure of funds, proceeds. 
(a)	Beginning January 1, 1997, monies earmarked for the chamber of commerce will revert back to two percent. 
(b)	A transfer of these funds will be made on a monthly basis. 
(c)	The proceeds of all taxes collected pursuant to this section shall be used and expended in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Ord. of 9-25-1995; Ord. of 7-11-2005, § 1) 
Secs. 24-127-24-151. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MOTEL AND LODGINGS LICENSE 

Sec. 24-152. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accommodation means any unit or combination of units set aside as a rental unit. 
    Auto tourists or transients means any person who either at his own expense or at the expense of another obtains lodging or the use of lodging space in any motel. 
    Motel means a series of attached, semi-attached or detached dwelling units with separate entrances, operated as a single business, containing individual sleeping or living units with bathrooms and closet space, with or without kitchens, designed for, or used by automobile tourists and transients; with convenient access to a parking space for the use of the unit's occupants and direct and convenient access to a traveled road; and maintained and held out to the public as accommodations for auto tourists and transients by the day, week or month, whether a charge is made or not. 
    Owner or operator includes the owner, manager, tenant, or any person owning or in charge of the motel, and shall include natural persons, firms or corporations. 
    Person shall be construed to include persons, partnerships, firms, company, corporation, tenant, owner, lessor or licensee, their agents, heirs or assigns. 
    Unit means a room or suite of rooms in a motel occupied or designed for occupation for living or sleeping purposes. 
(Ord. of 11-24-1986, § 1) 
Sec. 24-153. - Penalty. 
(a)	The operation of a motel without a license is a crime against the city and upon conviction in the municipal court, the owner and operator shall be punished under the laws of the city. 
(b)	Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, be punished as for a misdemeanor under the laws of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-24-1986, § 8) 
Sec. 24-154. - Enforcement. 
(a)	This article shall be enforced by the city manager, chief of police, and other agents and employees of the city. 
(b)	It is hereby made the duty of the city manager to see that all provisions of this article as prescribed herein, or such provisions as may hereafter be enacted, are enforced, and for the purpose of securing such enforcement, any member of the city police department or any employee of the city. Any employee of the city when authorized by the city manager or chief of police shall have the right and is hereby empowered to enter upon the premises on which any motel units are located, or are about to be located, and inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable time. The city manager is further empowered to issue orders granting, renewing and revoking such permits and licenses as are provided for in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-24-1986, § 2) 
Sec. 24-155. - Application for license and issuance thereof. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established, operated by maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him or others, a motel within the limits of the city without having first secured a license therefor from the city manager, granted and existing in compliance of the terms of this article. Such license shall expire at the end of the calendar year but may be renewed under the provisions of this article for additional periods of one year. Licenses shall not be transferrable from one person to another. 
(b)	The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be filed with the city manager and shall be accompanied by the amount of the license fee now or hereafter in force. The application for a license or renewal thereof shall be made on or before February 1 of each year, or at a time when the motel begins business, whichever date first occurs. The application for a license or renewal shall show: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner in fee of the land on which the motel is located; 
(2)	The name and address of the lessee or other operator of the motel; 
(3)	The number of units in the motel; 
(4)	Compliance with the health, sanitation, building, fire, plumbing, zoning, electrical and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(c)	Before such license may be issued, there must be a favorable recommendation by the city manager, and the premises must be inspected and approved by him or his duly authorized representative as complying with all of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-24-1986, § 3) 
Sec. 24-156. - Management. 
(a)	In every motel, there shall be an office building in which shall be located the office of the person in charge of the said motel. A copy of the motel license and of this article shall be posted therein and the motel registry shall at all times be kept in said office. 
(b)	It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge, together with the licensee, to: 
(1)	Keep at all times a register of all guests (which shall be open at all times to inspection by city, county, state and federal officers) showing for all guests: 
a.	Names and address of each guest for which accommodations are afforded; 
b.	Dates of entrance and departure; 
c.	License number, make and title of all automobiles; 
d.	State's issuing such automobile licenses. 
(2)	Maintain the motel in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. 
(3)	See that the provisions of this article are complied with an enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violation of this article or any other violations of law which may come to his attention. 
(4)	Report to the county health department all cases of persons or animals affected or suspected of being affected with any communicable disease. 
(5)	Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats or other animals or pets. 
(6)	Maintain in convenient places, approved by the chief of the fire department, hand fire extinguishers in good operating condition in the ratio of one to each three motel units. 
(7)	Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises. 
(8)	Prohibit the use of any motel unit or suite by a greater number of occupants than that which it is designed to accommodate. 
(Ord. of 11-24-1986, § 4) 
Sec. 24-157. - Charges for accommodations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motel to: 
(1)	Charge a price greater than the motel's accommodation price advertised on outdoor signs, or as advertised in manner whatsoever, or as set out on the rate card displayed in each room; 
(2)	Post or allow to remain posted on any outdoor advertising sign, rates for accommodation in such motel unless there shall be available for immediate occupancy, accommodation at the rate posted on such sign; 
(3)	Post, authorizing the posting, or to allow to remain posted, an outdoor advertising sign on which the rates for accommodation are difference than the rate signs posted in each unit; 
(4)	Make an extra charge for the use of appliances or facilities such as air conditioning, television, fans, radios, swimming pool and etc., unless extra charge is clearly shown on signs as required by this section. 
(Ord. of 11-24-1986, § 5) 
Sec. 24-158. - Health and sanitation. 
(a)	The city manager, or his duly authorized representative, shall inspect all motels as often as requests therefor shall be made, or whenever the said city manager shall deem it necessary, and in any event as often as once in each year. If after such inspection it is found by the city manager or his duly authorized representative that a motel is being conducted in an unclean or unsanitary manner or in violation of this article or any of the ordinances of the city as to the public health or safety, the city manager shall make a full report to the city council and the county board of health. 
(b)	Each motel unit shall have a complete bathroom, including flush toilet, sink, bath or shower. Floors of bathrooms shall be constructed of concrete, tile or similar materials which are impervious to water and shall be pitched to a floor drain. Each bathroom shall be provided with an adequate supply of: hot and cold running water, soap, individual hand and bath towels and toilet paper at all times. 
(c)	Each motel unit containing a kitchen shall be provided with a kitchen sink, constructed of nonabsorbent material, and supplied at all times with hot and cold running water. 
(Ord. of 11-24-1986, § 6) 
Sec. 24-159. - Hearings and appeals. 
(a)	The city manager shall grant a hearing so as to comply with due process requirements on all actions taken by him in refusing or cancelling a license granted to a motel. 
(b)	The motel owner shall have the right of appeal from any adverse decision of the city manager to the council within ten days, who shall grant a hearing to such owner or operator. 
(Ord. of 11-24-1986, § 7) 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Marijuana. 
(a)	Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess less than one ounce of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)	Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall after conviction in the municipal court, be punished by confinement in jail of not more than 60 days or fined not more than $500.00, or both, or sentenced to labor in the public works of the city for a period not exceeding 30 days. 
(Ord. of 10-20-1981, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference- Municipal jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6. 
Sec. 26-2. - Misdemeanors under state law. 
    Any act, the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor under the laws of the state, is prohibited within the city, and if committed within the city, and if not prosecuted by the state, it is hereby declared to be an offense punishable by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 12-1) 
State Law reference- Georgia law forbids a municipality from enacting a criminal ordinance against conduct which is also unlawful under the criminal laws of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(2)(A). 
Sec. 26-3. - Noises-Unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for any person to make, create or maintain any unreasonable, loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise or noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to life, health, comfort or repose of any individual, within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 12-2) 
Sec. 26-4. - Same-Specific acts or conditions prohibited. 
    The following noises, among others, are prohibited under the terms of section 26-2: 
(1)	Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device by a motorist when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)	Radios, phonographs, etc. The use or operation of any radio or television receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person of normal hearing who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto; or allowing such use or operation. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 12:00 noon and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)	Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising, etc. The use or operation of any radio, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building, product, service, merchandise or political candidate, or allowing such use or operation, except as authorized by the governing body. 
(4)	Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)	Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)	Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)	Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)	Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises. 
(9)	Loading, unloading and opening boxes, etc. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers on Sundays, Christmas, New Year's or Thanksgiving or before 7:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m.; provided, however, that under emergency conditions the city may grant exceptions thereto. 
(10)	Adjacent to schools, courts, churches, hospitals, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, church or court street. 
(11)	Hawkers, peddlers, etc. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(12)	Drums, etc. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(13)	Firearms and fireworks. The explosion of firecrackers, skyrockets, Roman candles, pinwheels or any other form of fireworks or the unnecessary shooting of any firearms, except as specifically authorized by law or the proper official. 
(14)	Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along the streets and other public places upon vehicles or in any other manner so loaded as to cause noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet on such streets or other public places. 
(15)	Operation of public transportation buses. The causing, permitting or continuing of any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of a public transportation bus. 
(16)	Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, except on written permission of the city prescribing the locality where and the hours during which such operation is permissible. 
(17)	Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan, or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(18)	Air conditioning units. Self-contained, one-room air conditioning units up to one-ton capacity attached to the outside walls or windows of buildings within the city, and operated for the comfort of the occupants of such buildings, shall not be deemed in violation of this article where proof is established that such units are maintained in good mechanical condition. Air conditioning units of more than one-ton capacity may not be operated within the city except where remote compressors are housed in soundproof rooms, or where attached or immediately adjoining compressors are sound treated or baffled, and cooling coil and condensation water is disposed of, as prescribed by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 12-3; Ord. of 7-1-1991(1); Ord. of 11-27-1995) 
Sec. 26-5. - Posting signs without authority. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge any sign or advertisement, or to post or display upon any telegraph, telephone or electric company's pole, or upon any public property or the private property of any person any bills, signs, or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1911, § 13(a); Code 1982, § 12-4; Ord. of 11-8-1976, § 1) 
Sec. 26-6. - Weapons-Discharging unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to fire off or discharge within the city any firearm of any kind, including pistols, guns, small bore arms or .22 caliber rifles, except in defense of self, family, property or habitation or in the furtherance of justice or protection of the public. Nothing herein shall prevent the shooting of dogs or other animals believed to be of a vicious nature. 
(Code 1982, § 12-5; Ord. of 4-23-1951, § 1) 
Sec. 26-7. - Same-Forfeiture; sale. 
(a)	Any device which is used as a weapon in the commission of any offense against the ordinances of the city is hereby declared to be contraband and is forfeited. 
(b)	At such time as there shall be a final judgment entered finding the accused guilty of a violation of an ordinance of the city, any such device which was used as a weapon in the commission of such offense, shall be turned over by the person having custody of such device to the city manager. The city manager shall within 90 days after receiving such device either destroy the same or advertise it for sale in such manner as public sales of the chief of police are advertised and shall sell such devices to the highest bidder at the next sale conducted after completion of the advertisement; provided, however, that if the weapon used in the commission of such offense is not the property of the accused, there shall be no forfeiture of such weapon. 
(c)	Proceeds derived from sales of such devices after deducting the cost of advertisement and sale, shall be deposited in the general funds of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 12-6; Ord. of 8-23-1971, §§ 1-3) 
Sec. 26-8. - Remaining uninvited on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to leave private property when requested to do so by the owner, proprietor or manager thereof. For the purposes of this section, private property is defined as being real property other than property owned by the federal government, the state, county, city or any other government body. 
Sec. 26-9. - Congregating, assembling around place of business restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or any congregation or association of individuals to gather or congregate around or adjacent to any public or private business in the city without the express permission of the owner or occupant of said premises. 
Secs. 26-10-26-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 26-35. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
    Garage sale means the sale of personal property conducted in or near a residence under cover, partially under cover, or completely outside of any building, in the open. The term "garage sale" shall include garage sales, yard sales, patio sales, rummage sales or other similar sales which are advertised by a sign or other means for the public to attend. The term "garage sale" shall not include sales in commercially zoned areas or industrially zoned areas of the city. 
    Nonprofit organizations includes but is not limited to fraternal organizations, hobby societies, educational societies, historical societies, museums, hospital auxiliary groups, churches, church auxiliary organizations, student groups and parent-teacher organizations. 
(Ord. of 9-27-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 26-36. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the terms of this article shall be subjected to a fine of not more than $100.00 for the first offense, not more than $200.00 for the second offense and not more than $300.00 for the third offense. 
(Ord. of 9-27-2004, § 3) 
Sec. 26-37. - Regulations. 
(a)	Garage sales conducted by individuals or nonprofit organizations shall only be for the purpose of disposing of personal items no longer needed or wanted by the individuals or nonprofit organizations. Purchasing or otherwise obtaining any item for the purpose of placing the same in a garage sale for resale shall be prohibited. 
(b)	Under no circumstances shall such a sale be conducted off the premises of the owner of the property to be disposed of at the sale, except that it shall be permissible for neighbors to conduct a joint sale on the property of one of the neighbors who is a participant in the sale. 
(Ord. of 9-27-2004, § 2) 
Secs. 26-38-26-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ATTIRE 

Sec. 26-63. - Appropriate dress for persons in certain public places; public exposure in certain attire prohibited. 
(a)	On public property (including streets, sidewalks or public transportation, including school buses) of the city, and in a place where a person should reasonably expect to be in view of the public, all persons shall be properly attired. 
(b)	Pants and/or skirts, including long and short, worn by any person, regardless of age, shall be size appropriate and secured at the waist to prevent such pants from falling below the hips causing exposure of the person's skin or undergarments. 
(c)	Fines and penalties: 
(1)	If a person is found to be in violation of this article, a citation shall be issued to the offender and the person shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $25.00 of the first offense and not more than $200.00 for each subsequent offense. In addition to the fine, the court may order such person to participate in up to 40 hours of court-approved community service activities. Violators shall not be subject to arrest or imprisonment for violation of this section, however, the municipal court shall have the same authority as the superior court to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences. 
(2)	Each occurrence in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2008, § 1; Ord. of 5-13-2013) 
Secs. 26-64-26-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-71. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. I, § 1) 
Sec. 26-72. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. I, § 2) 
Sec. 26-73. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
    City means the City of Eastman. 
    Covered account means: 
(1)	An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)	Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
    Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
    Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
    Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
    Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
    Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
    Personal identifying information means a person's personal financial identification, credit card account information, debit card information, account bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
    Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
    Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. I, § 3) 
Sec. 26-74. - Findings. 
(a)	The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)	Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer or waste water and refuse collection. 
(c)	Although the city has no previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts, this ordinance is enacted for the purpose of preventing any future incidents of the same. 
(d)	The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)	The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is password protected. 
(f)	The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)	Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)	Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)	Use of another person's bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; 
(4)	Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. I, § 4) 
Sec. 26-75. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)	As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identification via a valid governmental issued identification with current photograph of the customer. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system. 
(b)	Each account shall be assigned an account number that shall be unique to each particular utility meter. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. I, § 5) 
Sec. 26-76. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)	Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and appropriate action shall be taken, which may include changing all passwords. 
(b)	Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. I, § 6) 
Sec. 26-77. - Sources and types of red flags. 
    All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators or possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)	Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers which are directed or provided to the city. Examples of alerts may include but are not limited to: 
a.	A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report. 
b.	A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report. 
c.	A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.	Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or existing customer. 
(2)	Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.	Identification that appears to be altered or forged. 
b.	Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer. 
c.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer. 
(3)	Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.	Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
b.	Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer. 
c.	Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources. 
d.	Other information provided, such as a fictitious mailing address and/or a mailing address otherwise associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.	The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants. 
f.	The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
g.	Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file. 
h.	The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet. 
(4)	Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.	An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. 
b.	The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
c.	The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
d.	The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)	Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. I, § 7) 
Sec. 26-78. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)	In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall notify the city clerk who shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, said city clerk determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such clerk deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, then he or she shall convey this information to the city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, the city clerk or other designated staff shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by city manager: 
(1)	Contact the customer; 
(2)	Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.	Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or close the account; 
(3)	Notify law enforcement and/or take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)	In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, said employee shall notify the city clerk, who may then use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, said city clerk shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such city clerk deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the city clerk shall convey this information to the city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, he or she may direct another city employee to perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by city manager: 
(1)	Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)	Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)	Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. I, § 8) 
Sec. 26-79. - Updating the program. 
    The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)	The City's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)	Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)	Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)	Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)	Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. I, § 9) 
Sec. 26-80. - Program administration. 
    The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by the city clerk or other staff members regarding compliance with red flag requirements; and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary, in his or her opinion, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)	The city clerk will report annually to the city manager, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.	The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.	Service provider arrangements; 
c.	Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.	Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)	The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. I, § 10) 
Sec. 26-81. - Outside service providers. 
    In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city manager shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. I, § 11) 
Secs. 26-82-26-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 26-91. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known as treatment of address discrepancies. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. II, § 1) 
Sec. 26-92. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1 the purpose of this division is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. II, § 2) 
Sec. 26-93. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
    Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. 1681 (h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
    City means the City of Eastman. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. II, § 3) 
Sec. 26-94. - Policy. 
    In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee; 
(1)	Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.	Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. 5318(1); 
b.	Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.	Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee. 
(2)	Verify the information in the customer report with the customer. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. II, § 4) 
Sec. 26-95. - Furnishing customer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)	In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)	The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)	The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)	The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)	Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. II, § 5) 
Sec. 26-96. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
    The city employee charges with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods; 
(1)	Verifying the address with the consumer. 
(2)	Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)	Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)	Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, art. II, § 6) 
Chapter 28 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 28-19. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a board to be known as the Eastman-Dodge County Recreation Commission. 
(Ord. of 10-17-1994, § I) 
Sec. 28-20. - Composition; terms. 
    The recreation commission shall be composed of nine members, four to be appointed by the city council and four to be appointed by the commissioner of the county and the ninth member shall be appointed on an alternating basis by both the city and county. 
(1)	The terms of office for board members shall be for a period of five years, or until their successors have been duly appointed and qualified. After the five-year term, each member will have to remain off the board for one year before being eligible for reappointment. 
(2)	Vacancies in the recreation commission shall be filled by the city council or commissioner of the county, who appointed such member, for the unexpired term only. If the newly appointed member who is filling the vacancy serves more than three years, then he will have to vacate the board for one year before being eligible for reappointment. 
(3)	The members of the recreation commission shall serve without remuneration or financial benefit of any kind. 
(Ord. of 10-17-1994, § II) 
Sec. 28-21. - Chairperson; meetings. 
    The recreation commission shall annually appoint from its membership, a chairperson and such other officers as it may deem necessary for the orderly conduct of its business. Any or all of the officers thus appointed may serve for consecutive years, if reappointed. The board may adopt rules and regulations covering its procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of the state laws. The recreation commission shall make rules and regulations governing the operation and conduct of the recreation facilities operated by it. The recreation commission shall hold regular meetings at such times and places which it may designate. Any five members of the board shall constitute quorum for the transaction of business. The absence for three consecutive meetings of any member of the board without due and acceptable excuse, shall be reported to the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 10-17-1994, § III) 
Sec. 28-22. - Maintenance. 
    The recreation commission shall provide, maintain, operate, and supervise the public parks and playgrounds, athletic fields, and recreation centers, and other recreational facilities owned or controlled by the city council and commissioner of the county or leased or loaned to the recreation commission; shall have supervision of the facilities and activities provided and conducted on, or in connection with, the parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, and recreation centers provided, and shall have the power to conduct any form of recreational or cultural activity. The recreation commission may create policies, for, have authority over and administer a coordinated recreation service and may cooperate with other similar local, state or federal authorities. 
(Ord. of 10-17-1994, § IV) 
Sec. 28-23. - Authorization to receive and disburse monies. 
    In carrying out the purposes of this article, the recreation commission is authorized to receive and disburse for such purposes any monies appropriated to it by the commissioner of the county and city council together with any other funds which may come into its hands by gifts, grants, donations, bequests, devises or from its own operation or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 10-17-1994, § V) 
Sec. 28-24. - Acceptance of donations. 
(a)	The city and commissioner of the county, by and through the recreation commission, may accept any grant, gift, bequest, loan or donation of any personal property offered or made for recreational purposes and may accept any grant, gift, loan or devise of real estate, provided, however, that if such gift, grant, loan, bequest, donation, or devise is conditional, the city council and commissioner of the county shall have the authority to accept the same upon the condition attached, and to comply with such condition as reasonable and in the best interest of the city and county. 
(b)	Money received for such purposes, unless otherwise provided by the terms of the gift or bequest, shall be deposited with the recreation commission and the same may be withdrawn and paid out by said board in the same manner as money appropriated for recreation purposes. 
(Ord. of 10-17-1994, § VI) 
Sec. 28-25. - Administrator. 
(a)	The recreation commission shall have power to employ an administrator of recreation who shall be a person of proven executive and administrative ability with special or professional training in community recreation, who shall be deemed a city and county employee. 
(b)	Said board and governing authority shall employ other trained persons as they deem necessary in the maintenance of an operation of the recreational facilities and program on a permanent or part-time basis and said persons shall be deemed city and county employees. 
(Ord. of 10-17-1994, § VII) 
Sec. 28-26. - Reports. 
    The recreation commission shall make full and complete monthly and annual reports to the city council and commissioner of the county and other reports from time to time as requested. The fiscal year of the board shall conform to that of the city and county. 
(Ord. of 10-17-1994, § VIII) 
Chapter 30 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLICITATIONS 

Sec. 30-19. - Definitions. 
    Whenever used in the following sections of this article, the following words shall be as herein defined, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
    Charitable means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
    Contributions includes the words food, clothing, money, subscription, property or donations. 
    Council means the members of the city council. 
    Persons means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association, public school organization, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization or league. 
    Promoter means any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes, or attempts to promote, manage, supervise, or organize a campaign of solicitation. 
    Solicit and solicitation means the request directly or indirectly of money, credit, property, financial assistance, or any other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or any other thing of value will be used for a civic, charitable or religious purpose. The terms "solicit" and "solicitation" shall also mean and include the following methods of securing money, credit, property, financial assistance, or any other thing of value on the plea or representation that it will be used for a charitable, educational, civic or religious purpose: 
(1)	Any oral or written request; 
(2)	The distribution, circulation, or posting of any handbill, written advertisement or publication. 
A solicitation shall be deemed complete when made, whether or not the person making the same received any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this section. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 30-20. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $50.00 or more than $300.00 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2009, § 11) 
Sec. 30-21. - Findings. 
    The council and police department have received complaints from residents in residential and business areas about the uncontrolled and unregulated assembly of persons at various locations in the city for the purpose of collecting money and other items from persons passing by. The council recognizes that the indiscriminate and unregulated persons assembling at various locations in the city for the purpose of making solicitations which impedes the natural flow of pedestrians and traffic can affect the health, safety and welfare of residents of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 30-22. - Welfare of city. 
    The city council has determined that the unregulated solicitations can be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and that regulation of the same is essential. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 30-23. - Charitable solicitations permit required; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person whomsoever anywhere in the city to solicit contributions for any charitable, educational, civic or religious purpose without first obtaining a permit from the city, provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any established person or entity organized and operated exclusively for charitable purposes and not operated for pecuniary profit of any person if: 
(1)	The solicitations by such established person or entity are conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitation; or 
(2)	The solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of any such established person. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2009, § 4) 
Sec. 30-24. - Application for charitable solicitations permit. 
(a)	An application for a permit to solicit shall be made to the city clerk's office upon forms provided by the city. Such application shall be sworn to and filed with the city clerk's office at least 15 days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; provided, however, that the city may for good cause shown allow the filing of an application less than 15 days prior to the effective date of the permit applied for. The application herein required shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reason why such information cannot be furnished: 
(1)	The name, address or headquarters of the person or entity applying for the permit. 
(2)	If applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and managers and a copy of the resolution, if any, authorizing such solicitations, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of applicant's records. 
(3)	The purpose for which such solicitations are to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom. 
(4)	A specific statement, supported by reason and, if available, figures, showing the need for the contributions to be solicited. 
(5)	The name and address of the person who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitations and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitations. 
(6)	An outline of the method to be used in conducting the solicitations. 
(7)	The date when such solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred hours for the beginning and ending of such solicitations. 
(8)	A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the applicant within the city. 
(9)	A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city, or by any department, officer or employee thereof. 
(10)	Such other information as may be reasonably required by the city attorney's office in order to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitations and whether such solicitations are in the interest of, and not inimical to, the public welfare. 
(b)	If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy, or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the city clerk's office in writing thereof within one business day after such change. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2009, § 5) 
Sec. 30-25. - Standards for city's action in granting or denying applications for charitable solicitation permits. 
    The city shall issue a permit whenever it shall find the following facts to exist: 
(1)	That all of the statements made in the application are true. 
(2)	That the applicant has a good character and reputation for honesty and integrity, or if the applicant is not an individual person, then every managing officer or agent of the applicant has a good character or reputation for honesty and integrity. 
(3)	That the control and supervision of the solicitations will be under responsible and reliable persons. 
(4)	That the applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise. 
(5)	That the solicitations will not be a fraud on the public. 
(6)	That the solicitations are prompted solely by a desire to finance a charitable cause described in the applications, and will not be conducted for private profit or gain. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2009, § 6) 
Sec. 30-26. - Fee for charitable solicitations permit. 
    Before a permit is issued, there shall be paid to the treasurer of the city the sum of $5.00 as a permit fee and the sum of $0.50 for each facsimile copy of the permit that is desired. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2009, § 7) 
Sec. 30-27. - Issuance of certificate. 
(a)	If it shall appear from such application and the showing made thereby to the satisfaction of the city that the applicant meets the qualifications as hereinafter provided, the city clerk shall immediately upon order of the city manager issue a certificate to the applicant to engage in such solicitations by themselves, and by the assistance of those designated in such application, or in such amended lists. 
(b)	The certificate shall remain in force and effect only for the period of time for which it was granted and cannot be renewed except upon the filing of a new application as provided for in this section. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2009, § 8) 
Sec. 30-28. - Standards for granting or denying application for solicitation certificates. 
(a)	The city shall issue the certificate provided for in section 30-27, whenever it shall find the following facts to exist: 
(1)	That all of the statements made in the application are true. 
(2)	That the applicant has a good character and reputation for honesty and integrity, or if the applicant is not an individual person, then every managing officer or agent of the applicant has a good character or reputation for honesty and integrity. 
(3)	That the control and supervision of the solicitations will be under responsible and reliable persons. 
(4)	That the applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise. 
(5)	That the solicitations will not be a fraud on the public. 
(6)	That the applicant is a bona fide established educational, civic or religious organization or an authorized agent of the same. 
(7)	That the solicitations are prompted solely by the desire to finance and assist the persons, groups or organizations described in the application and will not be conducted for private profit or gain. 
(b)	The city clerk shall file in the office of the city all documents relating to each application and shall notify the applicant of the city's decision upon each application. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2009, § 9) 
Sec. 30-29. - Solicitations permit and certificate; form of granting not to constitute endorsement by city; time limit. 
    Permits and certificates issued under this article shall bear the name and address of the person or entity by whom the solicitations are to be made, the number of the persons by whom the solicitations are to be made, the number of the permit or certificate, the date issued, the dates within which the permit or certificate holder may solicit, and a statement that the permit or certificate does not constitute an endorsement by the city, or by any of its departments, officers or employees of the purpose or of the person or entity conducting the solicitations. All permits and certificates must be signed by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2009, § 10) 
Chapter 32 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EASTMAN PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 32-19. - Created and established. 
    The city planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the commission, is hereby created and established as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-61-7. 
(Code 1982, § 14-1; Ord. of 2-10-1958) 
Sec. 32-20. - Composition; terms; method of appointment. 
    The commission shall consist of ten members whose terms, after the initial term hereof, shall be for a period of three years. They shall be appointed by action of the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 14-2; Ord. of 2-10-1958, § 1) 
Sec. 32-21. - Filling vacancies; compensation. 
    Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by action of the city council. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1982, § 14-3; Ord. of 2-10-1958, § 1) 
Sec. 32-22. - Organization; rules; staff; finances. 
(a)	The commission shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson shall be for one year with eligibility for re-election. 
(b)	The commission may appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. 
(c)	The commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine the time of meetings. All meetings of the commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the commission shall be a public record. 
(d)	The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. 
(e)	The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing bodies of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 14-4; Ord. of 2-10-1958, § 2) 
Sec. 32-23. - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall have all of the powers, duties and responsibilities delegated to it by the laws of the state as they now exist or may hereafter exist. 
(Code 1982, § 14-5; Ord. of 2-10-1958, § 3) 
Secs. 32-24-32-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HEART OF GEORGIA PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 32-50. - Created and established. 
    The Heart of Georgia Planning and Development Commission, hereinafter referred to as the commission, is hereby created and established as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 50-8-32. 
(Code 1982, § 14-6; Ord. of 11-8-1968, § 1) 
Sec. 32-51. - Composition; appointment. 
    The commission shall consist of two members from each of the counties participating. Of the two members from each county, one shall be appointed by the governing authority of the municipality wherein the county seat is located (or by the governing authorities of participating municipalities within said county) and the other member shall be appointed by the governing authority of the county. 
(Code 1982, § 14-7; Ord. of 11-8-1968, § 1) 
Sec. 32-52. - Terms of office; filling vacancies; removing members; compensation. 
(a)	The term of office for each member shall be five years. 
(b)	Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing authority making the appointment which has become vacant. 
(c)	The appointing authority shall also have the power to remove any member it may appoint for cause, on written charges, after public hearing. 
(d)	All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1982, § 14-8; Ord. of 11-8-1968, § 2) 
Sec. 32-53. - Organization; rules; staff; finances. 
(a)	The commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its appointive members. The term of office of the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be for one year or until re-elected or their successors are elected. 
(b)	The commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an employee of the commission. 
(c)	The commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the chairperson or commission may determine; shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(d)	The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work. In the performance of its duties, the commission may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, or local public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations, may spend such funds, and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. It may make expenditures for the purchase for required equipment and supplies. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts to the commission and contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the participating governing authorities. 
(Code 1982, § 14-9; Ord. of 11-8-1968, § 3) 
Sec. 32-54. - Powers and duties. 
    It shall be the function and duty of the commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of the entire South Central Georgia area and each political subdivision therein. In general, the commission shall have such powers and duties and responsibilities as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 50-8-32 et seq. 
(Code 1982, § 14-10; Ord. of 11-8-1968, § 3) 
Chapter 34 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal street administration, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein: 
    Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the city. 
    Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install wires, install conduit, install pipes, install transmission lines, install poles, install signs, or install facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
    Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles, installing signs, or installing Facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
    Director means the director of the department of streets and sidewalks of the city, or his designee. 
    Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety, or of a significant loss of real or personal property. 
    Excavation means any work in the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, opening the public right-of-way; installing, servicing, repairing or modifying any facility in or under the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way, and restoring the surface and subsurface of the public right-of-way. 
    Facilities representative means the specifically identified agents/employees of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agents for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
    Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, a utility's poles, wires, optical fibers, cables, electrical conductors, conduits, ducts, innerducts, pipes, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances, appurtenances and future technology authorized in a permit or written service agreement. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
    Registration means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written service agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code. 
    Right-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. The term "right-of-way" shall not include buildings, parks, bridges, river, tunnel, viaduct, conduit or other public property or easements that have not been dedicated to compatible uses, except to the extent the use or occupation of such property is specifically granted in a permit or by law. The term "right-of-way" shall not include private easements or public property, except to the extent the use or occupation of public property is specifically granted in a written approval of registration. 
    Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
    Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
    Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests. 
    Underground facilities means all lines, cables, conduits, pipes, posts, tanks, vaults, wires and any other facilities which are located wholly or partially underneath rights-of-way. 
    Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
    Utility means any privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, servicer, contractor, sub-contractor or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
    Working day means any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday excluding legal holidays observed by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. I, § 3) 
Sec. 34-2. - Penalties. 
    Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. IX) 
Sec. 34-3. - Obstructions and excavations-Prohibited; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct any street, sidewalk or other public way in the city by any porch, steps, or fence, or any other obstruction whatever, or to place any trash, boxes, wood, tin or glass thereon; provided, this shall not apply to persons lawfully doing so under a permit issued by the city. 
(Code 1911, § 158; Code 1982, § 15-1) 
Sec. 34-4. - Same-Use of streets for storage place. 
    No person shall use the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places as a storage place, and no person shall put, place or maintain any obstacle or object on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city, other than the demands of business exigencies, and as herein permitted. 
(Code 1982, § 15-2; Ord. of 9-25-1961, § 10) 
Sec. 34-5. - Same-Permit to place obstruction. 
    The provisions of sections 34-3 and 34-4, and of any other ordinance touching the obstruction or of the streets, sidewalks and other public ways shall not apply to persons engaged in building or repairing of any building which person possesses a valid permit therefor from the city. 
(Code 1911, § 119; Code 1982, § 15-3) 
Sec. 34-6. - Same-Excavation permit; restoring surface. 
    No street, sidewalk or other public way in the city shall be altered or excavation made therein without a written permit from the city. Any person who shall be found guilty of a violation of this section shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-8, and shall in addition thereto be held responsible for the expense of restoring the street, sidewalk, or other public way to its original condition. 
(Code 1911, § 161; Code 1982, § 15-4) 
Sec. 34-7. - Same-Warning devices; streets to remain open. 
    Persons holding permits to place obstructions or make excavations shall provide warning devices, and during night hours shall provide adequate warning lights. Said public ways shall not at any time be rendered impassable. 
(Code 1911, § 119; Code 1982, § 15-5) 
Sec. 34-8. - Taking material from public grounds; permit required. 
    No person shall dig or haul earth or other material from any street or other public ground of the city without a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1911, § 161; Code 1982, § 15-6) 
Sec. 34-9. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. I, § 2) 
Secs. 34-10-34-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 34-37. - Administration. 
    The director of the department of streets and sidewalks or his designee shall be the city official responsible for the administration of this chapter except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. II, § I) 
Sec. 34-38. - Rights-of-way occupancy registration. 
(a)	Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this chapter, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)	Following the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, each utility which seeks to have facilities located in any rights-of-way under the control of city, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a notification of construction with the department. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. II, § 2) 
Sec. 34-39. - Registration procedure. 
    The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the permit registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility to be installed, maintained or repaired in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner. 
(2)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representatives. Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representatives in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times. 
(3)	A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)	A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. II, § 3) 
Sec. 34-40. - Issuance of written acceptance of registration. 
(a)	If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(b)	Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining the permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. II, § 4) 
Secs. 34-41-34-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOTIFICATION TO CITY OF CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 34-69. - Notification required. 
    Written notification to the director from the utility is required prior to any of the following activities: 
(1)	Before any utility does any work to construct, install, maintain, remove or relocate facilities on, along, over or under the right-of-way in the city; or 
(2)	Construction adjacent to the rights-of-way in the city that require tree trimming within the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. III, § 1) 
Sec. 34-70. - Notification procedure. 
    The written notification shall be submitted on a form provided by the director and shall specifically include: 
(1)	The name and address of the utility; 
(2)	The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)	The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representatives; 
(5)	The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; and 
(6)	An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or to any member of the public caused by work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. III, § 2) 
Sec. 34-71. - Locate requests required. 
    As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next business day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than business days. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. III, § 3) 
Sec. 34-72. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
    Failure to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in this article may result in revocation of registration and removal of facilities from the rights-of-way. 
(1)	The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designer and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city municipal equivalents. 
(2)	Protection of traffic and roadway. In conformance with city policy, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way, or the right-of-way itself. 
(3)	Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon at least ten business days' notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(4)	Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. V) 
Sec. 34-73. - Restoration of property. 
    A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder or thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the that caused such disturbance or damage. If utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. VI) 
Sec. 34-74. - Discontinuance of operations; abandoned and unused facilities. 
(a)	A utility which has discontinued or is discontinuing operation of any facilities in the city shall: 
(1)	Provide information satisfactory to the city that the utility's obligations for its facilities in the rights-of-way under this chapter and any other provision in the codified ordinances or other laws have been lawfully assumed by another utility; 
(2)	Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities; 
(3)	Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities. Said proposal must be approved by the director; 
(4)	Remove its entire facilities within a reasonable amount of time and in a manner acceptable to the city; or 
(5)	Submit to the city, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city. If a utility proceeds under this subsection, the city may, at its option do one or more of the following: 
a.	Purchase the facilities; 
b.	Accept donation of some or all facilities; or 
c.	Require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
(b)	Facilities of a utility who fails to comply with the above provision shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. VII) 
Sec. 34-75. - Termination of registration. 
(a)	The registration statement shall remain in place for one year and renew each subsequent year automatically unless the utility is in default. The director shall give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)	Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a registration application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)	Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
(3)	Practiced any fraud or deceit upon city; or 
(4)	Made a material misrepresentation of fact in its application for registration. 
(b)	If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the approval of registration. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)	The city shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)	If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the registration terminated. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. VIII) 
Secs. 34-76-34-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 34-124. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
    The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or which may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, the state, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying or and being issued a written approval of registration, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. X, § 2) 
Sec. 34-125. - Compliance. 
    No utility shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce prompt compliance. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. X, § 3) 
Sec. 34-126. - Appeals. 
    All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification to the city required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director of public service as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. X, § 4) 
ARTICLE V. - SIDEWALK CAFES 

Sec. 34-141. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for regulation of sidewalk cafes operated by qualified restaurants on public sidewalks, and to more fully promote the public interest by contributing to a viable and attractive commercial and pedestrian environment. In recognition thereof, reasonable regulation of sidewalk cafes is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and the interest of the city and the primary use of the public streets and sidewalks by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2016(1)) 
Sec. 34-142. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the words below shall have the following meaning: 
    City manager shall mean the city manager of the City of Eastman and those to whom he delegates or assigns duties under this section, including but not limited to the Eastman Downtown Development Authority. 
    Operator or permittee shall mean the person operating the restaurant with its associated sidewalk cafe, and shall include, but not be limited to, an owner, lessor, renter or manager. 
    Person shall mean both natural persons, and legal persons such as corporations, partnerships or LLC's. 
(Ord No 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013; Ord. of 4-11-2016(1)) 
Sec. 34-143. - Qualifications. 
    The use of sidewalks for restaurant tables shall only be permitted incidental to the operation of a "restaurant" as defined in the City of Eastman Code of Ordinances section 4-63. No permit is required, however, the use of the sidewalk to operate a sidewalk cafe is a privilege, not a right, and any person who violates the conditions of this article may be forbidden to operate a sidewalk cafe after notice and a hearing. 
(Ord No 13-01, § 1. 3-7-2013; Ord. of 4-11-2016(1)) 
Sec. 34-144. - Temporary closing of sidewalk cafe. 
(a)	Sidewalk cafes may be ordered closed temporarily by the City of Eastman whenever deemed necessary in the sole discretion of the city, whenever the area may be needed for a public purpose, including but not limited to, construction, maintenance, public health, safety or welfare, emergencies and public events such as parades or street parties. 
(b)	The city may order the immediate removal or relocation of all, or parts of, a sidewalk cafe in emergency situations or for safety considerations, without notice. The city and its officers and employees shall not be responsible for sidewalk cafe fixtures relocated during emergencies. 
(Ord No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013; Ord. of 4-11-2016(1)) 
Sec. 34-145. - Restrictions on use of sidewalks. 
(a)	In no event shall the uses permitted by this article reduce that portion of any sidewalk customarily used by pedestrians to less than five feet in width. Additionally, contiguous pedestrian flow must be maintained between two or more adjacent sidewalk cafe. The city may designate portions of the sidewalk which must not be obstructed under any circumstance, and may restrict usage in any manner deemed necessary by the city. 
(b)	Nothing will be placed within five feet of a fire hydrant, pedestrian crosswalk or handicapped corner curb cut. 
(c)	The city reserves the right of access to all portions of the sidewalk included in areas permitted for the purposes of sidewalk repair or other necessary purposes. 
(d)	Sidewalk cafe operators shall maintain the sidewalk and the curb and gutter immediately adjacent to it in a clean and safe condition. Full daily cleaning is required. Refuse shall not be disposed of in the city's sidewalk trash receptacles. The area shall be kept clear of all debris. The operator shall also be responsible for cleaning the ground or floor surface on which the sidewalk cafe is located and the gutter area immediately adjacent to the sidewalk cafe. Such cleaning shall include pressure cleaning. If the area is not maintained in a neat and orderly appearance after notice the city may then take steps necessary to place the property in a neat and clean order and charge the operator with the reasonable cost of cleaning or repairs. Such action by the city does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the city to make further repairs or to maintain the property and does not create any liability against the city for any damages to the property if such cleaning or repairs were completed in good faith. 
(e)	No tables, chairs, or any other parts of sidewalk cafes shall be attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign or other fixture, curb, or sidewalk in or near the permitted area. 
(f)	Only the area in front of a restaurant, as defined by projecting its interior width outward perpendicular to the street to a point at which it intersects the roadway (or within the sidewalk frontage of the building where the validly licensed restaurant is located provided that written approval is supplied by the building owners), can be used by the restaurant. Placement of tables and chairs will be permitted in areas more than ten feet from the front of the building only when city manager determines it is in the best interest of the public to permit such placement. All tables and chairs must be of a design, material, and specification suitable for outside dining. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 3-7-2013; Ord. of 4-11-2016(1)) 
Sec. 34-146. - Insurance prerequisite. 
(a)	The operator of a sidewalk cafe agrees to, and does by its operation of a sidewalk cafe, indemnify, defend, save, and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees from any and all claims, liability, lawsuits, damages and causes of action which may arise out of operator's activity on the demised premises. The operator shall provide indemnification to the city in writing on a form provided by the city manager. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to operate a sidewalk cafe, unless the applicant shall furnish in a form acceptable to the city manager evidence of commercial general liability insurance, and alcohol license liability insurance if serving alcohol, naming the city as a co-insured party and insuring the city against any liability resulting from the uses permitted pursuant to this section. The coverage shall not be less than $500.000.00 per occurrence. 
(c)	It shall not be lawful to operate a sidewalk cafe at any time the insurance required by this section is not maintained and evidence of its continuance filed with the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013; Ord. of 4-11-2016(1)) 
Sec. 34-147. - Revocation. 
    The privilege of an operator to use the sidewalk of the City of Eastman may be revoked at any time by written notice to be served on the operator: such service to be by certified mail or personal service. Upon receipt of such revocation notice, the permittee shall have ten days to appeal such revocation to the board of zoning appeals, whose decision after notice and hearing as required by the governing board of zoning appeals section of this Code shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013; Ord. of 4-11-2016(1)) 
Sec. 34-148. - Sale of alcoholic beverages at sidewalk cafes. 
    Only a properly permitted restaurant with a sidewalk cafe, which holds a valid alcohol license for consumption on the premises, may serve alcohol to customers in the sidewalk cafe, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)	Alcohol may only be possessed in the sidewalk cafe portion of the restaurant between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. 
(2)	Alcohol may not be served in its original container, but must be served in a glass or in clear plastic cups. No bottles or cans are allowed. 
(3)	Only a single serving of alcohol may be in possession of any patron. 
(4)	Patrons must be seated while consuming an alcoholic beverage. 
(5)	Patrons may not remove any alcohol from the premises of the restaurant where the alcoholic beverage was purchased. 
(Ord. No 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013; Ord. of 4-11-2016(1)) 
Sec. 34-149. - Right to limit or deny admission or service. 
    Within the designated area of a cafe, the operator holding a permit under this article shall have the right to limit access and occupancy to only bona fide paying customers of that operator's restaurant who are behaving in a lawful manner. 
(Ord. No 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013; Ord. of 4-11-2016(1)) 
Sec. 34-150. - Penalties. 
    In addition to losing the privilege of operating a sidewalk cafe, any person, firm, corporation or agent, servant, employee, officer or contractor or any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision, requirement, term, or condition of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. The performance of any act prohibited by any section or provision of this article, or the failure to perform any act required thereby, shall constitute a violation and an offense hereunder and any person found guilty of any violation of any section or provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section l-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-7-2013; Ord. of 4-11-2016(1)) 
Sec. 34-151. - Intention and enforcement. 
(1)	It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that, to the greatest extent allowed by the law, each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the council that no section paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is mutually dependent upon any other section paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article. 
(2)	In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction. It is the express intent of the council that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or enforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any to the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of the article and that all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of the article shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
(3)	Unless otherwise provided herein, penalties provided for violations of this article are set out in the Code or Ordinances, City of Eastman Georgia and are hereby incorporated as if set out fully. 
(4)	All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2016(1)) 
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic violation jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-9. 

Sec. 36-1. - State rules of the road-Adoption by reference. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372, the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-1-1 and 40-6-1 et seq., known as the uniform rules of the road, are hereby adopted, which, together with the provisions of this chapter, shall constitute, the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1982, § 16-1; Ord. of 9-25-1961, § 125) 
Sec. 36-2. - Same-Penalties. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of section 36-1 shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1982, § 16-2) 
Sec. 36-3. - Immediate reports of accidents. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of $25.00 or more shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the city manager or any police officer of the city. Such notice shall be in addition to the written report required by state law. 
(Code 1982, § 16-3; Ord. of 9-25-1961, § 45) 
Sec. 36-4. - Speed limits-Generally. 
    The rules of the road and all amendatory acts thereto, are amended by providing that the speed limit upon the streets of the city shall be 30 miles per hour except over and upon those streets where a different rate of speed is permitted, which rate of speed shall be clearly marked by signs setting the maximum speed over and upon said streets. 
(Code 1982, § 16-4; Ord. of 5-12-1958, § 2) 
Sec. 36-5. - Same-On state roads. 
(a)	The following speed zones are established based on the engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law: 
State Route 27 Business from the Eastman city limit (M.L. 0.34) 0,01 mile east of County Road #138 to City Street #641-Wood Valley Drive (M.L. 1.05), a distance of 0.71 mile to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 27 Business from City Street #641-Wood Valley Drive (M.L. 1.05) to County Road #357-Ninth Avenue (M.L. 1.31), a distance of 0.26 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 27 Business from County Road #357-Ninth Avenue (M.L. 1.31) to the city limit (M.L. 3.15) 0.08 mile west of City Street #637, a distance of 1.84 miles to be zoned 35 mph. 
State Route 27 Business "School Zone" from a point 0.08 mile west of County Road #572-Harrell (M.L. 2.43) to a point 0.08 mile east of County Road #573-School Bus Lane (M.L. 2.68), a distance of 0.25 mile to be zoned 25 mph from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days only. 
State Route 46 runs common with State Route 27 Business from (M.L. 0.00) to (M.L. 1.98), a distance of 1.98 miles. 
State Route 46 from State Route 27 Business (M.L. 1.98) to City Street #565-Fourth Avenue (M.L. 2.38), a distance of 0.40 mile to be zoned 35 mph. 
State Route 46 from City Street #565-Fourth Avenue (M.L. 2.38) to the Eastman city limit (M.L. 2.87) 0.02 mile east-of County Road #268, a distance of 0.49 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 87 from the Eastman city limit (M.L. 15.30) 0.01 mile south of County Road #90 to State Route 27 Business (M.L. 15.76), a distance of 0.46 mile to be zoned 35 mph. 
State Route 87 runs common with State Route 27 Business from (M.L. 15.76) to state Route 46 (M.L. 16.16), a distance of 0.40 mile. 
State Route 87 from State Route 46 (M.L. 16.16) to City Street #552-Seventeenth Avenue (M.L. 17.06), a distance of 0.90 mile to be zoned 35 mph. 
State Route 87 from City Street #552-Seventeenth Avenue (M.L. 17.06) to the Eastman city limit (M.L. 17.67) 0.08 mile north of County Road #141, a distance of 0.61 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 117 runs common with State Route 87 from (M.L. 17.22) to (M.L. 19.21), a distance of 1.99 miles. 
State Route 117 runs common with State Route 27 from (M.L. 19.21) to (M.L. 19.61), a distance of 0.40 mile. 
State Route 117 runs common with State-Route 46 from (M.L. 19.61) to (M.L. 19.77), a distance of 0.16 mile. 
State Route 117 from State Route 46-Fifth Avenue (M.L. 19.77) to City Street #587-Rogers Street (M.L. 20.10), a distance of 0.33 mile to be zoned 35 mph. 
State Route 117 from City Street. #587-Rogers Street (M.L. 20.10) to the Eastman city limit (M.L. 20.38) 0.15 mile north of City Street #563, a distance of 0.28 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
Signs to be erected by Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(b)	Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided for by law. 
(Code 1982, § 16-5; Ord. of 9-20-1973; Ord. No. 94.151, 10-23-1995) 
Sec. 36-6. - State highways on which stopping, standing and parking prohibited. 
    The stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited within the limits of the following areas of the state highway system within the city: 
(1)	On both the east and west sides of Oak Street beginning at Fifth Avenue and extending in a northerly direction to north city limits. 
(2)	On the south side of Second Avenue beginning at Pine Street and extending easterly to state Route 27 (87), Oak Street. Also, on the north side of Second Avenue beginning at the Heart of Georgia Community Action Center and extending easterly to state Route 27 (87), Oak Street. 
(3)	On the north side of state Route 46 beginning at the intersection of state Route 117 and extending easterly to Foster Street. 
(4)	On the west side of Foster Street beginning at state Route 46 and extending northerly to state Route 117. 
(5)	On the south side of state Route 117 beginning at the intersection of state Route 46 and extending easterly to Foster Street. 
(Code 1982, § 16-6; Ord. of 5-13-1974, §§ 1-3; Ord. of 1-12-1981) 
Sec. 36-7. - U-turns. 
    No person operating a motor vehicle shall make a U-turn in any street. 
(Code 1982, § 16-7; Ord. of 9-25-1961, § 5) 
Sec. 36-8. - Railroad trains-Blocking streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any locomotive, irrespective of the type engine used, any train or any part of any train, to block any street crossing in the city for more than five minutes. 
(Code 1911, § 161; Code 1982, § 16-8; Ord. of 7-9-1952, § 1) 
Sec. 36-9. - Same-Maximum speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any railroad locomotive, train, or part of a train in the city in excess of a speed of 25 miles per hour. 
(Code 1911, § 190; Code 1982, § 16-9; Ord. of 6-9-1952, § 1) 
Sec. 36-10. - Riding bicycles on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on any sidewalk in the city. 
(Code 1911, §§ 7, 183; Code 1982, § 16-10) 
Sec. 36-11. - Repairing motor vehicles on streets. 
    No person shall repair, or otherwise work on, any automobile, truck, tractor or other motor vehicle on the streets, sidewalks or other public ways of the city provided, however, emergency repairs necessary in order to remove an impaired motor vehicle from the streets, sidewalks and public ways shall be permissible. 
(Code 1982, § 16-11; Ord. of 8-7-1944, § 1; Ord. of 9-25-1961, § 8) 
Sec. 36-12. - Maximum parking time in fire limits. 
    No person shall leave or otherwise park any automobile, truck, tractor or other motor vehicle on any street or other public way within the fire limits of the city for a period of time in excess of 24 hours. 
(Code 1982, § 16-12; Ord. of 8-7-1944, § 1; Ord. of 9-25-1961, § 9) 
Sec. 36-13. - No parking. 
    No parking on private business property during nonbusiness hours will be enforced provided that the owner of the private property has posted "No Parking" or "Parking For Business Customers Only" signs in a conspicuous place on the property and has requested, in writing, that the police enforce this "No Parking." 
(Ord. of 7-23-1984(3)) 
Sec. 36-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of September 27, 2010, repealed § 36-14, which pertained to commercial vehicles in residence districts; operating and parking prohibited and derived from an Ord. of June 14, 2010. 
Sec. 36-15. - Operating and parking prohibition-Commercial vehicles in residence districts. 
(a)	No person shall operate, park or leave standing on any street or portion thereof in a residence district as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city, any commercial vehicle having over six wheels. The prohibition hereby imposed shall not apply to the operating, parking or standing of such a vehicle for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries from or to any building or structure located within such residence district, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any such building or structure for which a building permit has been obtained. 
(b)	Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance shall be fined not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. of 2-11-2013(2)) 
Chapter 38 - UTILITIES AND SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 

Sec. 38-18. - Purpose. 
(a)	The purpose of this article is to comply with the rate structure established by USDA Rural Development and to further comply and implement rate structures previously approved and adopted by the former city council. 
(b)	Early on in 2005, the environmental protection division (EPD), department of natural resources of the state, made a determination that discharge from the James Avenue WWTP was contributing to the pollution of Gum Swamp Creek and that the city must begin immediate measures towards eliminating any further pollution. 
(c)	On or about March 21, 2007, a consent order was entered into between the city and EPD which obligated the city to have its proposed solution completed by November 2008 or else be obligated to pay to EPD the sum of $3,000.00 per month for noncompliance. In short, the city's project consists of expanding the Sugar Creek WWTP from 900,000 gallons per day to 1.8 million gallons per day and taking the James Avenue WWTP out of service. 
(d)	The city went forward with the project by having an engineering firm to draw up and prepare plans and specifications for the proposed project. An application was made to United States Department of Agriculture, Rural Development (USDA Rural Development) to assist the city in the financing of the improvements needed and required of the city's WWTP. USDA Rural Development approved a loan not to exceed $7,395,000.00 and a grant not to exceed $3,920,000.00. The loan and grant funds are to be administered by USDA Rural Development. The loan will be repayable over a period not to exceed 40 years from the date of loan closing. The first payment will be due one month from the date of loan closing and will be a fully amortized payment of principal and interest. All monthly payments will be due on the same date of each succeeding month for the life of the loan. 
(e)	USDA Rural Development formulated a rate structure which would produce a sufficient amount of revenue to meet the obligations necessary to make the loan feasible. The rate structure formulated by USDA Rural Development cannot in any way be altered by the city even though all members of the current city council and those of the former city council attempted to reduce the rates for all users. The system through its users must pay its own way without depending on any other funds from another source. 
(f)	On March 27, 2006, a motion was made and adopted by the city council to agree and comply with the USDA Rural Development loan requirements. 
(g)	Failure to comply with all of USDA Rural Development's regulations would result in the city's failure to obtain necessary funds to pay for the necessary improvements to the city's wastewater treatment plant. 
(h)	In order to promote the public welfare, safety and general welfare and to prevent public and private and possible devastating inconvenience, the sewer rates previously approved by city council and made a condition precedent to obtain the loan and grant from USDA Rural Development are adopted and implemented according to the schedule set forth in Schedule A which is kept and maintained by the clerk. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2008(2)) 
Sec. 38-19. - Water rates. 
    Water rates are subject to change by the council from time to time, and a schedule of rates is kept and maintained by the clerk. 
Sec. 38-20. - Water/sewer rates for units with additional units within and outside the corporate limits. 
(a)	Any single-family dwelling, apartment complex, trailer, church, organizational building, trailer park or business establishment with one meter (master meter) serving more than one family, organization or business shall pay a minimum bill (water and sewer, if available) for each family unit, organization or business. Each minimum bill shall be billed individually or on one collective billing. The master meter will be allowed 2,000 gallons per additional unit per billing month as the minimum charge and will be billed for all water and sewer fees, if applicable, over the minimum figures gallons at the normal per-1,000-gallon cost for water and sewer, if applicable. 
(b)	Garbage fees will be charged monthly according to the most recent ordinance per unit. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 38-21. - Water line extensions. 
(a)	The city will install water lines a distance of 50 feet or to property line, whichever comes first, for the regular fee for installation. 
(b)	If length of desired installation of water line is over 50 feet, the private owners of property, developers of subdivisions, developers of mobile home parks, developers of housing projects, contractors of commercial and industrial buildings and all other owners and developers will be required to pay all expenses of laying water lines, including labor, pipe, parts and etc. 
(c)	Private owners and developers will be allowed to contract with private contractors to lay pipe if desired. The city reserves the right to inspect all or any work of such private contractors. Private contractors must be bonded. 
(d)	Water lines when finished either inside the city limits or outside city limits, and when accepted by the city for water service become the property of the city, to govern as necessary. 
(Code 1982, § 10-24; Ord. of 7-13-1981, §§ 1-4) 
Secs. 38-22-38-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-46. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building data means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treating sewage presently owned or afterward acquired by the city. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit carrying sewage. 
    Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent or manager of the sewerage works of the city, or its authorized deputy, agent or representative, as designed by the governing authority. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1982, § 10-30; Ord. of 5-12-1975, §§ 1-1-1-18) 
Sec. 38-47. - Right-of-entry of city personnel. 
    The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 10-31; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 7-01) 
Sec. 38-48. - Violations-Cessation after notice. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 38-49, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(Code 1982, § 10-32; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 8-01) 
Sec. 38-49. - Same-Damage to system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person, maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, to damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage works. 
(Code 1982, § 10-33; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 6-01) 
Sec. 38-50. - Same-Punishment. 
    Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 38-49 or who shall continue any violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in section 38-48, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 for each violation. Each day in which such a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and violation. 
(Code 1982, § 10-34; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 8-02) 
Sec. 38-51. - Sewer service charges levied. 
    There is hereby assessed and levied upon each parcel of real property in the city on which is located a sewer pipe line connected onto the sewer system of the city and the owners, residents or tenants of same a monthly charge for the use and maintenance of the sewer system of the city in an amount based on the formula herein set out. 
(Code 1982, § 10-35; Ord. of 11-26-1979, § I) 
Sec. 38-52. - Sewer rates. 
    Sewer usage rates are subject to change by the council from time to time, and a rate schedule is kept and maintained by the clerk. 
Sec. 38-53. - Sewer line extensions. 
(a)	The city will install sewer lines a distance of 100 feet or to property line, whichever comes first, for the regular fee for installation. 
(b)	If length of desired installation of sewer line is over 100 feet, the private owners of property, developers of subdivisions, developers of mobile home parks, developers of housing projects, contractors of commercial and industrial buildings and all other owners and developers will be required to pay all expenses of laying sewer lines, including, labor, pipe, parts and road repair expense. 
(c)	Private owners and developers will be allowed to contract with private contractors to lay pipe if desired. The city reserves the right to inspect all or any work of such private contractors. Private contractors must be bonded. 
(d)	Sewer lines when finished either inside the city limits or outside city limits and when accepted by the city for sewer service become the property of the city, to govern as necessary. 
(Code 1982, § 10-39; Ord. of 7-13-1981, §§ 1-4; Ord. of 5-14-2012) 
Sec. 38-54. - Deposit of waste in an unsanitary manner. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1982, § 10-40; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 2-01) 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate water pollution, § 15(20). 
Sec. 38-55. - Discharge of untreated polluted waters to natural outlet. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 10-41; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 2-02) 
Sec. 38-56. - Prohibited sewage disposal facilities. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1982, § 10-42; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 2-03) 
Sec. 38-57. - Toilet facilities and sewer connection required after notice. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the corporate limits of the city and located within 200 feet of a line of a public sanitary sewer now in existence or hereafter constructed to which such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity, is hereby required at such owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with said line of public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 60 days after date of official notice so to do. 
(Code 1982, § 10-43; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 2-04) 
Secs. 38-58-38-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 38-88. - Connection required where public sewer unavailable. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 38-57, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 10-50; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 3-01) 
Sec. 38-89. - Permit-Required; addenda; fee. 
    Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $300.00 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1982, § 10-51; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 3-02) 
Sec. 38-90. - Same-Effective upon installation, inspection and approval. 
    A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(Code 1982, § 10-52; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 3-03) 
Sec. 38-91. - Compliance with state recommendations; minimum area for subsurface soil absorption facilities; prohibited septic tank discharge. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1982, § 10-53; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 3-04) 
Sec. 38-92. - Disconnection and abandonment when public sewer available. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 38-57, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1982, § 10-54; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 3-05) 
Sec. 38-93. - Operation and maintenance by owner. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1982, § 10-55; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 3-06) 
Sec. 38-94. - Additional requirements apply. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Code 1982, § 10-56; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 3-07) 
Secs. 38-95-38-116. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 38-117. - Permit to uncover, connect, etc. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(Code 1982, § 10-60; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 4-01) 
Sec. 38-118. - Connection costs and expenses; indemnity; portion to be performed by city; tap fees. 
(a)	The purpose of this section is to transfer the expense of installation and maintenance of sewer lines from the property owner to the city for that portion of the sewer line beginning at the property line of the land owner and extending to the city trunk line. Distance would be limited as specified in section 38-53. The property owner shall be responsible for all cost and expense incident to the connection of the sewer line from the owner's building to the property line and the installation of a clean-out plug at that point. Property owners presently receiving sewer service will be required to install a clean-out plug at the property line. In the event that the city trunk line is located on the property of the owner it shall be the owner's responsibility for the cost of installation and maintenance of the entire line into the city trunk line. Any work performed by the customer or his designated contractor must be inspected by the city building inspector for proper installation and sealing, prior to closing. The owner shall pay the city a standard sewer tap fee of $300.00 for residential tap and $1,000.00 per inch for commercial tap. 
(b)	In the event property owners without a clean-out plug experience sewer line problems the city water department will install a clean-out plug. Property owners will be assessed a fee of $30.00 for this service. 
(Code 1982, § 10-61; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 4-02; Ord. of 3-27-1995; Ord. of 10-2-1997) 
Sec. 38-119. - Separate connections for each building; exception. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except that where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Code 1982, § 10-62; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 4-03) 
Sec. 38-120. - Use of old sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 10-63; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 4-04) 
Sec. 38-121. - Building sewer materials. 
    The building sewer shall be cast iron pipe; ASTM Specifications A-74; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM Specifications C-13; or concrete sewer pipe, ASTM Specification C-14. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the superintendent where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1982, § 10-64; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 4-05) 
Sec. 38-122. - Size and slope of building sewer. 
    The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(Code 1982, § 10-65; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 4-06) 
Sec. 38-123. - Position of building sewer. 
    Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings. 
(Code 1982, § 10-66; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 4-07) 
Sec. 38-124. - Lifting sewage by artificial means. 
    In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1982, § 10-67; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 4-08) 
Sec. 38-125. - Excavations-Type authorized; pipe laying and backfill specifications. 
    All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C-12; except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(Code 1982, § 10-68; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 4-09) 
Sec. 38-126. - Same-Guarding; restoration of streets, etc. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1982, § 10-69; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 4-13) 
Sec. 38-127. - Joints and connections to be gastight and watertight; jointing. 
(a)	All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
(b)	Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead, federal specification QQ-L-156, not less than one inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coatings shall be permitted on the joint material until after the joint has been tested and approved. Rubber joint cast iron pipe may be used as an alternate. 
(c)	All joints in vitrified clay or concrete pipe or between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot-pouring jointing material, as specified below or by using rubber gaskets or performed, factory-applied couplings having resilient properties in accordance with ASTM Specification C-443-59T for concrete pipe and ASTM Specification C-425-64 for vitrified clay pipe, or the latest revisions thereof. 
(d)	Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit, nor be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp, or similar approved material. 
(e)	Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the superintendent. 
(Code 1982, § 10-70; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 4-10) 
Sec. 38-128. - Joining building sewer and public sewer. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the superintendent. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, which entry shall be in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1982, § 10-71; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 4-11) 
Sec. 38-129. - Notice of readiness for inspection. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
(Code 1982, § 10-72; Ord. of 5-12-1972, § 4-12) 
Secs. 38-130-38-156. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 38-157. - Discharge of unpolluted water-To sanitary sewer. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1982, § 10-80; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 5-01) 
Sec. 38-158. - Same-To storm sewer or natural outlet. 
    Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1982, § 10-81; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 5-02) 
Sec. 38-159. - Discharges prohibited without approval or control; pretreatment regulations for industrial wastes. 
(a)	Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)	Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin; or, wastewater from industrial or commercial plants containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of floatable oils, fats, or grease. 
(3)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)	Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, whole or ground paper products, or any other solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of sewerage works. 
(6)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage works. 
(7)	Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)	Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(9)	Any noxious or malodorous or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(b)	All industrial contributors proposing to discharge other than domestic sanitary wastes to the municipal system shall comply with pretreatment regulations set forth in 40 CFR 128 of the federal register. 
(Code 1982, § 10-82; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 5-03; Ord. of 9-8-1975; Ord. of 2-9-1976) 
Sec. 38-160. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors-Requirements. 
(a)	A grease trap shall be installed in all businesses where cooking for the public is a part of that business. Oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(b)	Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(Code 1982, § 10-83; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 5-04; Ord. of 3-13-1995(1)) 
Sec. 38-161. - Same-Maintenance. 
    When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at such owner's expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 1982, § 10-84; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 5-05) 
Sec. 38-162. - Discharges requiring review and approval, and preliminary treatment or flow restriction. 
(a)	The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes: 
(1)	Having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 milligrams per liter; 
(2)	Containing more than 350 milligrams per liter of suspended solids; 
(3)	Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in section 38-159; or 
(4)	Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city; 
shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(b)	Where necessary in the opinion of the superintendent the owner shall provide, at such owner's expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(1)	Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to 350 milligrams per liter; 
(2)	Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 38-159; or 
(3)	Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or wastes. 
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing. 
(Code 1982, § 10-85; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 5-06) 
Sec. 38-163. - Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner at such owner's expense. 
(Code 1982, § 10-86; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 5-07) 
Sec. 38-164. - Control manholes. 
    When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1982, § 10-87; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 5-08) 
Sec. 38-165. - Determination of measurements, tests and analyses. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in sections 38-159 and 38-162 shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage," shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in section 38-164, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Code 1982, § 10-88; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 5-09) 
Sec. 38-166. - Special agreements for discharge of industrial waste of unusual strength. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1982, § 10-89; Ord. of 5-12-1975, § 5-10) 
Secs. 38-167-38-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 38-186. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means house and kitchen offal, and all refuse matter composed of animal or vegetable substances. 
(Code 1982, § 10-100; Ord. of 4-20-1942, § 2) 
Sec. 38-187. - Accumulation of garbage in containers only; maintenance of premises free from rubbish. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, or occupant of any such premises to have, maintain, or keep any garbage on any premises except in such garbage containers as are provided for in this article. Said owner, agent or occupant shall also keep clean and free from rubbish and similar loose material all premises, whether improved or unimproved, as well as all open lots and areas. 
(Code 1982, § 10-101; Ord. of 4-20-1942, § 3) 
Sec. 38-188. - Collection and disposal by city; supervision; promulgation of regulations. 
    All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city under the supervision of the city manager. The city manager shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance, and disposal of garbage as such officer shall find necessary and to change and modify the same after reasonable notice to the citizens of the city, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provision of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 10-102; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 2) 
Sec. 38-189. - Curbside Roll Cart system-Only approved system for residential customers. 
(a)	The provisions of this section apply only to the Curbside Roll Cart system. Except as provided herein, the Curbside Roll Cart System shall be the only approved system for the use by residential customers in the city. 
(b)	The carts shall remain the property of the city and will be assigned to residents for the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the occupant. 
(c)	The person having authority to control the disposal of garbage in any household shall cause all garbage collected therein to be placed in a receptacle by the city and placed at the curb on scheduled collection day. 
(d)	Weight. The combined weight of a container and its contents shall not exceed 200 pounds and container shall not be filled to overflowing. 
(e)	Identification. Where more than one family occupies a dwelling or apartment, the garbage receptacles shall be marked by the city so as to indicate the family using the particular garbage receptacle. The receptacle may be identified by putting the apartment number thereon or the name of the household. When receptacles are so identified, such receptacle may be used only by the person whose name or other identification is shown thereon. 
(f)	Lost, stolen or damaged containers. Any residential container provided by the city which becomes lost, stolen, or damaged shall be replaced by the city and cost for such replacement shall be borne by the city or property owner depending upon the circumstances of damages or disappearance. The city shall be sole determiner as to responsibility. Containers which are damaged through normal usage shall be repaired or replaced by the city. Containers which are abused or damaged as a result of negligence by occupant will be repaired and/or replaced by the occupant. 
(g)	Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant to maintain all garbage containers serving his property in a clean and sanitary manner, free of obnoxious odors, maggots, insects and rodents, or any other conditions which may render them unhealthy to the occupants of the apartment or the neighborhood in compliance with state and county health code requirements. 
(h)	Location. Receptacles provided to residences by the city as provided in this section shall be placed in the area between the sidewalk and curb or in an accessible place approved by the public works department. Containers shall not be placed at the curb side before 5:00 p.m. on the day preceding the collection day and shall be removed from the curb side when collected on collection day. Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the public works department for persons with physical limitations which prevent placement of the garbage receptacles at the curb, provided such person submits a written request for said exception. 
(i)	Time of collection. The public works department shall provide a schedule to each residence receiving garbage collection service from the city which shall indicate the day on which such collection will be made. 
(j)	Garbage. The following items may be placed in the containers: Garbage hereby defined as domestic wastes composed of meats, vegetable and fruit scraps, cans, glass, paper, cardboard, rags, and other such waste matter normally to be disposed of from residences, eating establishments, and other businesses. 
(Code 1982, § 10-103; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 6) 
Sec. 38-190. - Same-Separate for garbage, ashes and rubbish. 
    Garbage, ashes and rubbish shall each be placed and maintained in separate containers so as to make convenient the collection thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 10-105; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 3) 
Sec. 38-191. - Same-To be kept covered. 
    Containers shall be kept tightly covered at all times except when momentarily open to receive garbage or to have the contents removed. 
(Code 1982, § 10-106; Ord. of 4-20-1942, § 2) 
Sec. 38-192. - Same-Placement for emptying. 
    Refuse containers shall be placed for collection at ground level on the property not within the right-of-way of a street or alley and shall be accessible to and not more than 50 feet from the side of the street or alley from which collection is made. However, the city may make a specific exception in this respect. 
(Code 1982, § 10-107; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 10) 
Sec. 38-193. - Containers for businesses-Required. 
    The operator, owner or manager of any place of business within the city shall provide a container or bin for the deposit of rubbish, empty boxes, useless paper, floor sweepings and other forms of trash arising on the premises on which said business is conducted. 
(Code 1982, § 10-108; Ord. of 5-8-1967, § 1) 
Sec. 38-194. - Same-Placement. 
    Such containers for the deposit of rubbish and trash from businesses shall be placed at the rear of such place of business, if possible; otherwise adjacent to such place of business and accessible to the collectors sanitary department of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 10-109; Ord. of 5-8-1967, § 2) 
Sec. 38-195. - Same-Depositing refuse therein. 
    The owner, operator, manager or other employee of every place of business in the city shall deposit all rubbish, empty boxes, useless paper, floor sweepings and other forms of trash arising from such business in such container. 
(Code 1982, § 10-110; Ord. of 5-8-1967, § 3) 
Sec. 38-196. - Refuse from businesses not to be placed on streets. 
    No owner, operator, manager or employee of any business within the city shall deposit rubbish, empty boxes, useless paper, floor sweepings and other forms of trash coming from the premises on which such business is conducted on the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 10-111; Ord. of 5-8-1967, § 4) 
Sec. 38-197. - Placement for collection of tree trimmings. 
(a)	All yard waste including leaves, grass clippings, straw, limbs, shrubbery trimmings, etc., will be placed on the curb for pickup on assigned days. There must be no other types of materials mixed with these products. 
(b)	All leaves, grass clippings and straw may be bagged in only biodegradable bags. 
(c)	Limbs up to three inches in diameter will be cut in four-foot lengths maximum and piled separately. Limbs and trees larger than three inches in diameter cut by the owner or his contractor will not be picked up by solid waste management authority and must be disposed of by the owner. 
(d)	Limbs and trees larger than three inches in diameter that are blown down by wind storm must be cut up in four-foot lengths and will be picked up by solid waste management authority. 
(e)	Demolition materials such as roof shingles, metal roofing, sheetrock, blocks, bricks and other related materials resulting from home repairs or building construction will be the responsibility of the property owner to dispose of. 
(f)	Failure to comply with this article shall be deemed a violation. 
(Code 1982, § 10-112; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 4; Ord. of 8-24-1998; Ord. of 4-23-2012) 
Sec. 38-198. - Removal of bedding and refuse from places where disease exists. 
    The removal of bedding or other refuse from homes and other places where highly infectious and contagious disease has prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the county health officer. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collection. 
(Code 1982, § 10-113; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 13) 
Sec. 38-199. - Disposal of inflammable and explosive materials. 
    Highly inflammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection, but shall be disposed of as directed by the city at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 10-114; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 14) 
Sec. 38-200. - Limitation on quantity. 
(a)	The city manager shall require collection of a reasonable accumulation of refuse at each dwelling during a collection period. The city manager shall require a collection for a reasonable accumulation from restaurants, businesses and institutions during the collection period. For any excessive or unreasonably large volume of refuse and garbage, the city manager shall make prior arrangements with the person or institution accumulating such refuse and may provide for an extra charge or service fee for an unreasonably large accumulation of refuse. 
(b)	Commercial yard and tree service companies operating in the city shall be responsible for hauling all limbs, trees, and other by-products to a designated landfill and paying all required fees. 
(Code 1982, § 10-115; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 12; Ord. of 6-11-2001) 
Sec. 38-201. - Frequency of collection. 
    Refuse accumulated at residences shall be collected at least twice a month. Commercial establishments and restaurants and such other businesses and institutions as may deem it necessary, may enter into an agreement with the city for a greater frequency of collection. Where necessary to protect the public health, the city manager shall have the authority to require that more frequent collections be made. 
(Code 1982, § 10-116; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 11; Ord. of 9-24-1998) 
Sec. 38-202. - Individual collection and disposal of garbage and refuse. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or occupant of any premises located within the city, to convey or dispose of garbage produced or accumulated within the city. 
(b)	This article shall not prohibit the actual producers of refuse, other than garbage, or the owners of premises upon which refuse, other than garbage, has accumulated from personally collecting, conveying or disposing of such refuse, provided such producers or owners comply with the provisions of this article and with any other governing law, ordinance and regulation. Such owner shall convey such refuse to the approved land fill provided for such purposes and obey and comply with rules governing the use thereof. 
(c)	The city manager shall have the authority to make such reasonable rules and regulations concerning individual collection and disposal and relating to the hauling of refuse, other than garbage, by the actual producers of such refuse, other than garbage, or the owners of premises upon which refuse, other than garbage, has accumulated, subject to the adoption and approval of such rules and regulations by the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 10-117; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 15; Ord. of 5-29-1984(2), § I) 
Sec. 38-203. - Assessment of garbage fee; collection and enforcement. 
(a)	All garbage accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city under supervision of the city manager and there shall be a garbage service fee assessed and collected for the collection and disposal of garbage accumulated and produced within the city. 
(b)	The fee and assessment for garbage service shall be set in such amounts and based upon and in accordance with such classifications of property and sanitary service or services provided as scheduled by the city manager, subject to the approval and adoption by the city council. 
(c)	Any fee, as provided in this article, shall be an assessment to be charged and a lien against the real estate in respect to which the fees are so assessed, and the owner thereof. 
(d)	The city manager shall have the authority to enforce, to levy and collect such fees and take all necessary steps to enforce the payment and collection of such fees imposed in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1982, § 10-118; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 17; Ord. of 5-29-1984(2), § II) 
Sec. 38-204. - Violations. 
    Failure to comply with the rules and regulations and directions as provided for in this article shall be deemed a violation thereof and punishment shall be administered as for a violation of this Code. The city manager shall determine when violations occur and report same to the chief of police for proper corrective action or prosecution. 
(Code 1982, § 10-119; Ord. of 7-28-1975, § 17) 
Sec. 38-205. - Dumping septage. 
    The following is the policy established by the city council concerning the use of the city sewage system for dumping septage: 
(1)	No grease from traps will be accepted. 
(2)	A charge of $30.00 per 300-gallon load will be assessed. 
(3)	All dumps will be made at the lift station on Legion Drive located between Herman Avenue and Cooper Avenue. 
(4)	A city employee will be available to unlock facility and oversee dumping operation. 
(5)	For access call 374-4077, if no answer call 374-7721. Weekend and emergency night calls 374-3731 (fire station and employee will be paged). 
(6)	Anyone found dumping into the city sewage system in other than the area specified in this section or without specific authority from the city will be subject to a fine of up to $500.00. 
(Ord. of 3-8-1993) 
Chapter 40 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Certificates of public convenience and necessity, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-25; franchise tax, O.C.G.A. § 45-5-420 et seq.; motor vehicle insurance, self-insurance, minimum benefits, O.C.G.A. § 33-34-5.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1-40-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 40-19. - Conduct of business constitutes a privilege. 
    The transportation of passengers for hire in a motor vehicle upon the streets of the city, and other public places therein, not on a regular route and schedule and not between fixed termini, is not an inherent right, but is a privilege which the city council, in the exercise of its discretion, may grant or revoke. 
(Code 1982, § 17-20; Ord. of 4-23-1951, § 3) 
Sec. 40-20. - Compliance with article prerequisite to operation. 
    Before any person, either as owner or as driver, shall operate a motor vehicle upon the streets and other public places as a carrier of passengers for hire, not on a regular route and schedule, and not between fixed termini, which vehicle is commonly known as cab, taxi or taxicab, such person shall first comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 17-21; Ord. of 4-23-1951, § 4) 
Sec. 40-21. - License-Required. 
    No person shall operate a taxi upon the streets and other public places in the city without a license to do so, nor shall any person so operate a taxi after such license shall have been revoked by the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 17-22; Ord. of 4-23-1951, § 9) 
Sec. 40-22. - Same-Application; insurance; issuance; denial. 
(a)	Any person desiring a license to operate taxis shall make application with the city manager, addressed to the city council, seeking permission to operate such taxicab on the streets and other public places in the city. Said application shall give the name of the owner of such proposed taxis, the name of the drivers of such proposed taxis and a description of the vehicles proposed to be operated as taxis. 
(b)	Each application shall be accompanied with a policy of insurance commonly known as public liability and property damage insurance, in the minimum amount of $5,000.00 property damage, $25,000.00 personal injury to any one person and $50,000.00 personal injury in any one accident. Each insurance policy shall have an endorsement thereon, requiring the insurer to notify the city of any lapse or cancellation of the policy. 
(c)	Said application and insurance policy shall be presented to the city council at its next meeting, which thereupon shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, the applicant, the owner and the driver thereof. 
(d)	After such investigation, the city council will grant or refuse the application to operate a taxi. In the event of a refusal, the council will grant the applicant a hearing, and the council, after a careful consideration of all of the facts and circumstances, in its discretion, will grant or deny the applicant a license. A separate license to operate a taxi must be granted for each vehicle and for each driver. 
(Code 1982, § 17-23; Ord. of 4-23-1951, § 6) 
Sec. 40-23. - Same-Form; display. 
    The license to operate a taxi on the streets and other public places in the city shall be in such form as the city manager may determine and shall be kept in plain view in the vehicle so licensed, showing the correct description of the vehicle, the name of the owner thereof, and the name of the driver. 
(Code 1982, § 17-24; Ord. of 4-23-1951, § 7) 
Sec. 40-24. - Same-Revocable. 
    The license to operate a taxi on the streets and other public places in the city, granted by the city council, is a privilege, and is revocable, in the discretion of the council, at will. 
(Code 1982, § 17-25; Ord. of 4-23-1951, § 8) 
Sec. 40-25. - Vehicle identification. 
    Each person receiving a license to operate a taxi in the city shall have plainly printed on each side and on the back of such motor vehicle in clear view and in letters not less than two inches in height, the words "TAXICAB ____________ OWNER," showing the correct name of the true owner of the business in the blank space, or illuminated top cab light which must be lighted at night. 
(Code 1982, § 17-26; Ord. of 4-23-1951, § 5) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix A consists of the zoning ordinance and resolution enacted by the city and the county in 1970. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. The ordinance is included herein substantially as enacted. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

FOREWORD 
    Zoning is a governmental tool that is designed to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the people of Eastman, Georgia, through the regulation of land use. The objectives of this ordinance are: 
(1)	To establish zoning districts where land development appropriate to a given district will be encouraged to develop in that particular district rather than in other parts of the city. This step is designed to prevent the inharmonious use of land and the accompanying decrease in property values. Zoning can stimulate residential, commercial, and industrial construction in Eastman by providing specific areas where such types of development can take place on a logical basis with minimum interference from surrounding land development. 
(2)	To establish area, yard, and height requirements whereby buildings in certain districts are: (a) required to be set back certain distances from the street, and from side and rear lot lines; (b) have a minimum lot area; and (c) conform to reasonable height limitations. The basic purpose of these regulations is to prevent overcrowding and to insure adequate light and air. 
(3)	To require adequate off-street parking and loading in certain commercial and industrial areas. In future years, this will materially lessen traffic congestion and will provide better access to business and industrial areas, thereby benefiting both the city and the owners and developers of such properties. 
TITLE 
    An ordinance for the City of Eastman, Georgia, regulating the height and size of buildings and other structures, the size of yards, the density and distribution of the population, the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, sanitation, and other purposes; creating districts for said purpose and establishing the boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the method of administration, appeal and amendment; and providing for the imposition of penalties for the violation of the provisions of this ordinance. 
PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
    In pursuance of the authority conferred by the Georgia General Planning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morale, convenience, order, prosperity or the general welfare of the City of Eastman, lessening congestion on the streets, securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; promoting desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; protecting property against blight and depreciation; conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and other buildings and structures throughout the municipality, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan, the City Council of Eastman, Georgia, does ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections. 
    WHEREAS, by the provision of General Assembly of 1957, pages 420-443 as amended, Chapter 69-12 of the Code of Georgia, authority is conferred upon the City of Eastman and the County of Dodge, Georgia, to establish districts or zones within their jurisdictions for the purpose of regulating the use of land and buildings. 
    WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Eastman, Georgia, deems it necessary in order to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public services and otherwise to promote the public safety, health, convenience, and general welfare in logical manner. 
    WHEREAS, there is rapid expansion and growth occurring in the City of Eastman and new streets are being constructed or are to be soon constructed, all of which makes the need for an adequate zoning ordinance and resolution immediate and imperative, the Eastman-Dodge County Planning Commission is hereby authorized to hear and make recommendations on zoning matters to the responsible governing authority within the corporate limits of Eastman, Georgia. 
ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE 

Sec. 11. - Scope. 
    This ordinance and resolution and map shall be known as the "Official Zoning Ordinance" and the map hereinafter referred to which is identified by the title "Official Zoning Map, City of Eastman, Georgia," shall be known as the "Official Zoning Map." 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 21. - Enumeration. 
    Except as specifically defined herein all words used in this ordinance have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance and resolution certain terms and words are herein defined as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure", and the word "shall" is mandatory and not permissive. 
    Accessory building or use: A subordinate building or use the purpose of which is incidental to that of the principal use or of the main building. 
    Automobile sales or storage yards or lots: Open premises used for the storage or sale of complete and operable automobiles. 
    Basement: A story partially below grade having at least one-half (1/2) of its height above the grade of the lot upon which it is situated. A basement shall be counted as a story if used for dwelling or business purposes. 
    Buffer strip: A planted strip of vegetation five (5) feet wide that when first planted is not shorter than three (3) feet and the anticipated growth height of which after two (2) years will be six (6) to eight (8) feet. 
    Building: A structure for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels. When separated from the ground up without openings, or connections, each portion of such building shall be deemed a separate building. 
    Building height: The vertical distance measured from the level of the established grade opposite the middle of the front of the building, to the highest point of the roof surface of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip, or gabled roof. For building set back from the street, or right-of-way line, the height may be measured from the average elevation of the natural grade along the front of the buildings, provided its distance from the street or right-of-way line is not less than the height of such grade above the established grade of the street. In case of through lots, or double front lots, the established grade of such abutting street shall govern to one-half (1/2) the depth of the lot. 
    Building line setback: The distance between the building line and the street line in a district, lot, tract, or parcel of land. 
    Building, main (main building): A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which the same is situated. "Main building" when used with reference to ground coverage shall mean the dimensions of the dwelling with the porches and garages, when same are under one roof. 
    Bulk plant or station: A place where petroleum products or other flammable liquids are stored for wholesale purposes only, where the total capacity of all storage tanks is more than twelve thousand (12,000) gallons. 
    Cellar: A room or story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for purposes of height measured. 
    Comprehensive plan: Any officially accepted part or element of the comprehensive plan by the City of Eastman and/or the Commissioner of Dodge County. 
    Court: A required open, unoccupied space on the same lot and fully enclosed on at least three (3) adjacent sides by walls in any building. An outer area facing for its full required width on a street, or any other required open space is not a court. An inner court is any other required court. Vegetation may be planted in a court. 
    Dwelling unit: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes by one family. 
    Dwelling, single-family (single-family dwelling): A building containing, but one housekeeping unit, and designed or used to house not more than one family in a permanent manner, which may include not more than two (2) boarders or lodgers. 
    Dwelling, multi-family (multi-family dwelling): A building designed for, or portion of a building having accommodations for, three (3) or more families being independent of each other, and each having its own kitchen and bath facilities. This term includes premises occupied more or less permanently for residential purposes in which the rooms are occupied in apartments, suites, or groups such as apartment units, tenement houses, flats, apartment hotels, bachelor apartments, studio apartments, kitchenette apartments, and all other dwellings similarly occupied except hotels and motels. 
    Dwelling, two-family (two-family dwelling): A building containing two (2) housekeeping units, and designed or used to house two (2) families, living independently of each other, each of which may include not more than two (2) lodgers or boarders. 
    Family: One or more persons including their direct descendants and adopted children (and including the domestic employees thereof) together with not more than two (2) persons not so related, living together in a room or rooms comprising a single dwelling unit. 
    Frontage: The distance for which property abuts one side of a street, road, or highway, or other public way measured along the dividing lines(s) between the property and such road, or highway or other public way. 
    Frontage roadway or access street: A roadway contiguous to and generally paralleling an expressway, major street or highway, or through street or highway, and so designed as to intercept, collect and distribute traffic desiring to cross, enter, or leave such facility, and to furnish access to property which otherwise would be isolated as a result of any controlled-access features. 
    Garage, private (private garage): A garage intended for and owned or used by the members of families resident upon the premises, provided that not more than one-half (1/2) of the garage space may be rented for private vehicles owned or used by persons not resident on the premises, except that all the space in a garage of one or two-car capacity may be so rented. Such a garage shall not include those used by more than one commercial vehicle per family resident on the premises, and no such commercial vehicle shall exceed two (2) ton capacity; nor shall such garage provide for the repair or equipping of such vehicles. 
    Garage, public (public garage): Any garage not included within the definition of a private garage. 
    Governing body having jurisdiction: The City Council of Eastman, Georgia. 
    Home occupations: Any occupation or profession engaged in by any occupant of a dwelling not including the conduct of a retail business, or a manufacturing business or a repair business of any kind on the premises. "Home occupation" shall not include any occupation conducted in any building on the premises other than the principal building which is used by the occupant on his or her private dwelling and shall not include the employment of any additional person in the performance of such services. Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor space shall be devoted to this use. Such home occupations shall not include clairvoyance, fortune telling, experimentations that involve the use of chemicals or matter or energy that may create or cause to be created noises, noxious odors, or hazards that will endanger the health, safety, or welfare, of the community, or detract from the residential nature of the district. 
    Hotel: Any building containing sleeping rooms for more or less temporary occupancy of individuals who are lodged for compensation, with or without meals, with no provision made for any cooking in any individual room or suite. 
    Institution: Any building or group of buildings used for public or private educational, religious, civic or other similar purpose, usually on a non-profit basis. 
    Lodging[house] or boardinghouse: A building designed or used for the more or less permanent occupancy with or without meals, of more than two (2) lodgers or boarders whether the compensation be paid directly or indirectly. 
    Lot of record: A lot or parcel of land the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Dodge County, Georgia. 
    Lot, corner (corner lot): A lot which abuts on two (2) or more streets, and/or roads, at their intersection. 
    Lot depth: The distance between front and rear lot lines; if two (2) opposite sides of said lot are not parallel, the depth shall be deemed to be the mean distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, interior (interior lot): A lot which is not a corner lot. 
    Lot line, front (front lot line): The front lot line of an interior lot is the line separating the lot from the easement of principal access. The front lot line of a corner lot shall be the lot line with the least frontage. 
    Lot line, rear (rear lot line): The rear lot line is the boundary opposite and more or less parallel to the front lot line. The rear lot line of an irregular or triangular lot shall be for the purposes of this ordinance and resolution a line not less than ten (10) feet long, lying wholly within the lot, and parallel to and at the farthest distant from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side (side lot line): A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street line is an exterior side lot line. Any other side lot line is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot, through (through lot): A lot, the depth of which extends between two (2), more or less parallel streets and having frontage on each street. 
    Lot width: The width of the lot measured at right angles to the mean depth of said lot. 
    Motel: Any building containing sleeping rooms for the more or less temporary occupancy of individuals who are lodged for compensation with or without meals, and where the design favors a direct vehicular approach to each sleeping or living room. Any building or structure exceeding two and one-half (21/2) stories in height shall be classified as a hotel rather than a motel. 
    Nonconforming use: Any use of a building or of land that does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is situated, but which was an existing and lawful use prior to the adoption of this ordinance and resolution. 
    Parking lot, accessory: A parcel of land used by an individual, partnership, firm or corporation in any commercial or industrial district exclusively for the parking of vehicles of its employees or customers and for which no charge is made. 
    Parking space: An area of appropriate dimensions of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, exclusive of access or maneuvering area, to be used exclusively as a temporary storage space for private motor vehicles. Truck loading and unloading space shall not be included in such area. When the application of a unit of measurement for parking spaces to a particular use or structure results in a fractional space, any fraction under one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded and fractions of one-half (1/2) or over shall be counted as one additional required space. 
    Planning commission: This refers to the Eastman-Dodge County Planning Commission, which meets the third Monday of each month. 
    Planting strip: The portion of the street between the curb or pavement edge and the property line exclusive of the area occupied by the sidewalk. 
    Sign, billboard: Any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numbers, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trade marks by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an individual, a firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, or a commodity or product, which are visible from any public street or highway and used to attract attention. This applies to freestanding devices attached to a building or structure also. 
    Stable, horse (horse stable): A structure intended for the accommodation of one or more horses or mules. 
    Story: The vertical distance of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and ceiling next above it, provided that a cellar shall not be considered a story. Attic space is construed as one-half (1/2) story. 
    Street: A public thoroughfare, twenty (20) feet or more wide, where public title to land extends between right-of-way lines. Whenever the sense of the law or these regulations so require, the word "street" shall include avenue, drive, circle, road, highway, or similar terms as they are generally understood. 
    Street grade: The established grade of the front street or other higher street upon which the lot abuts at the mid-point of the frontage of the lot thereon. If there is no established grade, the director of public works shall be consulted and his approval obtained as to the ultimate grade to be established by the owner. 
    Street line or right-of-way line: The dividing line between a lot, its property line or lines, and a public right-of-way, a public street, road, or highway; or a private street, road, or highway, over which two (2) or more abutting owners have an easement or right-of-way. 
    Street width: The horizontal distance between the side lines of a street, road or highway measured at right angles to the side lines. 
    Structural alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, floor joists, or roof joints, or exterior supports. 
    Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development for purposes other than agricultural. It includes resubdivision and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. 
    Trailer, mobile home: Any vehicle with or without its own motive power, designed and so constructed as to permit occupancy thereof as a temporary or permanent dwelling unit or sleeping place for one or more persons, and mounted on wheels or designed to be so mounted and transported. 
    Trailer park: Any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon which two (2) or more trailer coaches are placed, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such park. 
    Variance: Deviation from the terms of the ordinance that are not contrary to the public interest. 
    Yard: An unoccupied area of a lot, open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except for vegetation, or as otherwise provided in this ordinance and resolution. 
    Yard, front (front yard): An open space extending the full width of a lot and of a depth measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line. 
    Yard, rear (rear yard): An open space extending the full width of a lot and of a depth measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side (side yard): An open space extending along the side line of a lot between the front yard and the rear yard and of a width measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 31. - Zoning affects every structure and use. 
    Upon the effective date of adoption of this ordinance and resolution, no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, moved, remodeled, extended, enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the zoning district in which it is located, or so provided by the planning commission and city council, if in the City of Eastman, or by the planning commission, if outside the corporate limits of the City of Eastman. 
Sec. 32. - Continuing existing uses. 
    Any building, structure or use lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance and resolution may be continued as a nonconforming use even though such building, structure, or use does not conform with[to] the provisions of this ordinance and resolution for the use district in which it is located. Similarly, whenever a use district shall be changed hereafter, the then existing lawful use may be continued, as a nonconforming use. 
Sec. 33. - Nonconforming uses. 
    No building, structure, or premises containing a nonconforming use shall hereafter be extended, altered, rebuilt or repaired after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of its replacement costs, unless such extension or alteration shall conform to the provisions of the zoning district in which it is located, except as stated in section 31, above. 
Sec. 34. - Restoring unsafe buildings. 
    Nothing in this ordinance and resolution shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the building inspector, or from complying with his lawful requirements, as long as the proper procedures outlined in Article XIII are followed. 
Sec. 35. - Intersection visibility and corner setback. 
    In all zones no construction, fence, hedge, shrubbery, or other obstruction, except buildings in B-2 zones, preventing a clear view which extends over three (3) feet in height, shall be permitted at any corner of intersecting streets where either or both of the streets are less than sixty (60) feet in width, within the area formed by the legs of a triangle the apex of which is the point of intersection of the center line of the traveled roadways and the legs of which are sixty (60) feet in length along the center lines, and the hypotenuse of which is the line connecting the ends of said legs. Exception shall be made for utility poles, lighting standards, post office mail boxes, city or state traffic signs, and trees, the branches of which are kept trimmed to a height of seven (7) feet above the ground. 
Sec. 36. - Sign or billboard. 
(36.1)	In each of the use districts, no sign, billboard structure, or obstruction of any character, other than buildings, shall be erected closer than seventy-five (75) feet to the center line of any street, except that standard highway signs and markers which the Georgia State Highway Department and the City of Eastman may authorize shall be permitted within the right-of-way of any street or road. Required house numbers shall be excepted from this provision. 
(36.2)	No sign whatsoever, whether temporary or permanent, except traffic control signs and signals and information signs erected by an authorized public agency or department, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way and must be ten (10) feet from the edge of the pavement or outside the right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
(36.3)	Such signs referred to in paragraphs (36.1) and (36.2) will be erected only after securing a permit from the building inspector on forms to be provided by him. Permits will be subject to the approval of the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2007; Ord. of 11-23-2015) 
Sec. 37. - Public parking areas; design standards. 
    Every parcel of land which after the effective date of this ordinance and resolution is changed to a public parking area shall be developed as follows: 
(37.1)	Such area where subject to heavy traffic shall be paved or have equivalent surfacing subject to the approval of the building inspector. 
(37.2)	Where such adjoins a lot in a Residential district, a solid wall, fence or compact planting screen at least five (5) feet high shall be erected and maintained between such area and the Residential district. Such enclosures shall be at least five (5) feet from the side of a lot in a Residential district, and all required front and side yards shall be properly maintained. 
(37.3)	Any light used to illuminate said parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect light away from the Residential district. 
(37.4)	All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of access and egress to streets, alleys, and maneuvering areas. No curb cuts in any zone shall exceed forty (40) feet in length. Detailed plans shall be submitted to the building inspector for approval of all driveway openings or curb cuts before a permit may be obtained. 
Sec. 38. - Special purpose off-street loading space. 
(38.1)	Authority to require loading facilities: On or after the effective date of this ordinance and resolution, no permit for a new business or industrial structure or use shall be issued unless there is included with the plan for such structure, or use, a plot plan showing the required off-street loading facilities. 
(38.2)	Off-street loading: On any premise in business and industrial districts on which is conducted any new business or industrial use, there shall be provided space as follows: 
A.	Off-street loading space shall be provided with an access to an alley or street. 
B.	One loading berth for each fifty (50) feet of building width up to five thousand (5,000) square feet of ground floor area, except that none shall be required for three thousand (3,000) square feet or less. 
C.	One additional loading berth for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof over the first five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area. 
D.	Such loading berth shall be not less than ten (10) feet in width, thirty (30) feet in length, and fifteen (15) feet in height. 
(38.3)	Design standards: Same as for public parking areas. See Section 37. 
Sec. 39. - General land provision. 
(39.1)	[Height limitation of building or structure]. Except as hereinafter provided (Article XII), no building or structure shall be erected or enlarged or reconstructed to exceed the height limit established for the zone wherein such building or structure is located. 
(39.2)	[Conforming to area regulations of zone]. Except as hereinafter provided (Article XII), no building or structure shall be erected on a lot unless such building or structure conforms with[to] the area regulations of the zone in which it is located. (Article XI.) 
(A)	Reduction of lot area: No lot shall be so reduced or diminished, that the yards, other open spaces or total lot area shall be smaller than that prescribed by this ordinance and resolution, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the regulations herein established. 
(B)	Lots of record with less than minimum area: Lots of record at the time of enactment of this ordinance and resolution which have less than the minimum requirements for Residential zones may nevertheless be used for uses or buildings permitted in the respective zones. All other lots in a Residence zone shall be for uses prescribed for the zone in which they are located. 
(39.3)	[Required yards and open space]. Required yards apply to only one building: No required yard or other open space around an existing building, or which is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance and resolution shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot where a building is to be erected. 
(39.4)	Building lines: Front building line shall conform to the average building line in a developed block, but in no case shall it be less than ten (10) feet. Where there is undeveloped land for a distance of three hundred (300) feet on both sides of a proposed building, the minimum building line setback shall be the required distance from the established right-of-way as described in Article XI. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 41. - Established. 
    For the purpose of regulating and restricting the location of trades, industries, and other uses, and the location of buildings designed, erected, altered, moved, or occupied for specified purposes; to regulate and limit the height, bulk, and size of buildings hereafter erected, altered or moved; to regulate and limit the density of population and vehicular congestion; the City of Eastman, Georgia, are[is] hereby divided into the following use districts or zones, to-wit: 
(1)	Agricultural districts to be known as "A" zoning districts. 
(2)	Residential districts to be known as "R" zoning districts. 
(3)	Professional districts to be known as "P" zoning districts. 
(4)	Business districts to be known as "B" zoning districts, and 
(5)	Industrial districts to be known as "I" zoning districts. 
Sec. 42. - Designating on map; conformance. 
    The zoning districts referred to above shall be designated by boundaries upon the official zoning map which is expressly made a part of this ordinance and resolution. No building shall be erected, altered, moved, or occupied, or premises be used for any purposes other than a purpose permitted by this ordinance and resolution in a zoning district in which such buildings or premises are located. 
Sec. 43. - Determining boundaries. 
    Unless otherwise indicated, the zone boundaries are lot lines, the center lines of streams, streets, railroad rights-of-way, or such lines extended. 
Sec. 44. - Interpretation of map. 
    Where the street layout on the ground varies from the layout as shown on the official zoning map, the planning commission shall interpret said map according to the reasonable intent of this ordinance and resolution. 
ARTICLE V. - USE PROVISIONS FOR AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 50. - General intent. 
    It is the intent of this ordinance [and resolution] that certain designated agricultural areas be preserved for present and anticipated agricultural and open space uses. 
Sec. 51. - Agricultural district, A-1. 
    The A-1 zone is established to preserve certain land areas for agricultural use; to discourage non-agricultural development so as to provide areas of open space; and to provide building sites for future urban development. 
    The following uses are permitted in the A-1 district: 
(51.1)	Any type of agricultural pursuits including the raising of livestock. 
(51.2)	Any facilities provided as a public service. 
(51.3)	Any commercial recreational enterprise. 
(51.4)	Mobile home parks, providing they meet the requirements as outlined in section 124. 
ARTICLE VI. - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 61. - Purpose. 
    The single-family residential districts are established to protect the existing areas of primary low density single-family residential development and to provide for and encourage similar or complementary type development in the future together with the associated recreational, educational, and religious facilities. 
Sec. 62. - Permitted uses in single-family residential district (R-1). 
(62.1)	Single-family detached dwelling for one housekeeping unit only. There shall be a minimum of one parking space per dwelling unit. Trailer parks and/or mobile home parks are expressly prohibited in the R-1 district. 
(62.2)	Public parking area where the area adjoins a business or industrial zone, provided such transitional use does not extend more than one hundred (100) feet into an "R" zone, and is properly screened with a buffer strip. 
(62.3)	Upon approval of location by the city council and after recommendation by the planning commission: 
(A)	Religious uses: churches, synagogues, Sunday schools, convents, etc. 
(B)	Educational uses: churches and private schools and institutions of higher learning including dormitories, fraternity and sorority houses. 
(C)	Cemeteries. 
(D)	Governmental uses: municipal, county, state and federal uses which are necessary to the general public welfare, such as community buildings, schools, parks, recreation centers, water storage tanks, pump houses, etc., but excluding such uses as incinerators, dumps, garages, machine or equipment shops, equipment and material storage yards, etc. Such structures shall be architecturally harmonious with the general character of the surrounding areas or screened by use of a buffer strip. 
(E)	Quasi-public service uses: utility company facilities on premises which are necessary for the convenience and general welfare of the public such as telephone exchanges, pump houses, transformer, substations, pressure reducers, cable easements, etc., where not more than two (2) persons are inhabiting such buildings or structures, but excluding such uses as garages, machine or equipment shops, equipment and material storage yards, etc. Such structures shall be architecturally harmonious with the general character of the surrounding area or screened by use of a buffer strip. 
(F)	Club or fraternal organization (non-profit). 
(G)	Golf course, tennis courts, and similar recreational uses of a non-commercial nature, and specifically excluding commercial driving ranges, miniature golf courses and similar uses. 
(H)	Hospitals and convalescent homes, but excluding alcoholic sanatoriums, and mental hospitals. 
(I)	Nurseries and day care centers. 
(J)	Single family mobile homes or single-family manufactured homes. 
(62.4)	Upon approval of the city council, customary uses including home occupation or the office or studio of any person authorized by law to practice a profession, or render a service provided that: 
(A)	Personal services only are rendered; 
(B)	No stock in trade is kept or commodities sold on premises, except by permission of city council; 
(C)	Not more than one non-resident of the household is employed; 
(D)	The applicable codes of the City of Eastman shall govern the size of electrical wiring, plumbing, etc., which shall be installed before such uses may begin; 
(E)	The home occupation in the judgment of the city council will not be hazardous or injurious to the welfare of the public; and 
(F)	The residential character or the dwelling is not changed, nor the dwelling extended to permit a home occupation except as recommended by the planning commission permitted by the city council. 
(62.5)	Accessory structures. 
(A)	No accessory living quarters, garage apartments, etc. shall be located in an "R-1" zone, except that a bona fide guest house where no rent is paid, or servants' quarters shall be permitted upon a lot. Such accessory building shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to any lot line unless the lot is a corner lot; then those requirements prevail. 
(B)	Where the rear yard abuts upon a street, no accessory building shall be closer to the lot line than the required building setback for the zone. 
(C)	No billboard, sign board, or advertising sign shall be permitted as an accessory structure larger than eight (8) square feet. 
(D)	Accessory structures may generally be considered as private garages, stables, storehouses, green houses, children's playhouses, summer houses, and home workshops, and swimming pools. 
(E)	Any temporary structure erected to facilitate construction or for temporary shelter will not require permitting. If this type structure remains for more than ninety (90) days it must be permitted through the normal channels. 
(62.6)	Signs, billboards, etc.: Except as provided in sections (36.1) and (62.5)(C), no signs, billboards, or advertising matter shall be permitted. 
(62.7)	Non-commercial, truck gardens and green houses. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1995, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-23-1995; Ord. of 11-23-2015) 
Sec. 63. - Permitted uses in single-family residential district (R-1A). 
    Any use permitted in an R-1 zone shall apply in the R-1A Single-Family district, subject to the lot requirements for the R-1 district. 
Sec. 64. - Permitted uses in single-family residential district (R-1B). 
    Any use permitted in an R-1 zone shall apply in the R-1B One-Family zone, subject to lot requirements for the R-1 district. 
ARTICLE VII. - MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS R-2 

Sec. 71. - Purpose. 
    [The purpose is] to establish and provide for a less restrictive type of residential development at higher densities, to protect existing multifamily residences, and to provide for their orderly development in the future. 
Sec. 72. - Permitted uses. 
(72.1)	Any use permitted in the R-1B Single-Family Residential district will be permitted in the R-2 Multiple Family zone provided that such uses shall be subject to the limitations and controls as set forth in Articles VI and XI for those uses. 
(72.2)	Multiple-family dwelling units for any number of families will be permitted in an R-2 zone. There shall be provided a minimum of one parking space per dwelling unit on each lot. 
(72.3)	Apartment hotel or hotel, for any number of guests and in which incidental business may be conducted primarily as a service for persons residing therein, provided there shall be no entrance to such apartments or rooms except from the inside of the building, and one off-street parking space is provided for every three (3) rooms. 
(72.4)	Signs not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area will be permitted to identify R-2 zone uses. Such signs shall be located not less than fifteen (15) feet from the front lot line of the property so identified. 
(72.5)	Trailer parks, as discussed in Article XII, section 124. 
(72.6)	Personal care homes, nursing homes, convalescent homes and hospitals shall be permitted in the R-2 zone. 
(Ord. of 4-26-1995) 
Sec. 73. - Permitted uses in multiple-family residential district (R-2A). 
    Any use permitted in the R-2 area shall apply in the R-2A Multifamily zone, subject to lot requirements for the R-2 district. 
(73.1)	Upon approval of location by City Council after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Board, the following permitted uses are added: 
(A.)	Manufactured homes on individual lots, subject to the housing standards and Requirements as set forth herein. 
(B.)	Day Care Homes as defined in Chapter 290-2-2 & 3 of the Rules of the Department of Human Resources and Family and Children Services [Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. chs. 290-2-2, 290-2-3]. Also, As defined in O.C.G.A. § 49-5-3(8). 
(73.2)	Housing Standards: Dwelling units shall comply with the following minimum Standards: 
(A)	The structure shall be of such size so that each dwelling unit shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width, a minimum of forty (40) feet in length, and with a minimum total square footage of 900 square feet exclusive of open porches, patios and garages. 
(B)	The roof shall have a minimum of 3:12 pitch, a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, clay, fiberglass, or metal tiles, slate, or built-up gravel materials. 
(C)	The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap, or other like materials approved by the City. 
(D)	The structure must be attached to a permanent foundation in accordance with state building codes and state rules and regulations for manufactured homes. 
(E)	Within forty-five (45) days after the new home is delivered to the lot, the area beneath the structure shall be enclosed with a facing of brick, stucco, concrete, stone, or like materials approved by the City. 
(F)	Each exterior door must have compatible steps and porches, or landings adjacent to the threshold constructed in accordance with state building codes. No metal steps will be allowed on the front, back or side entrances of any home. Front porches are required and must have a minimum floor area of 6 feet × 8 feet. Porches for doors on side and rear must have a minimum floor area of 4 feet × 6 feet. Such permanent porches with steps must be completed within forty-five (45) days after the home is delivered to the lot. 
(G)	The structure shall be connected with an approved water source, sewage disposal system, and electrical service as required by the City. 
(H)	The structure shall be oriented on the lot so that its front faces a street, and is similarly oriented as adjacent structures. 
(I)	In addition to the above standards, the structure must be of like size, materials, and general appearance as to be compatible and harmonious with adjacent structures and the neighborhood. 
(J)	In the event such manufactured home is located upon a lot for the purpose of replacing a dilapidated structure located on such lot, then in such event, such dilapidated structure must be torn down and removed within ninety (90) days after the new home is delivered to the lot. 
(K)	Within forty-five (45) days after the new home has been delivered, all wheels and axles, if any, must be removed from the unit and the same must have been placed upon a permanent foundation on the land. 
(73.3)	Dimensional Requirements. The area, height, and setback requirements for this district are specified under R-2 district in Article XI. (Sec. 111 schedule.) 
(73.4)	Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of 73.2 shall be fined not less than $5.00 or more than $250.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2000; Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 1) 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROFESSIONAL DISTRICTS P ZONE 

Sec. 81. - Regulations established. 
    The following regulations shall apply in the Professional (P) district. 
Sec. 82. - Permitted uses. 
(82.1)	Any use permitted in the "R" zones may be permitted in the "P" zone, subject to the lot requirements for the "R" districts. 
82.2	Physicians, lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects, funeral directors and similar professional people who may occupy an entire building or group of buildings. Veterinarians are specifically excluded from the "P" zone. 
(82.3)	Businesses which are generally associated with the above professional practices (e.g., prescription shops, optical sales, etc.). 
(82.4)	Insurance offices, realtors' offices, etc., where the nature of the business is primarily one of personal service. 
(82.5)	Radio and television stations where transmitting towers are not on the same property. 
(82.6)	Parking: Every lot in a "P" zone shall provide: (1) a minimum space on the lot for one car per employee and (2) visitors parking space as determined by city council after recommendation by the planning commission. 
(82.7)	Signs: The provisions of the "R-2" district shall apply to the "P" District. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1995) 
ARTICLE IX. - BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 91. - Purpose. 
    Business districts are established to protect existing commercial uses which provide goods and services primarily for local and surrounding trade area residents and to provide for their future development. 
Sec. 92. - Permitted uses in the neighborhood business district (B-1). 
(92.1)	Any non-residential use permitted in an "R" zone shall be permitted in a "B-1" zone provided that such uses shall be subject to the requirements of the "R" zone. 
(92.2)	Any non-residential use permitted in a "P" zone shall be permitted in a "B-1" zone, subject to the requirements of the "P" zone. Residential use in a "B-1" zone may be allowed through a "Special Use Permit" when approved by the City Council, after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Board. One off street parking space must be provided for each tenant prior to approval being granted. 
(92.3)	Any retail business dispensing goods or services including drive-in type businesses, but excluding the following: 
(A)	Bakery employing more than five (5) persons engaged in the production of baked goods; 
(B)	Billboards; 
(C)	Blacksmith or other metal working shops; 
(D)	Building material supply sales or storage; 
(E)	Candy shop employing more than five (5) persons engaged in the production of candy; 
(F)	Coal and ice plant; 
(G)	Contractor's storage yard; 
(H)	Drive-in theater; 
(I)	Laundry or dry cleaning plants employing more than five (5) persons; 
(J)	Farm equipment sales agencies; 
(K)	Garages, except those operated in connection with new car agencies, where major repairs take place; 
(L)	Printing plant; 
(M)	Stone or monument works; 
(N)	Truck terminal; 
(O)	Undertaker; 
(P)	Tire re-capping; 
(Q)	Wholesale distributors of gasoline, fuel oil and liquefied petroleum gases; and 
(R)	Slaughterhouses. 
(92.4)	Upon approval of location by the city council and after recommendation by the planning commission, the following may be permitted: 
(A)	Commercial recreation facilities. 
(B)	Places of amusement. 
(C)	Veterinarians. 
(D)	Motels. 
(E)	Professional Fortunetelling. 
(F)	Counseling Services. 
(G)	Psychic Readings. 
(H)	Apartments. 
(92.5)	Signs: Any exterior sign including signs that are flat against a building shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from an "R" Zone boundary line; exterior signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
(92.6)	Yards: 
(A)	Where the block frontage is located partly in a "B-1" zone and partly in an "R" zone the front yard requirements of the "R" district shall apply in the "B-1" zone. 
(B)	Gasoline dispensing pumps shall be set back a minimum of twelve (12) feet from any street right-of-way line. 
(C)	Where the side of a lot in a "B-1" zone abuts upon the side of a lot in an "R" zone, there shall be a side yard of not less than four (4) feet for each story or twelve (12) feet in height, but such side yard for a one story building shall be not less than six (6) feet in width. In all other cases, a side yard for a business building shall not be required, but if provided, it shall be not less than three (3) feet in width. 
(D)	On a corner lot in a "B-1" zone, which abuts on an "R" zone, there shall be provided a side yard on the side street equal in depth to the required front yard of the "R" zone. 
(E)	Where a B-1 zone abuts an "R" zone, there shall be a rear yard which will not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
(F)	In all other cases, no rear yard shall be required, but if provided, it shall be not less than five (5) feet in depth. 
(Ord. of 7-14-1997; Ord. of 12-29-2003; Ord. of 3-18-2006; Ord. of 11-23-2015) 
Sec. 93. - Permitted uses in the central business district (B-2) zone. 
(93.1)	Any non-residential use permitted in an "R" zone shall be permitted in a B-2 Central Business zone provided that such uses shall be subject to the requirements of the "R" zone. 
(93.2)	Any non-residential use permitted in a "P" zone shall be permitted in a "B-2" zone. 
(93.3)	Any use permitted in a "B-1" zone shall be permitted in a "B-2" zone. 
(93.4)	Any business or profession dispensing goods or services except the following: 
(A)	Building material storage yard; 
(B)	Coal and ice plant; 
(C)	Contractor's storage yard; 
(D)	Truck terminal; 
(E)	Tire re-capping; 
(F)	Wholesale distributors of gasoline, fuel oil and liquefied petroleum gases; and 
(G)	Veterinarians. 
(93.5)	Yards: 
(A)	Side: Where a "B-2" zone abuts an "R" zone, the side yard provisions of the "B-1" zone shall apply to the "B-2" zone. 
(B)	Rear: Where a "B-2" zone abuts an "R" zone, the rear yard provisions of the "B-1" zone shall apply to the "B-2" zone. 
(93.6)	Signs: Provisions of the "B-1" zone shall apply to the "B-2" zone. 
ARTICLE X. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 101. - Purpose. 
    This district is established to protect existing industrial uses and to provide suitable land for and to encourage development of future industrial uses. 
Sec. 102. - Permitted uses. 
(102.1)	Any non-residential use permitted in the "P" zone shall be permitted in the "I" Industrial zone, provided that the restrictions of the "P" zone shall apply. 
(102.2)	Any non-residential use permitted in a "B" zone shall be permitted in an "I" zone, provided that the restrictions of the appropriate "B" zone shall apply. 
(102.3)	Wholesale, storage and warehousing facilities shall be permitted in an "I" zone. 
(102.4)	Upon approval of location by the city council after recommendation by the planning commission, the following uses may be permitted in an "I" zone. 
(A)	Automobile wrecking yard. 
(B)	Coal yards. 
(C)	Salvage yards. 
    In connection with the above three (3) uses a fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in height to obscure the view of pedestrians and motorists shall be required on all sides except those facing railroad sidings. Such uses shall be carried on, a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from any "R" zone. 
(D)	Tire re-capping. 
(E)	Distributors of gasoline, fuel oil, and liquefied petroleum gases. 
(F)	Veterinarian. 
(102.5)	Uses of a manufacturing nature, employing electricity, gas, atomic energy or other unobjectionable motive power, utilizing hand labor or machine process, and free from objectionable odors, dirt, fumes, vibrations, or noise shall be permitted in the "I" zone, upon approval by the city council after recommendation by the planning commission. 
(102.6)	Yards: Each yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width, except that where an "I" zone abuts an "R" zone, the yard in the adjacent "I" zone shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in width. 
(102.7)	Prohibited uses: 
(A)	No residential structure shall hereafter be erected in an "I" zone. 
(B)	The following uses are prohibited within an "I" zone: 
(1)	Acid manufacture-hydrochloric, nitric, picric, or sulphuric acid; 
(2)	Cement, lime, clay, gypsum or plaster manufacturing; 
(3)	Production of chlorine or similar noxious gases; 
(4)	Distillation of bones; 
(5)	Drop forge industries using power hammers; 
(6)	Explosives-manufacture or storage; 
(7)	Fertilizer manufacturer; 
(8)	Garbage, offal, dead animal reduction or dumping; 
(9)	Glue manufacture; 
(10)	Hair manufacture; 
(11)	Petroleum refining; 
(12)	Processing of sauerkraut, vinegar, or yeast; 
(13)	Rendering or refining of fats and oils; 
(14)	Stock yard or animal feeding pens; 
(15)	Slaughter of animals, not including the killing of fowl; 
(16)	Any other use that is noxious or offensive by reason or the emission or creation of odor, dust, fumes, smoke, gas, noise, vibration or similar substances or conditions which in the judgment of the planning commission would be detrimental to the public interest. 
ARTICLE XI. - AREA, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 111. - Schedule. 
Minimum Lot 

Size District Total 
Area 
Square 
Feet Area Per 
D.U. Lot 
Square Feet Width 
Feet Minimum 
Setback Minimum 
Rear 
Yard 
Depth Minimum 
Side Yard 
Width 
Feet Minimum 
Height Maximum 
Lot Coverage A-1 None None None None None None One half acre R-1 15,000 15,000 100 25(1) 20% of Depth 7 with a total of 17 31/2 stories or 35 feet 30% R-1A 10,000 10,000 75 25(1) 20% of Depth 7 with a total of 17 31/2 stories or 35 feet 30% R-1B 6,000 6,000 60 25(1) 20% of Depth 5 with a total of 15 21/2 stories or 25 feet 30% R-2 10,000 Less than 8 D.U. 4,000 

More than 8 D.U. 2,500 75 25(1) 20% of Depth 7 with a total of 17 6 stories or 75 feet 30% P 10,000 10,000 75 25(1) 20% of Depth 7 with a total of 17 4 stories or 50 feet 30% B-1 None None None 15(2) None(3) 6(3) 4 stories or 50 feet None B-2 None None None None None(3) 6(3) None None I None None None 25 None(4) 10(4) None 60%  
NOTES:
(1) From row line. 
(2) From the curb line. 
(3) See article IX. 
(4) See article X. 
ARTICLE XII. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 121. - Height. 
(121.1)	R-Residence zones: A structure may be increased in height, providing the required side yards are increased one foot for each additional three (3) feet in height. 
(121.2)	Structures permitted above height limit: The following structures may extend above the established zone height regulations providing that they shall not be used primarily for dwelling purposes, nor violate FAA regulations: 
(A)	Chimneys or smokestacks. 
(B)	Cooling towers. 
(C)	Elevator penthouses. 
(D)	Fire or parapet walls. 
(E)	Flagpoles. 
(F)	Gas containers. 
(G)	Radio or television towers. 
(H)	Roof signs. 
(I)	Skylights. 
(J)	Stairways. 
(K)	Steeples or spires. 
(L)	Water tanks or standpipes. 
(M)	Similar structures. 
Sec. 122. - Yards. 
(122.1)	Where the yard regulations cannot be reasonably complied with or their application determined on lots of peculiar shape, location, or topography, such regulations may be modified by the city council upon recommendation of the planning commission. 
(122.2)	For the purpose of side yard regulations, the following dwellings with common party walls shall be considered as one building occupying one lot: 
(A)	Semi-detached dwellings. 
(B)	Row dwellings. 
(122.3)	Projection into yards: 
(A)	Cornices, sills, eaves, belt courses, chimneys, or other similar architectural features may extend or project into a required yard. 
(B)	Unroofed platforms, landings, steps or balconies may extend or project into a required yard. 
(122.4)	Fence, wall or landscape feature: A fence, screen, or solid wall not exceeding six (6) feet in height between the building setback line and the street, may be located in any required front, side or rear yard except where prohibited by corner setbacks for intersection visibility as prescribed in Article III, section 35. 
Sec. 123. - Group developments. 
    In the case of group developments (housing, commercial, etc.) containing two (2) or more buildings, the contemplated arrangement of which makes it impracticable to apply the provisions of this ordinance and resolution to the individual building units in the group, a permit for the construction of such development shall be issued only upon approval of the city council after recommendation by the planning commission on the request for said permit. 
(123.1)	Land deemed one lot: Any parcel of land including any interior streets and recreation areas which is occupied by a group of dwellings designed as a unit, may be deemed to be one lot. 
(123.2)	Application of regulations: When the group development consists of two (2) or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least one acre not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so subdivided, the application of these requirements may be varied upon approval by the planning commission in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, or area and that will insure a lot area per family no lower than permitted by this ordinance and resolution in the zone or use district in which the proposed group development is to be located. 
Sec. 124. - Trailer parks and courts. 
    Trailer parks may be located within "R-2" districts only, provided: 
(A)	That such trailer parks have their entrance or entrances upon a dedicated street; 
(B)	That at least three thousand (3,000) feet of lot area be provided for each trailer and at least six (6) lots be provided (this area provision shall not include automobile parking areas, areas used by interior streets, or any area not contiguous to the trailer lot); 
(C)	That for each trailer location there be off-street parking space provided for at least one automobile; 
(D)	That interior streets within such trailer court have a paved width of not less than sixteen (16) feet exclusive of any parking space provided along such streets; 
(E)	That there be a minimum trailer setback of fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way of a residential street; 
(F)	That there be a minimum trailer setback of twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way line of any major street; 
(G)	That the trailer court be appropriately landscaped and maintained; and 
(H)	That a five (5) foot wide planted buffer strip be provided along side and rear lot lines. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 131. - Enforcement by governmental bodies. 
    It shall be the duty of each governmental agency (usually the building inspector) to enforce the provisions of this ordinance and resolution within the police jurisdiction of the City of Eastman in the manner and form and with the powers provided in laws of the State of Georgia and in the city charter of the City of Eastman. Every official and employee of the City of Eastman, Georgia, who is vested with the duty or authority to issue a building permit shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance and resolution and shall not issue a permit or license for any use, building, or purpose if the same is in conflict with any provision of this ordinance and resolution. 
    Any permit or license or certificate issued in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance and resolution or through error shall be null and void. 
Sec. 132. - Filing plans. 
(132.1)	All applications for building permits shall be to the appropriate governmental unit and accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn in such a way that they will show the approximate shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the approximate location on the lot of the proposed buildings or structures, the distance in feet from the property line and the approximate size and location of any existing structures on the lot. 
    The lot and location of the building thereon shall be staked out on the ground and approved by the building inspector before starting any construction. 
Sec. 133. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following conditions: 
(133.1)	Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or enlarged. 
(133.2)	Change in use of an existing building to a different use classification (e.g. residential to commercial, etc.). 
(133.3)	Any change in a nonconforming use. 
    No such occupancy, use, or change of use shall take place until the certificate of occupancy therefor shall have been issued by the building inspector, city manager, or direct permission from the city council. 
Sec. 134. - Effect of issuance of building permit. 
    After submitting plans to the governmental agent and upon the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall have complied with this ordinance and resolution for all purposes, provided said building is constructed in accordance with approved plans and the applicable codes of the City of Eastman. 
Sec. 135. - Approval required to move building. 
    No existing building or other structure shall be moved into any zone unless in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance and resolution and until written approval therefor shall be granted by the governmental agent. 
Sec. 136. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, or acting in any capacity, who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance and resolution shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned thirty (30) days for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 137. - Applications and appeals. 
    Applications: The city shall process all sign permit applications within thirty (30) business days of the city's actual receipt of a completed application and accompanying sign permit fee. The clerk shall give notice to the applicant of the decision of the city by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by mail, to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the completed application and fee. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing. 
    Appeals: The following procedure shall govern the appeal of any decision, order, requirement or determination made by the building inspector in enforcement of this ordinance, and as amended, including the denial of any application for a sign permit: 
(1)	Any applicant or person aggrieved or affected by the denial or grant of an application or decision may appeal the determination to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the building inspector within thirty (30) days following the decision. The appeal shall be heard within thirty (30) working days of the filing of the written notice of appeal. 
(2)	The city council shall have thirty (30) days following the hearing to issue a written decision. 
(3)	Any party aggrieved or affected by the decision of the city council may file a writ of certiorari with the superior court pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(Ord. of 11-23-2015) 
Sec. 138. - Remedies. 
    If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this ordinance [and resolution], the city, the county, building inspector, any other appropriate authority, or any adjacent or other property owner, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate civil action or proceedings to stop the violation in such case. 
Sec. 139. - Health hazards. 
    If in the opinion of the governing body, and based upon the judgment of a qualified health official, any building, structure, or use is deemed to create a health hazard to the community or to adjacent property owners, said governing body shall institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate civil actions to cause such hazard to cease. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ZONING CHANGES AND ORDINANCE AND RESOLUTION AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 141. - Amendments etc., authorized. 
    The City Council of Eastman may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by ordinance or resolution, the boundaries of the zoning districts established on the official zoning map or the regulations set forth in this ordinance and resolution. Any proposed amendment, supplement, or change shall first be submitted to the planning commission for its recommendation. 
Sec. 142. - Procedure. 
(142.1)	Any person or persons other than the city council or planning commission desiring to submit a petition requesting a change in zoning shall file such petition with a plat of property attached thereto, together with a payment to cover administrative and advertising costs, with the appropriate governmental agent. 
(142.2)	The agent shall advertise such public hearing on said petition in a newspaper of general circulation in Dodge County, Georgia, giving at least fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(142.3)	The public hearing shall be held by the planning commission as the agent of the city council, and the petitioner and/or his agent with copies of the plat shall be present to answer any questions of the planning commission and/or general public that may be present. 
(142.4)	The planning commission shall accept or deny the petition. 
(Ord. of 3-27-1995) 
Sec. 143. - Newly annexed areas. 
(143.1)	Areas newly annexed into the City of Eastman shall be considered to be zoned as "R-1" (Single-Family Residential) in the interim between date of annexation and city council action, unless said area within Dodge County has already been zoned in which case the area will be zoned as it was in the county. 
(143.2)	Within sixty (60) days after the date of annexation, the planning commission after public hearing shall recommend to city council the zone classification for such newly annexed areas which will carry out the objectives of the land use plan and this ordinance and resolution. 
Appendix B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix B consists of the ordinance and regulation of the city and county, adopted by the city on February 10, 1959. It has been set out as adopted, except that words and letters and explanatory matter have been inserted in brackets where appropriate. 

ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION 

Sec. A. - [Planning commission to regulate.] 
    By authority of the ordinance adopted by the city council of Eastman, Georgia, on the tenth day of February, 1959, and the resolution of the commissioner of roads and revenues of Dodge County, pursuant to the provisions of the Act of the Georgia Assembly of Georgia (1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 358)), the Eastman Planning Commission shall have the authority to regulate the subdividing of land and the recording of plats within its jurisdiction, 
    Whereas said laws prohibit the subdivision of land into two (2) or more lots unless an accurate map, plan and plat of such subdivision shall have been approved by the Eastman Planning Commission and shall have been certified and recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court, as a basis for such approval, the Eastman Planning Commission prescribes the following regulations governing subdivisions. 
Sec. B. - Jurisdiction. 
    From and after the date of adoption, these regulations shall govern all subdivision of land within the limits of the City of Eastman and an area of Dodge County extending two (2) miles from said limits, as now or hereafter established. 
    Any owner of land within the limits of said subdivision jurisdiction wishing to subdivide land, shall submit to the Eastman Planning Commission a plat of the subdivision which will conform to the minimum requirements of these regulations. No plat of a subdivision lying within such territory or part thereof shall be recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Dodge County, and no subdivider shall proceed with sale of lot or lots in a subdivision until such subdivision plat shall have been approved by the Eastman Planning Commission and such approval shall have been entered in writing on the plat by the chairman or the secretary. 
    The jurisdiction shall not include the splitting of a lot into two (2) parts, provided both parts to be used to increase the size of adjoining lots. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL DEFINITIONS 

Sec. A. - Definitions. 
(1)	Certain words and terms are defined as follows: 
(a)	Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural; and words in the plural number include the singular; and the word "shall" is mandatory. 
(b)	The term "commission" means the Eastman-Dodge County Planning Commission as authorized by ordinance number 1, dated February 10, 1959. 
(c)	"Governing body" means the city council of Eastman, Georgia. 
(2)	Other words used in this regulation are defined as follows: 
(a)	Building line: A line between which line and any street line of a lot, tract or parcel of land, no building or part of a building may be erected or altered. 
(b)	Building line setback: The distance between the building line and the street line in a lot, tract or parcel of land. 
(c)	Comprehensive plan: Any legally adopted part or element of the overall plan for development as provided by the General Assembly of Georgia. 
(d)	Corner lot: A lot which abuts two (2) or more streets at their intersection, or upon a curved street, provided that the two (2) sides of the lot intersect to form an interior angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
(e)	Cul-de-sac: Generally refers to a dead end street where there is room for a vehicle to turn at a circular end. 
(f)	Dead end street: A street with no outlet at one end. 
(g)	Frontage: The distance for which property abuts one side of a street, road, highway or other public way measured along the dividing line between the public way and private property. 
(h)	Lot depth: The distance between front and rear lot lines. If these lines are not parallel, the mean dimension shall be deemed to be the lot depth. 
(i)	Lot, interior: A lot which is not a corner lot. 
(j)	Lot line, front: The line separating the lot from the street or road. The front lot line of a corner lot shall be the line of least dimension. 
(k)	Lot line, rear: The line opposite and generally parallel to the front lot line. The rear lot line of a triangular or irregularly shaped lot shall for the purpose of this regulation be a line not less than ten (10) feet long lying wholly within the lot, parallel to and the greatest distance from the front lot line. 
(l)	Lot line, side: Any lot line not a front or rear lot line. 
(m)	Lot, through: A lot extending between two (2) more or less parallel streets and having frontage on each street. 
(n)	Lot of record: A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a map on file with the Clerk of Superior Court of Dodge County, Georgia. All lots of record shall front on, and have ingress and egress by means of a public street or road. 
(o)	Lot width: The width of the lot measured at right angles to the mean depth of said lot. 
(p)	Street: A public thoroughfare, including pavement, twenty-four (24) feet or more wide. Where title of land extends to the center of a street, easement or right-of-way shall be considered as the side lines of a street. The term "street" shall include avenue, drive, circle, lane, place, and road, as they are generally understood. 
(q)	Street right-of-way: The distance measured perpendicular to the edges of land in common with front lot lines opposite sides of that land dedicated to public use or in public use. Such width shall be not less than fifty (50) feet and may be increased if in the discretion of the planning commission the future needs of the community will be better served. 
(r)	Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent or semi-permanent location on the ground or the attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. This includes gasoline pumps, signs, trailers, vending machines, etc. 
(s)	Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development for purposes other than agricultural. It includes re-subdivision, and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
Sec. [B]. - Interpretations and meanings. 
    The planning commission's interpretation shall be final as to the meaning of any definition, statement, requirement, rules, and symbols, used in connection with this regulation and/or application thereof, subject to appeal as provided by law. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. A. - [Application, processing and approval.] 
(1)	Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed to be made and before any contract for the sale of or any offer to sell such subdivision or any part thereof is made, and before any permit for the erection of a structure shall be granted, the subdivider, or owner thereof or his agent shall apply in writing to the planning commission for approval of such subdivision. The application of the subdivider owner or agent to the commission shall conform to the specifications in sections C and D of [this] Article III of these regulations. 
(2)	The preliminary layout, topographic map, street profiles and formal subdivision plat and all procedure relating thereon shall in all respects be in full compliance with the provisions of these regulations except where variation therefrom may be specifically authorized by the planning commission. 
(3)	Three (3) copies each of the preliminary layout, as described in section C of [this] Article III, designated as such at the scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, topographic map at the same scale and proposed street profiles at appropriate scales shall be filed with the commission. The planning commission shall then study the preliminary layout and proposed street profiles in connection with the topography of the area, the existing requirements of the zoning ordinance, if any, the comprehensive plan and the official map, if any, and shall take into consideration the general requirements of the community and the best use of the land to be subdivided. Particular attention shall be given to specific requirements for parks, playgrounds, school sites, boulevards and main thoroughfares, the adequacy of street connections and the suitability of the land for development. 
(4)	After arriving at tentative conclusions the commission shall discuss the preliminary layout with the subdivider or his agents at a regular or special meeting of the commission. After such discussion, the commission shall communicate in writing within thirty (30) days to the developer: (a) the specific changes which it will require in the preliminary layout, (b) the character and extent of the required public improvements for which waivers may have been requested and which in its opinion may be waived without jeopardy to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, (c) the amount of construction or improvement required as set forth in these regulations. 
(5)	The owner or agent of the owner of any land within the jurisdiction of the planning commission shall not sell, offer to sell or negotiate to sell any building lot prior to the final approval in writing by the planning commission. Provided, however, said owner or agent of the owner, may sell, offer to sell or negotiate to sell any lot or lots shown on a plat having been given tentative approval by said planning commission; provided, further, said owner or agent of the owner shall, in lieu of the completion of such work or installations required, prior to the final approval of a plat by the planning commission an acceptable bond is provided, in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it, providing for the securing to the governing body having jurisdiction the actual construction and installations required within a period specified by the planning commission and expressed in the bond; and such governing body has the right and power to enforce such bonds by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. The Act authorizing planning commissions, Number 358, section 16, second paragraph provides "Such regulations may include requirements as to the extent to which and the manner in which streets shall be graded, surfaced, and improved, and water, sewers, septic tanks, and other utility mains, piping, connections, or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. Such regulations may provide that, in lieu of the completion of such work and installations previous to the final approval of a plat, the governing authority of the municipality may accept a bond, in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it, providing for and securing to the municipality the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities within a period specified by the planning commission and expressed in the bond; and the municipality is hereby granted the power to enforce such bonds by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies." 
(6)	The subdivider, after official notification by the commission with respect to the preliminary layout and the changes, if any, to be made therein, shall within six (6) months thereafter file with the commission original drawings of the formal subdivision plat and street profiles. These drawings shall be on tracing cloth or paper to a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch showing the entire subdivision on one sheet with lot and block numbers. Before the commission acts on the formal subdivision plat it shall hold a formal hearing thereon. The planning commission shall, within forty-five (45) days from the date of submission of the final plat, approve, modify and approve or disapprove such plat. Such approval shall, however, not be deemed final until the subdivider has complied with the provisions of the following paragraph. 
(7)	The developer shall install and complete in accordance with the requirements of this regulation, to the satisfaction of the planning commission, the following street and sanitary improvements: 
1.	Water lines. No individual water supplies will be permitted. A six (6) inch water line shall be installed to serve all dwellings and structures. Fire hydrants shall be installed at intervals of no more than 1,000'. Where hydrants are subject to traffic damage a gate valve must be installed between the main line and the hydrant. The developer shall be responsible for the costs of all taps and extensions to existing public facilities. 
2.	Sanitary sewers. A minimum of eight (8) inch sanitary sewer line shall be installed to serve all dwellings and structures. Where a public sanitary sewer system exists within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of a proposed subdivision, no individual disposal system will be permitted. The developer shall be responsible for the costs of all taps, lift pump stations, manholes, and extensions to existing public facilities. 
3.	Storm sewers. Storm sewers, catchbasins, traps and connections to existing facilities shall be the responsibility of the developer. All land and streets shall be so drained that water impoundments on developer's land or adjacent land will not exist. 
4.	All streets will be constructed according to the specifications of the City of Eastman for materials and installation. 
5.	Partial Development: Subdivisions may be developed in part after initial approval from the Planning Commission, with the stipulation that only those portions that have been fully developed may be eligible for final approval. 
6.	[Conformance to specifications:] All of the above items shall meet the specifications of the City of Eastman for materials and installation. Alternatively, the developer may file with the commission a performance bond as provided above, complying with and satisfactory to the city attorney having jurisdiction for the completion of such improvements as are not constructed and approved by any official or body authorized by law to act prior to the approval of the plat. The commission shall require a certificate from the city clerk having jurisdiction or other duly designated official as to the satisfactory character of improvements completed and from the respective attorney or other designated legal adviser as to the adequacy of any bond which may be proffered. The subdivider shall tender offers of cession in a form certified as satisfactory by city attorney having jurisdiction of all land included in streets, highways, or parks not specifically reserved by him, but approval of the plat by the commission shall not constitute an acceptance by the city of the dedication of any street, highway, park or other public open space. 
7.	After completion of these details and notation to that effect upon the plat, it shall be deemed to have final approval and within ninety (90) days thereafter the developer must file the plat with the Clerk of Superior Court at Dodge County, Georgia. Otherwise, such approval shall be voided. 
(Ord. of 7-24-1995) 
Sec. B. - General requirements for the subdivision of land. 
    The subdivider shall observe the following general requirements and principles of land subdivision: 
(1)	In general, the proposed subdivision shall conform to the official map and to the comprehensive plan, if such exists. 
(2)	The arrangements of streets in the subdivision shall provide for the continuation of the principal streets in adjoining subdivisions or for their proper projection when adjoining property is not subdivided and shall be of a width of at least fifty (50) feet, except that collector streets shall be at least sixty (60) feet in width. The commission will designate such collector streets. 
(3)	In general, main highways and secondary highways shall not be less than the width shown on the comprehensive plan, if such exists. Parkways and boulevards shall be such width as may be designated by the commission. As a general rule, width of minor streets shall not be less than fifty (50) feet. 
(4)	Dead end or cul-de-sac streets shall not in general exceed four hundred (400) feet in length, and shall be equipped with a turn-around roadway with a minimum radius of forty (40) feet for the outside curb at the closed end. 
(5)	Block lengths in general shall not exceed twelve hundred (1,200) feet in length. 
(6)	[Reserved.] 
(7)	Each block shall be planned to provide two (2) rows of lots, but irregularly shaped blocks indented by cul-de-sac streets and containing interior parks will be acceptable when properly designed and covered by agreements as to maintenance of interior parks, if such exist. 
(8)	Curb radii at intersections shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet and property lines shall be adjusted accordingly. 
(9)	Side lines of lots, so far as practicable, shall be at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(10)	Care shall be exercised in the layout of lots at street intersections. 
(11)	Corner lots shall be increased in size whenever necessary so as to provide that any structure to be placed thereon shall conform to the building setback line of each street. 
(12)	Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain, and shall not be less than five-tenths (0.5) percent nor more than five (5) percent for main thoroughfares nor more than seven (7) percent for minor streets. 
(13)	Paved rear service streets of not less than twenty (20) feet in width, or in lieu thereof, adequate off-street loading space, suitably surfaced, shall be provided in connection with all lots designed for commercial use. 
(14)	In front of areas designed and zoned or where a petition for a change in zoning is contemplated for commercial use, to permit such use, the street width shall be increased by such amount on each side as may be deemed necessary by the commission to assure the free flow of through traffic without interference by parked or parking vehicles and to provide adequate and safe parking space for such commercial or business district. 
(15)	Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the commission to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate the flood hazard, but such land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions. 
(16)	In case a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the opening of future streets and logical further re-subdivisions. 
(17)	In general, no reserve strips controlling access to land dedicated or to be dedicated to public use shall be permitted. 
(18)	In general, street lines within a block deflecting from each other at any one point more than ten (10) degrees shall be connected with a curve, the radius of which for the inner street lines shall not be less than three hundred fifty (350) feet on main thoroughfares, two hundred fifty (250) feet on secondary thoroughfares, and one hundred (100) feet on local streets. The outer street line in each case shall be parallel to such inner street line. 
(19)	Areas for parks and playgrounds shall be of reasonable size for neighborhood playgrounds or other recreation uses. No arbitrary percentage of area shall be insisted upon by the commission, but in general developers should set aside not less than five (5) percent of the area for these purposes. Such areas shall be reserved for purchase by the city at the developer's actual development cost for a period not to exceed five (5) years. 
(20)	Whenever any stream or important surface drainage course is located in any area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall dedicate an adequate easement along each side of the stream or drainage course for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping, improving or protecting the stream or for drainage, parkway or recreational use. 
(21)	Variations of the general requirements above outlined may be permitted by the commission on application when in their judgment special factors warrant such a variation. 
Sec. C. - Preliminary layout. 
    Subdividers shall present to the commission a preliminary layout. Three (3) copies shall be filed at the scale of no more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, showing or accompanied by the following information: 
(1)	Proposed subdivision name or identifying title and the name of the city and county in which the subdivision is located. 
(2)	Name and address of record owner, subdivider and designer of preliminary layout. 
(3)	Location of property lines, existing easements, building, water courses and other essential features. 
(4)	The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent and the names of owners of record of adjacent acreage. 
(5)	The location of any existing sewers and water mains, culverts and drains on the property to be subdivided. 
(6)	Location, names and present widths of existing and proposed streets, highways, easements, building lines, alleys, parks and other public open spaces and similar facts regarding property adjacent. 
(7)	Any changes in the use, height, area and density districts or other regulations under the zoning ordinance applicable to the area to be subdivided and any boundaries of such districts affecting the tract; all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedication. 
(8)	The width and location of any street or other public ways or places shown upon the official map or the comprehensive plan, if such exists, within the area to be subdivided, and the width, location, grades and street profiles of all streets or other public ways proposed by the developer. 
(9)	Typical cross sections of the proposed grading and roadways or sidewalks and topographic conditions. 
(10)	Date, north point and scale. 
(11)	Deed description and map of survey of tract boundary made and certified by a licensed land surveyor. 
(12)	Connection with existing water supply or alternative means of providing water supply to subdivision. Fire hydrants shall be noted. Fire hydrants shall be placed so that no dwelling shall be more than one thousand (1,000) feet distant, measured over traveled roadways. 
(13)	Connections with existing sanitary sewerage system or alternative means of treatment and disposal proposed as provided by the Dodge County Health Department. 
(14)	Provisions for collecting and discharging surface drainage. 
(15)	Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be required. 
(16)	The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and suggested location of buildings. 
(17)	The preliminary layout shall, if required by the planning commission, show the proposed location of and type of sidewalks, street lighting standards and species of street trees, the location of curbs, gutters, water mains, sanitary sewers and storm drains and the sizes and types thereof, the character, width and depth of pavement and sub-base, the location of manholes and basins and underground conduits. 
(18)	Where the topography is such as to make difficult the inclusion of any such facilities within the public area so laid out, the preliminary layout shall show the boundaries of proposed permanent easements over or under private property, which permanent easements shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in width and which shall provide satisfactory access to an existing public highway or other public open space shown upon the layout or upon the official map. 
(19)	Where the preliminary layout submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's entire holding, a sketch of the prospective future street system of the unsubmitted part shall be furnished and the street system of the submitted part shall be furnished and the street system of the submitted part will be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the street system of the part not submitted. 
    (All of the information set forth above is required by the commission for the information of the public at the public hearings. Due care in the preparation of this material will expedite the process of passing upon the formal subdivision plat.) 
Sec. D. - Final subdivision plat. 
(1)	The subdivision plat submitted for approval and subsequent recording shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink upon tracing cloth or paper. 
(2)	The drawing shall be at the scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch. Subdivider shall submit original and five (5) copies. The subdivision plat shall show: 
(a)	Proposed subdivision name or identifying title and the name of the city and county in which the subdivision is located, the name and address of record owner and subdivider, name, license number and seal of the licensed professional engineer. 
(b)	Street lines, pedestrian ways, lots, reservations, easements and areas to be dedicated to public use. 
(c)	Sufficient data acceptable to the commission to determine readily the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line and to reproduce such lines upon the ground. Where practicable, these should be referenced to monuments, and in any event should be tied to reference points previously established by a public authority. 
(d)	The length of all straight lines, the deflection angles, radii, length of curves and central angles of all curves, tangent distances and tangent bearings shall be given for each street. All dimensions and angles of the lines of each lot shall also be given. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot. The final plan shall show the boundaries of the property, location, graphic scale and north point. 
(e)	The final plan shall also show by proper designation thereon all public open spaces for which deeds of cession are included and those spaces title to which is reserved by the developer. For any of the latter, there shall be submitted with the final subdivision plat copies of agreements or other documents showing the manner in which such areas are to be maintained and the provisions made therefor. 
(f)	All offers of cession and covenants governing the maintenance of unceded open space shall bear the certificate of approval of the city attorney as to their legal sufficiency. The approval of the final subdivision plat by the planning commission shall not be deemed to mean acceptance by the city council or commissioner of the county of any street, way or public space. 
(g)	Before final approval of the plat, there shall be filed with the planning commission a certificate by the city or county clerk or other designated official as to the completion of all improvements required by the commission to his satisfaction in accordance with standards and specifications prescribed by him. For any required improvements not so completed there shall be submitted with the plat a certificate by the city attorney as to the sufficiency of the bond offered in lieu thereof. 
(h)	Lots and blocks within a subdivision shall be numbered and lettered in alphabetical order in accordance with the prevailing practice. In counties which have established a county block and lot system, the block numbers shall be obtained from the county registrar. 
(i)	Permanent reference monuments shall be shown thus: "X." They shall be constructed in accordance with specifications of the city clerk or other designated official, and when referenced to the state system shall also conform to the requirements of the state highway department. They shall be placed as required by the city clerk or other designated official and their location noted and referenced upon the plat. 
(j)	All lot corner markers shall be permanently located, satisfactory to the city clerk or other designated official, with a pipe, at least three-fourths (3/4) inches (if metal) in diameter and at least thirty (30) inches in length, shown thus "O," and located in the ground to existing grade. 
(k)	Monuments of a type approved by the city clerk or other designated official shall be set at all corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original tract to be subdivided; and at all street intersections, angle points in street lines, points of curve and such intermediate points as shall be required by the city clerk or other designated official. 
(l)	Upon approval, two (2) signed copies shall be returned to the subdivider, one signed copy shall be retained in the files of the planning commission. 
(m)	If the plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the planning commission. Failure of the planning commission to approve or disapprove the final subdivision plat within sixty (60) days after submission shall be deemed approval of the plat. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEPARABILITY 

Sec. A. - [Effect of invalidity of part.] 
    Should any article, section, subsection or provision of these subdivision regulations be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not effect the validity or constitutionality of the subdivision regulations as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1911 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1911 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1911 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1911 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 7 36-10 13(a) 26-5 25 22-86 32 2-12 48 22-86 61 16-2 68 8-6 82 20-19 83 22-87 84 20-22 91 4-4, 4-5 115 2-1 2-9, 2-10 119 34-5 34-7 131 2-11 149 6-3 150 6-5 151 6-4, 6-5 158 34-3 161 34-6 34-8 36-8 183 36-10 184 6-7 186 6-3 190 36-9 194 6-4 197 16-4  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1982 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code, as updated, which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1982 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1-1-12 1-1-1-12 2-1 2-1 2-2-2-6 2-9-2-13 3-1-3-5 4-1-4-5 3-21-3-24 4-35-4-38 3-26-3-32 4-39-4-45 4-1-4-5 6-1-6-5 4-7, 4-8 6-6, 6-7 5-2-5-6 8-2-8-6 5-21 8-39 5-51 8-67 6-1 10-1 6-2-6-5 10-3-10-6 6-6 10-2 8-1-8-4 16-1-16-4 9-3 22-86 9-5 22-87 9-20-9-23 20-19-20-22 9-30-9-36 20-40-20-46 10-24 38-21 10-30-10-35 38-46-38-51 10-39-10-43 38-53-38-57 10-50-10-56 38-88-38-94 10-60-10-72 38-117-38-129 10-80-10-89 38-157-38-166 10-100- 
10-103 38-186-38-189 10-105- 
10-119 38-190-38-204 11-20-11-25 24-32-24-37 11-27 24-38 11-30-11-33 24-65-24-68 12-1-12-6 26-2-26-7 14-1-14-5 32-19-32-23 14-6-14-10 32-50-32-54 15-1-15-6 34-3-34-8 16-1-16-12 36-1-36-12 17-20-17-26 40-19-40-25  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code, as updated, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1982 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede 1982, but which were never included in the 1982 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since 1982, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Date Section Section 
this Code  1-18-1937(Ord.) 24-23  4-20-1942(Ord.) 2 38-186 38-191 3 38-187  8- 7-1944(Ord.) 1 36-11, 36-12  8-29-1944(Ord.) 1, 2 20-22 12-31-1945(Ord.) 1, 2 6-6  4-23-1951(Ord.) 1 26-6 3, 4 40-19, 40-20 5 40-25 6-8 40-22-40-24 9 40-21  6- 9-1952(Ord.) 1 36-9  7- 9-1952(Ord.) 1 36-8  2-10-1958(Ord.) 32-19 1 32-20, 32-21 2, 3 32-22, 32-23  4-21-1958(Ord.) 1 24-22  5-12-1958(Ord.) 2 36-4  3-23-1959(Ord.) 6-1, 6-2  9-25-1961(Ord.) 5 36-7 8, 9 36-11, 36-12 10 34-4 45 36-3 125 36-1  5- 8-1967(Ord.) 1-4 38-193-38-196 11- 8-1968(Ord.) 1 32-50, 32-51 2 32-52 3 32-53, 32-54 10-27-1969(Ord.) 1-4 24-32-24-35 5(A), (B) 24-36 5(C)-(E) 24-37 7 24-38  4-27-1970(Ord.) 1-5 20-40-20-44 7 20-45, 20-46  2- 8-1971(Ord.) 1 4-3  8-23-1971(Ord.) 1 4-2 1-3 26-7 12-13-1971(Res.) 24-21  5-12-1972(Ord.) 4-12 38-129  8-14-1972(Ord.) 16-1  9-20-1973(Ord.) 36-5  5-13-1974(Ord.) 1-3 36-6  5-12-1975(Ord.) 1-1-1-18 38-46 2-01-2-04 38-54-38-57 3-01-3-07 38-88-38-94 4-01-4-09 38-117-38-125 4-10, 4-11 38-127, 38-128 4-13 38-126 5-01-5-10 38-157-38-166 6-01 38-49 7-01 38-47 8-01 38-48 8-02 38-50  7-28-1975(Ord.) 2 38-188 3 38-190 4 38-197 5 16-3 6 38-189 7 20-20 8 20-19 9 20-21 10 38-192 11 38-201 12 38-200 13, 14 38-198, 38-199 15 38-202 17 38-203, 38-204  9- 8-1975(Ord.) 38-159  2- 9-1976(Ord.) 38-159 11- 8-1976(Ord.) 1 26-5 10-24-1977(Ord.) I 10-1 II(A-G) 10-3 III-V 10-4-10-6 VI 10-2  9-25-1978(Ord.) 1 24-35 2 24-37 10- 8-1979(Ord.) 1 24-35 11-26-1979(Ord.) I 38-51 12-10-1979(Ord.) 1, 2 24-35, 24-36  3-23-1980(Ord.) I-IV 24-65-24-68  1-12-1981(Ord.) 36-6  5-12-1981(Ord.) 1 4-43 2 4-35 4 4-40 5(A, B) 4-39 6 4-36 7(A-D) 4-38 7(E) 4-42 7(F) 4-44 8 4-41 9 4-37 10 4-45  7-13-1981(Ord.) 1-4 38-21 38-53 10-20-1981(Ord.) 1, 2 26-1 12-27-1983(Ord.) 1 24-95, 24-96  5-29-1984(2)(Ord.) I, II 38-202, 38-203  7-23-1984(1)(Ord.) 4-3  7-23-1984(2)(Ord.) 4-6  7-23-1984(3)(Ord.) 36-13 10-14-1985(Ord.) 4-7 11-25-1985(Ord.) 1-5 24-121-24-125 6 24-120  4- 4-1986(Ord.) 1 4-44 11-24-1986(Ord.) 1 24-152 2-7 24-154-24-159 8 24-153  2-13-1989(Ord.) 2-14  8-14-1989(Ord.) 1 4-65 2 4-63 3 4-67 4 4-69 5 4-71 6 4-73 7 4-75 8 4-77 9 4-79 10 4-81 11-15 4-83-4-87 16 4-64 10- 8-1990(Ord.) 4-27 6-39 4-28, 4-29 6-46, 6-47 4-30-4-33 6-71-6-74 4-34 6-48  1-14-1991(Ord.) 1(2-5) 2-12  7- 1-1991(1)(Ord.) 26-4 10-28-1991(Ord.) 1-4 2-36-2-39  4- 1-1992(Ord.) 1 14-66 2-5 14-68-14-71 6 14-67  3- 8-1993(Ord.) 38-205  8- 9-1993(Ord.) 38-20  6-13-1994(Ord.) 1 16-27 2 16-29 3 16-28 10-17-1994(Ord.) I-VIII 28-19-28-26 12-19-1994(Ord.) 11-20-11-25 24-32-24-37  3-13-1995(1)(Ord.) 38-160  3-15-1995(2)(Ord.) 8-68  3-27-1995(Ord.) 38-118 App. A, § 142  4- 8-1995(Ord.) 1, 2 App. A, § 62  4-26-1995(Ord.) App. A, § 72  7-24-1995(Ord.) App. B, Art. III, § A  8-14-1995(Ord.) App. A, § 82  9-11-1995(Ord.) 11-3-11-10 24-8-24-15 11-10, 11-13 24-18 11-11, 11-12 24-16, 24-17 11-14, 11-15 24-19, 24-20  9-25-1995(Ord.) 24-125 10-23-1995(Ord.) App. A, § 62 10-23-1995 
(Ord. No. 94.151) 36-5 11-27-1995(Ord.) 26-4  7-22-1996(Ord.) 4-20, 4-21 6-8, 6-9 4-22-4-24 6-40-6-42 10-14-1996(Ord.) 9-1-9-4 22-81-22-84 9-5-9-7 22-85-22-87  2-10-1997(Ord.) 6-41, 6-42  7-14-1997(Ord.) App. A, § 92 10- 2-1997(Ord.) 38-118 12-22-1997(1)(Ord.) 1(11-1) 24-6 12-22-1997(2)(Ord.) 24-7  8-24-1998(Ord.) 38-197  9-24-1998(Ord.) 38-201  8-23-1999(Ord.) 12-1  2-28-2000(Ord.) 4-25B, C 6-44 4-25D, E 6-45  4-10-2000(Ord.) 1-4 8-21-8-24 10-23-2000(Ord.) App. A, § 73  6-11-2001(Ord.) 38-200  8-13-2001(Ord.) 10-1, 10-2 22-1, 22-2 10-19-10-25 22-23-22-29 10-30 22-48 10-31 22-47 10-32, 10-33 22-49, 22-50 10-36 22-51 10-38 22-52  9-10-2001(Ord.) II-VIII 14-26-14-32 IX 14-32  9- 9-2002(Ord.) 6-43 12-29-2003(Ord.) App. A, § 92  6-14-2004(Ord.) 1 App. A, § 73  9-27-2004(Ord.) 1 26-35 2 26-37 3 26-36 12-12-2004(Ord.) 1 24-8  7-11-2005(Ord.) 1 24-125  3-18-2006(Ord.) App. A, § 92  4-10-2006(Ord.) 1A 4-63 2A 4-66 3A 4-68 4A 4-70 5A 4-72 6A 4-74 7A 4-76 8A 4-78 9A 4-80 10A 4-82 11A 4-34  9-25-2006(Ord.) 10-7  1-24-2007(Ord.) App. A, § 36  6-11-2007(Res.) 2-1  4-28-2008(2)(Ord.) 38-18  4-28-2008(Ord.) art. 1, § C, 
art. 1, § D 18-2, 18-3 art. 2, § A- 
art. 2, § G 18-5-18-11 art. 2, § H 18-4 art. 3, § A- 
art. 3, § C 18-49-18-51 art. 4, § A- 
art. 4, § F 18-76-18-81 art. 5 18-105 art. 6 18-1  6-26-2008(Ord.) 1 26-63 10-13-2008(Ord.) art. I, § 2 34-9 art. I, § 3 34-1 art. II, § I- 
art. II, § 4 34-37-34-40 art. III, § 1- 
art. III, § 3 34-69-34-71 art. V- 
art. VIII 34-72-34-75 art. IX 34-2 art. X, § 2- 
art. X, § 4 34-124-34-126  3-23-2009(Ord.) 2-4 2-67-2-69 11- 9-2009(Ord.) 2.19 2-1 2.20-1-2.20-8 2-2-2-9 12-28-2009(Ord.) 12-2 1 2-97 30-21 2 2-98 30-22 3 2-99 30-19 4 2-100 4-10 30-23-30-29 11 30-20  6-14-2010(Ord.) 1, 2 36-14  6-30-2010(Ord.) 18-1, 18-6  7-12-2010(Ord.) art. I, §§ 1-11       Added 26-71-26-81 art. II, §§ 1-6       Added 26-91-26-96  9-27-2010(Ord.)       Rpld 36-14 12-13-2010(Ord.) 1-7       Added Adopting ord., p. xi 12-28-2010(Ord.)       Added 14-81-14-83 12-12-2011(Ord.) 1-6 24-32, 24-33 24-35-24-37  6-30-2011(Ord.) 1.1-1.6       Added 14-111-14-116 2 14-121 3.1-3.7 14-131-14-137 4.1-4.8 14-141-14-148 5.1 5.2 14-151, 14-152 6.1-6.4 14-161-14-164 7-7.2 14-170-14-173  4-23-12(Ord.) 38-197  5-14-12(Ord.) 38-53 11-13-12(Ord.) 8-1(a)  2-11-13(1)(Ord.) 24-32-24-37  2-11-13(2)(Ord.)       Added 36-15  5-13-2013(Ord.) 26-63  9- 9-2013(Ord.) 1-X       Rpld 14-26-14-32       Added 14-21-14-30 12- 9-2013(Ord.) 8-1(a)  3-24-2014(Ord.) 1 2-97-2-106  9- 8-2014(Ord.) 4-84  1-12-2015(Ord.) 8-1(a) 11-23-2015(Ord.) App. A, §§ 36.2, 62.5(C), 92.5, 137  4-11-2016(Ord.)       Added §§ 34-141-34-151  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia law. 
O.C.G.A. 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1-3 1-12 1-1-7 1-9 1-3-1 1-2, 1-3 1-3-2, 1-3-3 1-2 1-3-3 14-23 14-81 1-3-3(5) 1-2 2-10-105 24-11 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 4 3-3-23 Ch. 4 4-3 3-4-3 Ch. 4 3-4-40 et seq. Ch. 4 3-5-42 Ch. 4, Art. II 3-10-40 Ch. 4, Art. II 4-3-1 et seq. Ch. 6 6-3 4-5-1 et seq. 20-22 4-8-6 Ch. 6 4-8-20 et seq. Ch. 6 6-48 4-8-22 6-39 4-11-1 et seq. Ch. 6 5-3-29 22-49 5-4-1 18-105 App. A, § 137 5.17 Char. § 2.12 8-2-1 et seq. Ch. 8 22-47 8-2-20(9) 8-1 8-2-25, 8-2-26 Ch. 8 8-2-50 et seq. Ch. 8 12-2-8 14-24 12-4-70 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 12-4-72 14-23 12-5-20 14-22 12-5-20 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 12-5-23(5)(a) 14-25 12-5-30(f) 14-22 14-24 12-5-120 et seq. Ch. 8 12-5-440 et seq. 14-22 ch. 12-7 14-22 12-7-1 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 14-24 12-7-4 Ch. 14, Art. II 12-7-6 14-23 12-7-6(b) 14-24 12-7-6(c) 14-24 12-7-6, 12-7-7 Ch. 14, Art. II 12-7-7(e) 14-26 12-7-7(f)(1) 14-25 12-7-7.1 14-23 12-7-8(a) 14-22 14-25 14-26 12-7-9 Ch. 14, Art. II 12-7-14 Ch. 14, Art. II 12-7-17 Ch. 14, Art. II 12-7-17(9), (10) 14-25 12-7-19(1)(b) 14-28 12-7-19(4)(b) 14-28 12-7-20 14-25 14-28 12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II 15-21-73 1-8 15-21-93 1-8 15-21-100 1-8 15-21-112 1-8 16-7-42 Ch. 20, Art. II 16-11-41 Ch. 4 4-2 16-12-4 Ch. 6 6-2 16-13-2 et seq. 22-47 17-6-11 1-8 17-6-70 et seq. 1-8 17-10-3 1-8 17-10-3(e) 1-8 21-2-1 et seq. Char. § 5.10 Char. § 5.17, 
Char. § 5.18 12-1 21-2-210 et seq. Ch. 12 21-2-260 et seq. Ch. 12 21-2-280 et seq. Ch. 12 21-2-380 et seq. Ch. 12 21-2-400 et seq. Ch. 12 21-2-490 et seq. Ch. 12 tit. 22 Char. § 1.13 25-2-1 et seq. 22-47 25-3-1 et seq. Ch. 16 25-4-12 et seq. Ch. 16 25-8-1 et seq. Ch. 16 25-9-6 34-71 25-10-1 et seq. Ch. 16 16-4 25-12-1 et seq. Ch. 16 30-3-1 et seq. Ch. 8 31-19-1 et seq. Ch. 6 31-19-3 6-40 33-3-5 24-32 33-3-5(1) 24-36 31-3-5.2 14-81 33-8-4 24-35, 24-36 33-8-8.1 24-35 33-8-8.2 24-36 33-34-5.1 Ch. 40 36-18-1 14-23 36-32-6 26-1 36-32-10 Ch. 4 36-35-6(2)(A) 26-2 36-35-6(a)(2) 1-8 36-39-1 et seq. Ch. 34 36-60-4 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II 36-60-13 Ch. 2, Art. III Char. § 6.22 36-60-25 Ch. 40 36-61-7 32-19 36-61-11 Ch. 8 36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 36-81-3(a) Ch. 2, Art. III 36-81-4- 
36-81-6 Ch. 2, Art. III 38-3-27 10-4 38-3-27 et seq. Ch. 10 38-3-57 10-7 40-1-1 36-1 40-6-1 et seq. 36-1 40-6-372 36-1 40-6-391 Ch. 4 40-11-1 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II, 
Div. 2 40-13-9 Ch. 36 41-2-1-41-2-17 22-2 22-49 22-51 41-2-5 22-49 41-2-7 Ch. 8 22-47 41-2-7- 
41-2-17 22-47, 22-48 41-2-8 22-47 41-2-8- 
41-2-17 22-48 41-2-9 et seq. Ch. 8 41-2-9- 
41-2-17 22-47 41-2-12(g) 22-49 tit. 43 24-13 43-39A-1 et seq. 22-49 43-43-1 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II tit. 45 Char. § 2.12 45-5-420 et seq. Ch. 40 45-8-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 45-10-3 2-39 45-11-1 1-10 46-3-1 et seq. 24-11 46-7-15 24-11 47-17-60 et seq. 1-8 tit. 48 Char. § 1.13 48-2-40 24-18 48-4-60 et seq. 22-50 48-4-78 22-49 48-5-355, 
48-5-356 24-11 48-6-93 24-11 24-95 48-6-93(d) 24-96 48-13-7 24-8 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18) 24-6 48-13-51(a)(3) 24-125 49-5-3(8) App. A, § 73 50-5-100 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 50-8-32 32-50 50-8-32 et seq. 32-54 50-14-1 2-1 Char. § 2.19 Char. § 2.24 50-14-1 et seq. Char. § 2.14 50-14-1(d) 2-1 50-14-3 2-1 50-18-70 et seq.       24-16 51-2-6 Ch. 6  
