CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF JONESBORO, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2000 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: January 23, 2001 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
JONESBORO, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Joy Day 
Mayor 
____________ 
T. E. Adair 
Yvette McDonald 
Luther Maddox 
Wallace Norrington 
Clifford Sewell 
City Council 
____________ 
Steven Fincher 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Katherine Smith 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
JONESBORO, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Joy B. Day 
Mayor 
____________ 
Pat Sebo 
Billy Powell 
Ed Wise 
Alfred Dixon 
Jack Bruce 
Larry Boak 
City Council 
____________ 
Ricky L. Clark, Jr. 
City Manager 
____________ 
Steven M. Fincher 
City Attorney 
  
  
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1987 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1987 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Robert McNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to the Honorable Joy Day, Mayor, Ms. Katherine Smith, City Clerk, and Mr. Steven Fincher, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 2000. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
Resolution No. 003 
WHEREAS, the City of Jonesboro is a duly incorporated municipal government of the State of Georgia; 
WHEREAS, the governing authority of the City of Jonesboro is the duly elected Mayor and Council thereof; 
WHEREAS, the City of Jonesboro desires to adopt a bound code of Ordinances; and 
WHEREAS, in order to assure that any Charter Amendment, Ordinance, Resolution, Proclamation or other action of the Mayor and Council which was duly adopted after the submission of documents for inclusion into the newly bound code shall be readopted. 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Jonesboro hereby resolves: 
    Section 1. Any and all Charter Amendments, Ordinances, Resolutions, Proclamations or other actions which may in any way affect the recently bound codification of Ordinances including any references to zoning or zoning maps (this subject being fully addressed in a separate Resolution duly incorporated herein as if set out fully and physically attached to this Resolution as Exhibit "A") shall be and are hereby duly readopted. 
    Section 2. This readoption shall include any of the above described actions or documents listed in Section 1. above which came into existence after the date of submission of documents to the printer for binding into the most recently bound Code of Ordinances adopted on January 23, 2001. 
    Section 3. If any duly adopted Charter Amendment, Ordinance, Resolution, Proclamation or other action is found to have been erroneously omitted from the bound code of January 23, 2001 such action or document predating January 23, 2001 shall be considered to be specifically readopted hereby. Said readoption includes actions or documents duly amending or repealing actions and documents affecting individual documents or actions found in the newly bound code of January 23, 2001. 
    So Resolved this 23rd day of January, 2001. 
/s/   
      Joy B. Day, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Katherine Smith, City Clerk   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/   
      Steven M. Fincher, City Attorney   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this City of Jonesboro, Georgia Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 2010-004 12-13-2010 Include 16 2010-006  6-14-2010 Include 17 2011-002  8- 8-2011 Include 17 2011-003 10-10-2011 Include 18 2011-004 11-14-2011 Include 18 2011-005 12-12-2011 Include 19 2011-006 12-12-2011 Include 19 2012-001  3-13-2012 Include 19 2012-003 11-12-2012 Omit 20 2012-004 11-12-2012 Include 20 2012-007 11-12-2012 Include 20 2013-001  3-11-2013 Omit 21 2013-002  5-13-2013 Include 21 2014-001  2-10-2014 Include 22 2014-003  6- 9-2014 Include 22 2014-004  6- 9-2014 Include 22 2014-002  2-10-2014 Include 23 2014-005  8-11-2014 Include 23 2014-006 10-13-2014 Include 23 2014-008 10-13-2014 Include 23 2014-009 10-13-2014 Include 23 2014-010 10-13-2014 Include 23 2014-011 12- 8-2014 Include 24 2014-012 12- 8-2014 Include 24 2015-001  1-12-2015 Include 24 2015-003  2- 9-2015 Include 24 2015-002  4-13-2015 Include 25 2015-005  7- 1-2015 Omit 25 2015-006   8-10-2015 Include 25 2015-008a  8-10-2015 Include 25 2015-008b  8-10-2015 Include 25 2015-009  8-10-2015 Include 25 2015-10   8-10-2015 Include 25 2015-011 11- 9-2015 Include 26 2016-01   2- 8-2016 Include 26 2016-002  2- 8-2016 Include 26 2016-03   2- 8-2016 Include 26 2016-004  3-14-2016 Include 26 2016-005  4-11-2016 Include 27 2016-006  4-11-2016 Include 27 2016-007  5-31-2016 Include 27 2016-09 10-10-2016 Include 28 2016-10 10-10-2016 Include 28 2016-11 10-10-2016 Include 28 2016-12 10-10-2016 Include 28 2016-13 10-10-2016 Include 28 2017-001  1- 9-2017 Include 28 2017-002  1- 9-2017 Include 28 2017-03  2-13-2017 Include 29 2017-04  2-13-2017 Include 29 2017-07  5- 8-2017 Include 29 2017-08  6-12-2017 Include 29 2015-002B  2- 9-2015 Include 30 2018-001A  1- 8-2018 Include 30 2018-001B  1- 8-2018 Include 30 2018-02  1- 8-2018 Include 30 2018-003  1- 8-2018 Include 30 2018-004  1- 8-2018 Include 30 2018-004B  3-12-2018 Include 30 2018-05  3-12-2018 Include 30 2018-007  8-13-2018 Include 31 2018-009  8-13-2018 Include 31 2018-010  8-13-2018 Include 31 2018-012 10- 8-2018 Include 31 2018-013 10- 8-2018 Include 31  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the city's Charter as set forth in 1996 Ga. Laws, page 4056. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
    This city and the inhabitants thereof, are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style The City of Jonesboro, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate Boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alternations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and Construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Sec. 1.13. - Examples of Powers. 
(1)  Air and Water Pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air, and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal Regulations. To regulate and 1icense or to prohibit the keeping of or running at-large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(3)  Appropriations and Expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  Building Regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)  Business Regulation and Taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city regulatory fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in O.C.G.A. tit. 22, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire Regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(10)  Garbage and Trash; Collection; Fees and Taxes. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse, and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others. To provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials, and to provide for the sale of such items. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal, and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee, in such amount as is deemed appropriate and established by ordinance and on an annual, quarterly, or monthly basis, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefitting from such services. To enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such charges, taxes and fees. To provide for the authority to issue a writ of fieri facias or execution against the property served, to provide that the writ of fieri facias or execution shall have the same lien dignity and priority as a writ of fieri facias or execution issued for city ad valorem or property taxes, to provide that each annual installment shall become a lien against the property served on January 1 of each year in the same manner and the same priority that lien attaches for city ad valorem or property taxes, and to provide that any garbage collection fee that remains unpaid shall accrue penalty, interest, and fieri facias charges in the same manner and the same rate as delinquent city ad valorem or property taxes; 
(11)  General Health, Safety and Welfare. To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Recreation. To create programs, and to manage facilities so as to provide recreational opportunities for the city residents and visitors; 
(14)  Jail Sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares in the city, to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail, or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp, county jail or municipal jail by agreement with the appropriate county or municipal officials; 
(15)  Motor Vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal Agencies and Delegation of Power. To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal Debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal Property Ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal Property Protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city, and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal Utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, storm water management facilities and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties, and to provide for withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same. To levy fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee to those connected with the system; 
(21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and Zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and Fire Protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers, and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(25)  Public Hazards: Removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public Improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under O.C.G.A. tit. 22, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public Peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public Transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public Utilities and Services. To grant franchises, make contracts, easements, and rights-of-way over, in, under, and on other property of said city on such terms and conditions as such city council may fix, to grant for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, standards and conditions of services applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise granted or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission as may be applicable; 
(30)  Regulation of Roadside Areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and Viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands, and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Special Areas of Public Regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(34)  Special Assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(35)  Taxes: Ad Valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(36)  Taxes: Other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(37)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(38)  Urban Redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(39)  Other Powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia, 
(Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-008, § 1, 10-13-2014) 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of Powers. 
    All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City Council Creation; Number; Election. 
    The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six (6) councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City Council Terms and Qualifications for Office. 
(a)  The mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years or until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor or councilmember unless he/she, at the time that he/she has qualified to run for office: 
(1)  Has been a resident of the city for a period of one year; 
(2)  Has reached the age of 21; 
(3)  Is a qualified voter; and 
(4)  Has not been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(c)  No person's name shall be placed on the ballot as a candidate for mayor or councilmember unless such person shall have filed a notice of candidacy and shall have paid the qualifying fee to the city clerk of said city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-11 , § 1, 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; Filling of Vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Filling of Vacancies. In the event that the office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six (6) months of the date of the next regular election, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the unexpired term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and Expenses. 
    The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Holding Other Office; Voting When Personally Interested. 
(a)  Except as authorized by law, the mayor or any councilmember shall not hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which he was elected. 
(b)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall vote upon, sign or veto any ordinance, resolution, contract or other matter in which he is personally interested. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and Investigations. 
    The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General Power and Authority of the City Council. 
    Except as otherwise provided by the charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I [of this Charter]. 
Sec. 2.17. - Effective Date of Terms; Oath of Office. 
    Newly elected governing body members shall assume office effective January 1 following a municipal election. Prior to entering upon their duties, newly elected governing body members shall each take the following oath: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
The oath may be administered any time following the final determination of election results, to be effective on the next immediately following January 1. 
Sec. 2.18. - Regular and Special Meetings. 
(a)  The city shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three (3) members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible 24 hours prior to such meetings. 
Code reference- Regular meetings, § 2-51 et seq. 
Sec. 2.19. - Rules of Procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at his pleasure. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.20. - Quorum; Voting. 
    The presiding officer and three (3) councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the minutes, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the minutes. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of council members present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2.21. - Ordinance Form; Procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. The enacting clause shall be in substantially the following form: "Be it and it is hereby ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Jonesboro..." and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Code reference- Ordinances; form and procedures, § 2-31. 
Sec. 2.22. - Action Requiring an Ordinance. 
    Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.23. - Codes of Technical Regulations. 
    The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.24. 
Sec. 2.24. - Signing; Authenticating; Recording; Codification; Printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose, all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as city council may specify. The compilation shall be known and cited officially as the "Code of Ordinances of Jonesboro, Georgia." 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2.25. - Election of Mayor; Forfeiture; Compensation. 
    The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. He shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the county for one (1) year and the city for six (6) months immediately preceding his election. He shall continue to reside in this city during the period of his service. He shall forfeit his office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. The mayor shall vote as any other councilmember. 
Sec. 2.26. - Chief Executive Officer. 
    The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. He shall possess all of the executive and administrative power granted to the city under the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this charter. 
Sec. 2.27. - Powers and Duties of Mayor. 
    As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)  see that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  recommend appointment and removal of officers, department heads, and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided in this charter; 
(3)  exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(4)  prepare and submit to the city council a recommended operating budget and recommended capital budget; 
(5)  submit to the city council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city, and from time to time, such other information as the city council may request; 
(6)  recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient; 
(7)  call special meetings of the city council as provided for in Section 2.18(b); 
(8)  provide for an annual audit of all accounts of the city; 
(9)  require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever he deems it expedient; and 
(10)  perform such other duties as may be required by law, this charter, or by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.28. - Mayor Pro Tem; Selection; Duties. 
    By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tem at the January council meeting each year. During the sickness, absence or disqualification of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall act as mayor, or in case of sickness, absence or disqualification of the mayor pro tem, any one of the council chosen by the city council shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor, and shall perform the mayor's duties. The mayor, or mayor pro tem while acting as mayor, shall have right to vote upon any question before the council, and in the case of a tie shall cast the deciding vote, unless his vote created the tie. The sickness, absence or disqualification of the mayor or mayor pro tem shall be declared by majority vote of the council members. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2.29. - Election of Officers by Council; Salaries and Bonds; Removal from Office. 
    Officers shall be elected or appointed, employed and dismissed by the Mayor and Council in accordance with Article III of this Charter. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1997(2), § 1(2.29); Ord. No. 2014-005, § 1, 8-11-2014) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Code reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and Service Departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties, and establish, abolish or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to nominate for appointment and the City Council is hereby authorized and empowered to confirm the mayor's appointment annually, and for the term of one year, unless sooner discharged or as otherwise provided by Georgia statute setting another term, directors of city departments, with the exception of the city manager, and the following officers, who may or may not serve as directors of city departments: a chief of police and police officers, a building inspector, a code enforcement officer, a municipal court judge, a solicitor, and other officers that the city creates by ordinance. 
(c)  Directors of departments, with the exception of the city manager, are also officers. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, officers shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. Further, the mayor and councilmen, at their discretion, may appoint the same person to discharge and perform the duties of more than one office. 
(e)  The mayor and city council may establish the salaries of such officers, require them to bond, prescribe their duties and oaths, suspend or remove them from office, or impose upon them fines. All such officers shall be elected at the first regular meeting held after the election and qualification of said mayor and council or so soon thereafter as possible. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided by law, all officers shall be suspended or dismissed by either the city manager, the mayor, or the city council, without cause, and without rights to an appeal. 
(g)  Other employees shall be hired and removed by their supervisors. Such removals are subject to appeal to the mayor or the city manager. The grounds for such appeals are limited to factual errors, removal due to personal or political reasons, and unlawful discrimination prohibited by state and federal law. The mayor's or the city manager's decision on such appeals is subject to review by a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Clayton County. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-005, § 2, 8-11-2014; Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 1, 6-12-2017) 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, Commissions and Authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasijudicial or quasilegislative function the city council deems necessary, and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission or authority shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of four (4) members of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice-chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City Attorney. 
    The mayor shall nominate with the confirmation of the city council a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. The city attorney shall be suspended or dismissed by either the mayor or a majority vote of the city council, without cause, and without rights to an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2014-005, § 3, 8-11-2014) 
Sec. 3.13. - City Clerk. 
    The mayor shall nominate with the confirmation of the city council a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal; maintain city council records required by this charter; attend and preserve minutes of all the actions occurring during each meeting of the city council; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. The council may combine the duties of city clerk with other appointed positions in city government. The city clerk shall execute such bond, with good security, condition for the faithful discharge of his duties in such sum as may be required of him by the city council. The city clerk shall be suspended or dismissed by either the mayor or a majority vote of the city council, without cause, and without rights to an appeal. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-005, § 4, 8-11-2014) 
Sec. 3.14. - Finance Officer. 
    The mayor shall nominate with the confirmation of the city council a finance officer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other monies belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city, and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes by the city. The finance officer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a fiscal officer and shall execute such bond and in such sum as may be required of him by the city council. He shall also make general and special reports in the manner and at the time when called upon by the city council to do so. The council may combine the duties of finance officer with other appointed positions in city government. The finance officer shall be suspended or dismissed by either the mayor or a majority vote of the city council, without cause, and without rights to an appeal. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-005, § 5, 8-11-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-005, § 5, adopted Aug. 11, 2014, changed the title of § 3.14 from "City Treasurer" to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 3.15. - Position Classification and Pay Plans. 
    The city may adopt a position classification and pay plan. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. 
Sec. 3.16. - Personnel Policies. 
    The city council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  the method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  the administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
Sec. 3.17. - City manager; appointment; compensation; duties. 
(a)  The mayor shall nominate with the confirmation of the City Council a city manager. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications. 
(b)  The City Council shall have the authority to contract with the city manager to serve for a definite period of time, and shall fix his/her compensation and benefits. 
(c)  In the event the City Council determines that the city will exercise its authority to contract for the services of a city manager as authorized above, no such contract shall be executed within forty-five (45) days prior to a city general election of any year in which the city holds a general election for purposes of electing a mayor or councilpersons. 
(d)  The city manager shall be suspended or dismissed by either the mayor or a majority vote of the city council, without cause, and without rights to an appeal. 
(e)  The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city, and he/she shall serve as the director of the Administration Department. He/she shall be responsible to the City Council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his/her charge by or under this charter and ordinances of the city. He/she shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  He/she shall recommend for nomination by the mayor appointment of officers and directors of departments. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinances of the city, he/she shall suspend or remove officers and directors of departments. He/she may authorize any director of a department to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department. 
(2)  He/she shall supervise the administration of all departments of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(3)  He/she shall attend all city council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but he/she may not vote. 
(4)  He/she shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the City Council, subject to enforcement by him/her or by officers subject to his/her direction and supervisions, are faithfully executed. 
(5)  He/she shall prepare with the Mayor and submit all annual operating budgets to the City Council. 
(6)  He/she shall submit to the City Council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city at the end of each fiscal year. 
(7)  He/she shall make such other reports as the City Council may require concerning the operations of the city departments, offices and agencies subject to his/her direction and supervision. 
(8)  He/she shall keep the City Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable. 
(9)  In the absence of another appointee, he/she shall serve as the purchasing agent for the city. 
(10)  He/she shall perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 2, 6-12-2017) 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Code reference- Courts, ch. 30. 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; Name. 
    There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Jonesboro. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief Judge; Associate Judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and be admitted to the practice of law in Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of four (4) members of the city council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability and without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.19. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
    The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; Powers. 
(a)  The ..... municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) or ten (10) days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court shall have power to impose fines, costs and forfeitures for the violation of any ordinance of the City of Jonesboro passed in accordance with this charter, in an amount not to exceed One Thousand and 00/100 Dollars ($1,000.00), to imprison offenders for a period of not more than six (6) months, or at labor on the roads and streets or other public works of said city for not more than thirty (30) days; and the said municipal court shall have the power and authority to impose any one or more of these punishments when the court shall find that the facts of the case so justify, or to set out a penalty provided for use for punishment of violations of city ordinances as set out in state law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation, and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior and state courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizance to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi, at least (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts generally, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
    The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Clayton County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for Court. 
    The judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the court may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be finished to a defendant in municipal court proceedings. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 1) 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Code reference- Polling place, § 2-121. 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of General Law. 
    All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.) as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Election of the City Council and Mayor. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in odd-numbered years. 
(b)  There shall be elected three (3) councilmembers in the 1997 election and at every other election thereafter. The mayor's seat and the remaining city council seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created as provided for in the initial election held under this charter. 
(c)  The mayor and councilmembers holding office on the effective date of this charter shall continue in office as elected officers of the city. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan Elections. 
    Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by Plurality. 
    All elections in the city shall be determined by plurality. The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for mayor shall be elected. Councilmembers are elected at large. The number of candidates receiving the highest numbers of votes and corresponding to the number of council seats to be filled shall be elected. 
Sec. 5.14. - Special Elections; Vacancies. 
    In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six (6) months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those remaining may appoint a successor for the remainder of the term or may allow the office to remain vacant pending the next regular city election. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.15. - Other Provisions. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of Officers. 
(a)  The mayor, council members, or other appointed officers, not including department heads or other officers listed under Section 3.10, as provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  incompetence, misfeasance in office; 
(2)  conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  failure at any time to posses any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter; 
(4)  knowingly violating any express prohibition of this charter; 
(5)  abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; 
(6)  failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by state law; or, 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of four (4) council members after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten (10) days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Clayton County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the Superior Court from the municipal court. 
(2)  By an order of Superior Court of Clayton County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such a removal brought by any resident of the City of Jonesboro. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 1) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Code reference- Finance, § 2-151 et seq. 

Sec. 6.10. - Property Tax. 
    The city council may assess, levy and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is not exempt from such taxation by state law. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage Rate; Due Dates; Payments Methods. 
    The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and Business Taxes. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; Permits; Fees. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity, and if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety and welfare necessitates. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
    The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by him. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service Charges. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special Assessments. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; Other Taxes. 
    This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of Delinquent Taxes and Fees. 
    The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fa.'s; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General Obligation Bonds. 
    The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue Bonds. 
    Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Shortterm Loans. 
    The city may obtain shortterm loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Fiscal Year. 
    The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.23. - Preparation of Budgets. 
    The city council may prescribe procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.24. - Submission of Budget to City Council. 
    On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget may be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he may deem pertinent. The budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.25. - Action by City Council on Budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the budget proposed by the mayor, except, that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of the new fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.26. - Tax Levies. 
    Following adoption of the budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.27. - Changes in Appropriations. 
    The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget, at any regular meeting, special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from any existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.28. - Independent Audit. 
    There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.29. - Contracting Procedures. 
    All City contracts shall comply with state law and city ordinances. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6.30. - Centralized Purchasing. 
    The city council may by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.31. - Sale of City Property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of the resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place when such swap is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for Officials. 
    The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior Ordinances. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Pending Matters. 
    Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.13. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.14. - Severability. 
    If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.15. - Repealer. 
    An Act incorporating the City of Jonesboro in the County of Clayton approved August 18, 1919, (1919 Ga. Laws, page 1067), as amended by 1937 Ga. Laws, page 1972; 1941 Ga. Laws, page 1569; 1952 Ga. Laws, page 2510; 1957 Ga. Laws, page 2976; 1958 Ga. Laws, page 2619; 1971 Ga. Laws, page 2854; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 3295; 1988 Ga. Laws, page 4656; 1988 Ga. Laws, page 4814; and 1989 Ga. Laws, page 5216; as well as 1939 Ga. Laws, page 1130 are hereby repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this charter are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 7.16. - Effective Date. 
    This charter shall become effective following approval by the General Assembly and preclearance by the United States Department of Justice. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws in the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ga. Laws 
Year Page 
Number Section  Section 
this Charter 1996 4056 arts. 1-7 Arts. 1-7  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of any ordinances in the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Charter  2-12-2001 1 1.13(13) 1.13(20) 1.13(29) 2.12(b) 2.20 2.24(b) 2.28 3.10(a)-(d) 3.13, 3.14       Added 3.17 4.13(c) 4.15 5.16 6.29 2014-005  8-11-2014 1 2.29 2 3.10 3 3.12 4 3.13 5 3.14 6       Dltd 3.17 2014-008 10-13-2014 1 1.13 2016-11 10-10-2016 1 2.11 2017-08  6-12-2017 1 3.10 2       Added 3.17  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Jonesboro, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1987, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    City council. The term "city council" shall mean the mayor and councilmembers of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    Code. The word "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Jonesboro, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
    Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" shall mean the corporate limits of the City of Jonesboro. 
    County. Whenever the words "county," "the county" or "this county" are used they shall refer to Clayton County, Georgia. 
    Court. The word "court" shall mean the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether it shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
    Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
    Month, year. The words "month" and "year" shall mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
    Municipal court. The term "municipal court" shall mean the municipal court of the City of Jonesboro. 
    Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Jonesboro" were added thereto. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in the trade or with reference to the subject matter. 
    Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
    Oath. The word "oath" includes affirmation. 
    O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
    Or, and. The words "or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall mean and include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
    Property. The word "property" means and includes real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall include any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
    Schedule of fees and charges. The phrase "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts, performance bonds, and various charges, as determined from time to time by the city council, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
    Seating, minimum. Where this Code requires seating for a minimum number of persons, only chairs, stools and booths shall be provided as the required seating. The capacity of seats without dividing arms shall be determined by allotting 18 inches per occupant. 
    Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription includes the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
    State. Whenever the words "state," "the state" or "this state" are used they shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
    Street. The term "street" shall include streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city, unless otherwise provided. 
    Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
    Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupied, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
    Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1987, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference- Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections, history notes and editor's notes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1987, § 1-1-3) 
State Law reference- Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1987, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are or were, upon their enactment, believed by the mayor and council to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, no section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is mutually dependent upon any other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code. 
(c)  In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the mayor and council that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of the Code and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of the Code shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
(Code 1987, § 1-1-5; Ord. of 10-9-2000(1), § 1(1-1-5)) 
State Law reference- Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(11)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(12)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(13)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(15)  Any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language, or language of similar import: "Section _____ of the Code of Ordinances of Jonesboro, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language or language of similar import shall be used: "The Code of Ordinances of Jonesboro, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1987, § 1-1-6; Ord. of 8-14-2000(1), § 1(1-1-6)) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1987, § 1-1-7) 
State Law reference- Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Liability for violations by corporations; other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by the corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where the violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in such person or agency, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 180 days, or by both fine and imprisonment or by alternative sentencing. 
Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1987, § 1-1-8) 
Charter reference- Jurisdiction and powers of municipal court, § 4.13. 
State Law reference- Imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; display of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11. 
Sec. 1-13. - Additional penalties; jail fund; depositing of money in funds. 
(a)  In every case in which the municipal court shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any offense against a city ordinance, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(b)  At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this state or a violation of a city ordinance, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which the municipal court shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be collected. 
(c)  The additional penalties set forth in this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund, or by any other provision of law. 
(d)  The additional penalties as prescribed in this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds. Such additional penalties shall be paid over to the city council by the tenth day of each month following the month in which these sums are collected. 
(e)  All such sums collected and paid over to the city council shall be deposited into a special account which shall be known as the county jail fund. 
(f)  All moneys collected pursuant to this section and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended solely and exclusively for constructing, operating, and staffing the county correctional facilities, or for such other purposes as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. 
(g)  The additional penalties provided for by this section shall not be imposed or collected in the municipal court unless the city and the county enter into an intergovernmental contract providing for use of the county jail, correctional institution, or detention facility by city prisoners. 
State Law reference- Additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93. 
Sec. 1-14. - Default time limit. 
    Whenever this Code provides for the performance of any official act or decision by any person or entity, but fails specifically to provide a time limit for performance of the official act or the rendering of the decision, the act shall be performed or the decision rendered within 30 days of the event rendering the performance of the act necessary or possible. If the final day for performance of the act or rendering of the decision falls on a weekend or a legal holiday on which the government offices of the city are closed, then final day shall be extended to the next weekday on which the government offices of the city are open. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2000(2), § 1(1-1-2A)) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Administrative affairs, § 3.10 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(12); civil emergencies, ch. 26; courts, ch. 30; volunteer fire department, § 38-1; planning, ch. 50; taxation, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, § 86-41 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, § 86-231 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; offenses involving public records, documents and other items, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-6; duty of incumbent to deliver office property to successor, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-7 et seq.; records as public property, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102; records management plans for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90; records management plan required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e); supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Records management. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this section is to establish effective and efficient management techniques for the creation, utilization, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records made or received by and on behalf of the city in compliance with the Georgia Open Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.), as it may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Records defined . For purposes of this section, the term "records" means all documents, papers, letters, maps, books, tapes, photographs, computer based or generated information, data, data fields, or similar material which is prepared, maintained and/or received by the city, or on the city's behalf, for governmental purposes. 
(c)  Open records officer designated. The city manager is hereby designated as the city's open records officer with respect to all Open Records Act requests submitted to the city. 
(d)  Requests for records. All Open Records Act requests to the city shall be made to the city manager. All written requests for records shall be submitted to the city manager's official city-provided e-mail or fax number. Records requests may alternatively be submitted to the city manager electronically through the city's website; as such service may be made available by the city from time to time. 
(e)  City manager exclusive open records officer. The city manager may assign one or more city employee to assist him/her with responding to record requests under this section. Under no circumstance, however, shall the assignment of such employee exempt a requester from the requirement under this section to submit all records requests to the city manager as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10 , § 1, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 4, 6-12-2017) 
Secs. 2-2-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Elections, § 2-121 et seq. 
State Law reference- Personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; duty of incumbent to deliver office property to successor, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-7 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Ordinances; form and procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be reduced to writing in the form for final adoption. The enacting clause shall be: "The City Council of the City of Jonesboro hereby ordains..." or words of similar import, and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and may be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(Code 1987, § 2-1-9) 
Charter reference- Ordinance form; procedures, § 2.21. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt municipal ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 
Secs. 2-32-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULAR MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Regular and special meetings, § 2.18. 
State Law reference- Due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 

Sec. 2-51. - Time and place. 
    Regular meetings of the city council are held at the Jonesboro Police Department or such other place as may be designated on at such time and place as may be established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution. 
(Code 1987, § 2-1-3; Ord. No. 2015-005, § 1, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 2-52. - Agenda. 
(a)  Items to be placed on the council agenda for any regular meeting shall be submitted to the city clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the Tuesday preceding the next meeting. No formal action shall be taken on any matter by the city council unless the matter appears on the agenda. 
(b)  By a majority vote of the councilmembers present, the city council may vote to discuss any matter not appearing on the agenda, but no official action shall be taken on such matter until a subsequent meeting; provided, however, that by unanimous consent, the councilmembers may take formal action on such an issue. 
(Code 1987, § 2-1-4) 
Sec. 2-53. - Order of business. 
(a)  The order of business at all regular meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Approval of minutes of last meeting; 
(2)  Corrections, if any, to be made in the minutes; 
(3)  Reports of committees; 
(4)  Unfinished business; 
(5)  Reading by the clerk of any communications; and 
(6)  New business. 
(b)  If the city council directs any matter to be the special business of a future meeting, that matter shall have precedence over all other business at that future meeting. 
(c)  No proposition shall be entertained by the city council until it has been seconded, and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor or any member, be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1987, § 2-1-5) 
Sec. 2-54. - Procedure prior to discussion of issues before the city council; contempt. 
    The mayor or, in his absence, the mayor pro tem shall be the presiding officer and the members of council shall not bring up for debate any issue pending before the council until the presiding officer has recognized the member for such purpose. Any member who shall attempt to disrupt the order of business or bring up any motion before the city council or fail to secure the recognition of the presiding officer before entering upon any discussion or debate on any matter pending before the city council shall be held to be in contempt and shall be punished as provided in the Charter. 
(Code 1987, § 2-1-6) 
Sec. 2-55. - Recognition of member prior to speaking. 
    Any member of the council desiring to be recognized shall address the presiding officer as "Mr. Mayor." When recognized, the member shall proceed with his discussion or other business matters that he may desire to bring before the city council. While any member has the floor addressing the city council, it shall be ruled out of order if any other member interrupts or attempts to interrupt the speaker without first obtaining the recognition of the presiding officer. 
(Code 1987, § 2-1-7) 
Sec. 2-56. - Conduct of spectators. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee to be present and on official duty at all special and regular meetings of the city council. 
(b)  Except during such periods of time at such meetings as the city council shall set aside for public discussion, it shall be unlawful for any person present as a spectator to interrupt or disturb the proceedings in any manner by voice, actions or otherwise. 
(c)  During periods set aside for public discussion of any nature, any person desiring to speak shall secure the permission of the presiding officer by first silently raising his hand and being recognized. The use of profanity, obscene language, threats or any violent or abusive conduct by any person shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police, upon the order of the presiding officer at any such meeting, to forcibly if necessary, evict any person violating the provisions of this section from the council meeting hall. Any such violation shall subject the offender, upon conviction thereof before the municipal court, to a fine and/or imprisonment as prescribed by section 1-12. 
(Code 1987, § 2-1-8) 
Secs. 2-57-2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Additional administrative regulations pertaining to city employees on such subjects as employment policy, leaves of absence, holiday pay, sick leave and travel policies are compiled and published separately by the city as the City of Jonesboro Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual. Regulations pertaining to the police department are contained in the Jonesboro Police Department Operations Manual. 
An ordinance, adopted January 12, 1970, established a retirement plan for city employees and set forth the joint trust agreement and the contract for administration of the plan by the city and the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System as provided by O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq. 
Official copies of the personnel manual, police department operations manual and retirement plan are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-7(4); zoning enforcement officer, § 86-41. 
State Law reference- Personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2); authority to establish retirement systems for municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(4); authority of municipality to provide insurance, retirement and pension benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; Georgia municipal employees benefit system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14). 

Sec. 2-91. - Departments established. 
(a)  The following departments are established in the city: 
(1)  Administration. 
(2)  Police. 
(3)  Public works. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(b)  The directors of departments shall be answerable to the city manager. 
(Code 1987, §§ 2-4-1, 4-1-1; Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 3, 6-12-2017) 
Secs. 2-92-2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Elections and removal, art. V. 
Cross reference- City council, § 2-31 et seq. 
State Law reference- Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-121. - Polling place. 
    The Jonesboro city hall located at 124 North Avenue, Jonesboro, Georgia, shall be the polling place for all city elections. 
(Code 1987, § 2-2-5) 
Secs. 2-122-2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Finance, art. VI. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-7(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(3); any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-7(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); any ordinance levying or imposing any taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(13); any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes saved from repeal, § 1-7(15); taxation, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease by municipality of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq.; disposition of municipal property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; authority to dispose of public utility plants or properties, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-7; grants of state funds to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Note- See the editor's note to Div. 2. 

Sec. 2-151. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall commence on January 1 and end on December 31 of each year. 
(Code 1987, § 3-1-1) 
Sec. 2-152. - Annual budget; appropriations. 
    An annual budget and an appropriations ordinance shall be adopted by the city council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than 45 days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget and the appropriations ordinance are not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, this section automatically authorizes the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the city. The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues, including appropriated unencumbered surplus, equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. 
(Code 1987, § 3-1-2) 
Sec. 2-153. - Purchasing agent; purchase orders; duties. 
(a)  Each department head shall serve as purchasing agent for his department. 
(b)  Purchase orders for capital expenditures shall be obtained and processed through the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, each department head, as purchasing agent, shall: 
(1)  Arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all equipment and contractual services for his department, and sell or otherwise dispose of all surplus equipment of his department; 
(2)  Maintain a perpetual or periodic inventory record of all materials, supplies or equipment of his department; and 
(3)  Control and supervise all storerooms and warehouses of his department. 
(Code 1987, § 3-1-3) 
Sec. 2-154. - Unauthorized purchases. 
    It shall be unlawful for any city officer to order the purchase of any supplies or make any contract within the purview of this chapter other than in compliance with this chapter, and any purchase order or contract made contrary to the provisions of this article shall not be approved by city officials, and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
(Code 1987, § 3-1-4) 
Sec. 2-155. - Competitive bidding required. 
(a)  All contracts for capital expenditures and all sales of personal property of the city which have become obsolete and unusable shall, except as otherwise provided in this section, be based wherever reasonably possible on three or more sealed competitive bids and be approved by the city council. If it is not reasonably possible to obtain such bids, then as many competitive bids or quotations as possible shall be obtained. 
(b)  The lowest bid for purchases and the highest bid for sales shall be accepted, unless the city council finds that the lowest bid is not in the city's best interest whereupon the city council may accept another bid or may call for additional bids. 
(Code 1987, § 3-1-5) 
Sec. 2-156. - Cooperative purchasing. 
    Each department head shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the city would be served thereby. 
(Code 1987, § 3-1-6) 
Sec. 2-157. - City contracts; procedure. 
(a)  No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless the following requirements are fulfilled: 
(1)  Each department head shall have the authority to bind the city by contract for any purchase or contract for equipment, supplies and contractual services for the city with the exception of capital expenditures in an amount up to $500.00; provided, however, that the equipment, supplies or contractual services have been budgeted for that department and other purchasing and contracting requirements are fulfilled. 
(2)  The mayor shall have the authority to bind the city by contract for any purchase or contract of equipment, supplies and contractual services for the city, including capital expenditures, in an amount up to $1,000.00 provided the item or service has been budgeted, or in cases of emergency. 
(3)  Upon approval by motion of the city council all other contracts shall be authorized and signed by the mayor or a person designated in writing by the city council, provided that the designation is for a specific contract or subject only. 
(4)  All contracts shall be in writing and approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(b)  The city clerk shall authenticate all contracts and shall maintain a permanent indexed file of original copies of all city contracts. 
(c)  No contract for the sale, lease or purchase of real estate shall be valid without the approval of the city council expressed by a motion to that effect adopted by a majority of the councilmembers present. 
(Code 1987, § 3-1-7) 
Secs. 2-158-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HUD PROCUREMENT POLICY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Nov. 13, 2000, enacted provisions codified herein as Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2, §§ 2-181-2-190. In order to maintain Code format, the existing sections of Art. V were redesignated as Div. 1 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-181. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to create a stand alone procurement policy setting forth standards acceptable to the federal Housing and Urban Development (HUD) department for application when federal HUD monies are received and used by the city. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1(3-3-1)) 
Sec. 2-182. - Limitations of division. 
    This division is to be used for procurement only when the funding source for the procurement are federal HUD monies, HUD grants or other HUD asset devices or awards. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1(3-3-2)) 
Sec. 2-183. - Conflict of laws. 
    This division is designed to comply with Section 85.36, Procurement, of the HUD standards for procurement found in 24 CFR Subtitle A (4-1-00 Edition). If any conflict arises between this division and Section 85.36, the more restrictive policy shall apply. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1(3-3-3)) 
Sec. 2-184. - Award protests. 
(a)  The city as adopted below establishes protest procedures to handle and resolve disputes relating to their procurements and shall in all instances disclose information regarding the protest to the awarding agency. A protestor must exhaust all administrative remedies with the city. 
(b)  If an interested bidder or proposal submitting party protests the award of a bid or proposal the party shall submit such protest in writing within 30 days of the award of the bid or proposal to the city clerk. 
(c)  The protest must specify what violation of this division occurred and the factual basis for the allegation. The grounds for a protest shall be limited to allegations of factual error or that the bid or proposal was not accepted for personal, political, racial, or religious reasons. 
(d)  The protest must be issued by the party under oath or affirmation. 
(e)  Within 60 days of the protest the procurement board shall determine if the protest complies with this division. If the protest does not comply the parties will be notified in writing and provided a recitation of deficiencies. The party may then resubmit a protest. All protest resubmittals must comply with the time limit set forth in subsection (b). 
(f)  Once a complete protest is submitted the mayor and council shall convene an administrative hearing of a procurement board of three city citizens who have resided in the city for at least six months. 
(g)  A protest hearing is a quasi-judicial proceeding. As such, it should be conducted at a place conducive to the maintenance of a judicial atmosphere. At the hearing, the conduct of the parties shall be dignified, both on and off the record. 
(h)  Misconduct before the procurement board may be grounds for summary exclusion from the hearing. The hearing is intended to receive evidence either to refute or to substantiate specific charges which led to the protest. It shall not be a forum for discussion of extraneous or irrelevant matters having no bearing on the charges. All parties at action and witnesses shall be given ample time and opportunity to develop points, subject to the discretion of the procurement board. 
(i)  The procurement board shall not be advocates for or against either party. The procurement board may be appointed independent council for the purposes of investigating and/or refusing the protest. It shall be the duty of the procurement board to be impartial in its conduct and rulings, both on and off the record. The protestors and mayor and council may examine, call and question witnesses and may call for and introduce appropriate documentary evidence, being limited only by the relevance of the evidence to the issues. 
(j)  It should be recognized that the procurement board may be composed of private citizens. Accordingly, the board may not follow established legal procedures as might be expected in a court of law. However, in taking testimony and in considering the evidence, the board shall follow accepted legal procedure insofar as is practicable. It shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence observed in courts of law. The board may listen to hearsay testimony and may accept depositions and affidavits, if such testimony is material and relevant to the issues. 
(k)  Each protest shall be heard by the board at the earliest practicable date following the receipt of a compliant protest. 
(l)  The city clerk shall send out a written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing. This notice shall be sent to the protestor and/or his authorized representative. 
(m)  The general policy of the board concerning postponements shall be that cases set for hearings will be heard on the dates set, and that postponements will be granted only for good cause. Postponement of the opening date of a hearing shall be at the discretion of the chairman of the board. 
(n)  If deemed appropriate to the circumstances of the case, protestor or board may arrange a prehearing conference prior to the hearing in order to consider and determine the following elements: 
(1)  Simplification of the issues. 
(2)  Possible conciliation and settlement without a hearing. 
(3)  Limitation on the number of witnesses. 
(4)  Acceptance of evidence of deposition. 
(5)  Stipulation as to any uncontested facts. 
(6)  Other matters that may aid in the disposition of the appeal. 
(o)  An electronic recording of transactions may be made during prehearing conferences upon request of either party at interest. 
(p)  The chairman of the board shall administer the oath to witnesses. In the event that a prehearing conference has not limited the number of witnesses and the number of witnesses asked for seems to be excessive, in the discretion of the board the party requesting them may be required to justify his request before the board. The board may decline to listen to numbers of witnesses testifying to identical facts. The board, through the city clerk, may subpoena witnesses, documents and records as necessary. 
(q)  A protestor appearing before the procurement board may, if desired, be represented by legal counsel at their expense, or they may act as their own counsel and conduct their own hearings. 
(r)  A certified court reporter may, if desired, be employed by either party at interest, at their expense. 
(s)  The protestor shall make the initial presentation in an effort to prove that the award was taken for personal, religious, racial, or political reasons or that the decision was based upon factual error. After the presentation of all evidence, the procurement board may hear closing arguments and shall then take the case under advisement and render a decision at the earliest practicable date. 
(t)  The procurement board and mayor and council may reverse the award only on a finding that it was based on error or fact or was motivated by personal, religious, racial, or political reasons. Otherwise it shall affirm the decision. 
(u)  The procurement board, after reaching a decision in the case, shall cause an order to be prepared, setting forth their decision and directing appropriate remedies, if any, to resolve the appeal. Except as provided below, the decision of the procurement board in such cases shall be final and conclusive, in the absence of an appellant review. Copies of the board order shall be made a matter of official record and shall be furnished to all parties at interest. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1(3-3-4)) 
Sec. 2-185. - Competition. 
(a)  All procurement transactions will be conducted in a manner providing full and open competition. Some of the situations considered to be restrictive to competition include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Placing unreasonable requirements on firms in order for them to qualify to do business. 
(2)  Requiring unnecessary experience and excessive bonding. 
(3)  Specifying only a brand name product instead of allowing an equal product to be offered. 
(b)  All bid or request for proposal documents will incorporate a clear and accurate description of the technical requirements for the material, product, or service to be procured. Such description shall not, in competitive procurements, contain features which unduly restrict competition. The description may include a statement of the qualitative nature of the material, product or service to be procured, and when necessary, shall set forth those minimum essential characteristics and standards to which it must conform if it is to satisfy its intended use. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1(3-3-5)) 
Sec. 2-186. - Methods of procurement. 
(a)  Small purchase procedures are those relatively simple and informal procurement methods for securing services, supplies, or other property that do not cost more than the simplified acquisition threshold fixed at $1,000.00. If small purchase procedures are used, price or rate quotations shall be obtained from an adequate number of qualified sources. 
(b)  Procurement by sealed bids (formal advertising) are bids publicly solicited and a firm fixed-price contract (lump sum or unit price) is awarded to the responsible bidder whose bid, conforming with all the material terms and conditions of the invitation for bids, is the lowest in price. The sealed bid method is the preferred method for procuring construction. In order for sealed bidding to be used, the following conditions should be present: 
(1)  A complete, adequate, and realistic specification or purchase description is available; 
(2)  Two or more responsible bidders are willing and able to compete effectively for the business; 
(3)  The procurement lends itself to a firm fixed contract and the selection of the successful bidder can be made principally on the basis of price; and 
(4)  If sealed bids are used, the following requirements apply: 
a.  The invitation for bids will be publicly advertised and bids shall be solicited from an adequate number of known suppliers, providing them sufficient time prior to the date set for opening the bids; 
b.  The invitation for bids, which will include any specifications and pertinent attachments, shall define the items or services in order for the bidder to properly respond; 
c.  All bids will be publicly opened at the time and place prescribed in the invitation for bids; 
d.  A firm fixed-price contract award will be made in writing to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. Where specified in bidding documents, factors such as discounts, transportation cost, and life cycle costs shall be considered in determining which bid is lowest. Payment discounts will only be used to determine the low bid when prior experience indicates that such discounts are usually taken advantage of; and 
e.  Any or all bids may be rejected whether such right is reserved in public notice or not and in such case the city may readvertise or abandon the project. 
(c)  Procurement by competitive proposals. The technique of competitive proposals is normally conducted with more than one source submitting an offer, and either a fixed-price or cost-reimbursement type contract is awarded. It is generally used when conditions are not appropriate for the use of sealed bids. If this method is used, the following requirements apply: 
(1)  Requests for proposals will be publicized and identify all evaluation factors and their relative importance. Any response to publicized requests for proposals shall be honored to the maximum extent practical; and 
(2)  Proposals will be solicited from an adequate number of qualified sources. 
(d)  Awards will be made to the responsible firm whose proposal is most advantageous to the program, with price and other factors considered. 
(e)  The city may use competitive proposal procedures for qualifications-based procurement of architectural/engineering (A/E) profession services whereby competitors' qualifications are evaluated and the most qualified competitor is selected, subject to negotiation of fair and reasonable compensation. 
(f)  Procurement by noncompetitive proposals may be used only when the award of a contract is infeasible under small purchase procedures, sealed bids or competitive proposals and one of the following circumstances applies: 
(1)  The item is available only from a single source; 
(2)  After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined inadequate; and 
(3)  Cost analysis, i.e., verifying the proposed cost data, the projections of the data, and the evaluation of the specific elements of costs and profits, is required. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1(3-3-6)) 
Sec. 2-187. - Small and minority firms. 
    The city will take all necessary affirmative steps to assure that minority firms, small firms, women's business enterprises, and labor surplus area firms are used when possible. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1(3-3-7)) 
Sec. 2-188. - Price analysis. 
    The city shall perform a cost or price analysis in connection with every procurement action including contract modifications. The method and degree of analysis is dependent on the facts surrounding the particular procurement situation, but as a starting point, the city will make independent estimates before receiving bids or proposals. A cost analysis must be performed when the offeror is required to submit the elements of his estimated cost, e.g., under professional consulting, and architectural engineering services contracts. A cost analysis will be necessary when adequate price competition is lacking and for sole source procurements, including contract modifications or change orders, established on the basis of a catalog or market price of a commercial product sold in substantial quantities to the general public or based on prices set by law or regulation. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1(3-3-8)) 
Sec. 2-189. - Bonds. 
    The city may require bid, performance and payment bonds. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1(3-3-9)) 
Sec. 2-190. - Failure to comply. 
    Failure of an offeror, bidder, proposer or submittor to comply with this division may result in loss of award and may subject the party to actions against applicable bonds or other actions. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1(3-3-10)) 
Secs. 2-191-2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. For the convenience of the reader, unless the context of the regulation specifically relates to only one set or subset of actors, the terms official, employee, appointee, and volunteer may be used synonymously with "official" and "employee" throughout this article. All terms not defined shall be defined as in the Webster's Dictionary 2004 edition. 
    Agency means the city council, and all other agencies, authorities, boards, commissions, committees, departments, and offices of the city, without exception. 
    Appointee means any person duly appointed by the city council to serve on any authority, board, committee, subcommittee, agency, body, or in any other office or position. 
    Business means a corporation, a partnership, a limited liability company, a sole proprietor, or any other person or organization carrying on an enterprise for profit. 
    Business relationship means an agreement between parties designed to result in an enterprise for profit to those parties. 
    Censure means a public expression of severe criticism or reproach. 
    City means the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    Confidential information means any information, which by law or practice is not available to the general public. 
    Contract means any lease, claim, account or demand against or agreement with any person, whether express or implied, executed or executory, verbal or in writing. 
    Employee means any person holding a classified position as defined in the city's personnel policy. 
    Employment means any rendering of services on request, whether paid or unpaid. 
    Formal reprimand means an action taken by the ethics board against a person or entity found to be in violation of the ethics ordinance, issued in writing to the person or entity, chastising the person or entity for the violation. The record of said formal reprimand shall be inserted into the minutes of the city council. 
    Immediate family means spouse and children. 
    Interest means any direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a public officer or employee as a result of a contract or transaction, which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or within the city. This does not, however, include those contracts or transactions which by their terms and by the substance of their provisions confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of similar benefits to all other persons and/or property similarly situated. Examples of interest include, but are not limited to, situations involving: 
(1)  Any person in the immediate family of the official, employee, appointee, or volunteer; 
(2)  Any person or business with whom a contractual relationship (either written or implied) exists, whereby he may receive a payment or other benefit, including an agreement for employment; and 
(3)  Any business in which he is an officer, director, employee, prospective employee or substantial shareholder (owning or controlling in excess of five percent of the total stock or total legal and beneficial ownership). 
    Official means any official, officer, appointee, volunteer, or member of the government of the city who is not an employee, whether elected or appointed, whether paid or unpaid, whether permanent, temporary or alternate. 
    Official act or action means any executive, legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of any official or employee of the city or any agency of the city. 
    Official city business means work, action, attendance, or other legitimate participation in any event or activity sanctioned by the governing authority of the city. 
    Paid means the receipt of, or right to receive, a salary or commission, percentage, brokerage or contingent fee. 
    Participate means to take part in official acts, actions or proceedings personally as an official or employee through approval, disapproval, decision or the failure to act or perform a duty. 
    Person means any individual, business, labor organization, representative, fiduciary, trust, or association, whether paid or unpaid, including any official or employee. 
    Property means any property, whether real or personal, tangible or intangible, including currency and commercial paper. 
    Reprimand means an expression of disapproval, either public or private. 
    Transaction means the conduct of any activity that results in or may result in an official act or action of the city. 
    Volunteer means a non-paid person engaging in official city business with the approval of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, Art. I, 12-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-222. - Disclosure. 
(a)  An official of the city shall disclose the nature of any interest or benefit he or she has at the time such matter is presented to the mayor and council for discussion and/or action. Such disclosure shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and become part of the public record. The member shall not participate in any ex-parte communications with other members regarding the any such matter. 
(b)  No official of the city shall participate in any discussion, debate, deliberation or vote, or otherwise take part in the decision-making process on any agenda item, any official act or action in which he or she has a conflict of interest. Further, to avoid the appearance of impropriety, following any disclosure made pursuant to this code of ethics, the official shall leave the room in which the meeting is being held and not return to it until deliberation and action of the matter is complete. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, Art. II, 12-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-223. - Prohibitions. 
    No official of the city shall: 
(1)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy his/her favor in the performance of official acts. 
(2)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for him/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties. This limitation is not intended to prohibit the acceptance of an occasional non-monetary gift of insignificant value, an award publicly presented in recognition of public service, a commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by a regular lending institution, or campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. 
(3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's private gain. 
(4)  Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public. 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties. 
(6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being an official or employee of the city. 
(7)  Use his/her position to request or require an employee to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
c.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
d.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation. 
(8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved. 
(9)  Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself/herself or persons having an interest. 
(10)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation of the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has an interest. 
(11)  Draw a per diem or expense money from the City of Jonesboro to attend a convention, seminar or similar meeting and then fail to attend the seminar, conference or meeting. 
(12)  Make false or materially misleading statements or in any manner commit fraud or conceal wrongdoing in relation to city business. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, Art. III, 12-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-224. - Establishment of committee. 
    The mayor and council shall establish a standing ethics committee. The ethics committee shall consist of three persons, one Jonesboro resident appointed by the mayor, one Jonesboro resident appointed by the mayor and council, and one member appointed by the two above named subject to approval by the majority of the mayor and council. The third member shall be either a resident of the city or hold a business license in the City of Jonesboro and shall be an attorney in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia. Members shall serve a three year term and shall be appointed initially in such manner as to permit one term to terminate each year. Members may be removed for inability to perform upon recommendation of the appointing person and pursuant to a two third's vote of the mayor and council. Members of the ethics committee shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, Art. IV, 12-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-225. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person having a complaint against any official or employee of the City of Jonesboro for alleged ethics violations shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation. The complaint shall be filed with the city manager, or in the event the complaint regards the city manager, shall be filed with the mayor. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint concerning an official of the city, the city manager shall call for a meeting of the ethics committee within 45 days. The city manager shall provide the complaint to the ethics committee and answers the member's questions regarding the complaint. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint concerning an employee of the city, the city manager shall investigate the matter and take proper steps as identified in the Jonesboro Personnel Policies and Procedures. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics committee shall: 
(1)  Review the complaint to determine whether it is founded or unfounded, states sufficient facts to invoke disciplinary action or is to be considered for further investigation. 
(2)  Be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unfounded or fail to state sufficient facts to invoke disciplinary actions. 
(3)  Be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add to the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(4)  Be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, take evidence, and hold hearings. 
(5)  Be empowered to subpoena witnesses and information regarding matters before the committee. 
(6)  Report its findings and recommendations for disciplinary actions to the mayor and council. The findings shall include a summary of the committee's actions and investigation into the matter and shall be delivered to all parties of interest within ten business days of reaching the decision/recommendation. The mayor and council shall take action upon the recommendation of the ethics committee at the next regular meeting of the mayor and council following receipt of the recommendation. 
(e)  The mayor and council shall provide meeting space for the ethics committee. Subject to budgetary requirements of the city, the city shall provide the ethics committee with supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, Art. V, 12-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-226. - Appeals. 
    Decisions of the mayor and council pursuant to this code of ethics may be reviewed by an independent special master who is in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia and who is found acceptable by the Georgia Municipal Association. An appeal shall be instituted by notifying the city manager of the desire to appeal within five calendar days of the decision. The special master shall have access to all materials considered by the ethics committee and shall hold a hearing within 30 days receipt of the notice of appeal. The special master shall possess de novo authority and shall render a decision ten days after the hearing. All parties to the hearing may be represented by legal representation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, Art. VI, 12-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-227. - Penalties. 
    Any official found to have violated any provisions of this ordinance may be subject to public reprimand or censure by the mayor and council. These disciplinary actions may include, but shall not be limited to, public reprimand, public censure, request for resignation, the withholding of any pay/stipend of an official for service to the City of Jonesboro, or removal from office. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, Art. VII, 12-15-2005) 
Secs. 2-228-2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AMINISTRATIVE INVESTIGATIONS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-03, adopted Aug. 18, 2007, set out provisions intended for use as Ch. 90, §§ 90-1-90-6 and 90-15-90-24. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 2-251-2-256 and 2-271-2-280. 

DIVISION 1. - INVESTIGATION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-251. - Appointment of investigator. 
(a)  Pursuant to sections 2.15 and 3.11 of the city's Charter, the city council may, through ordinance, appoint an investigating officer for the investigation the affairs of the city. 
(b)  The investigating officer, in performing the investigation herein described, shall fulfill his duties in a manner and have powers and authorities bestowed in the city Charter and this division. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-1, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-252. - Authority of investigator. 
    Any duly appointed investigating officer shall have the authority to do the following in connection with any investigation under this division: 
(1)  Administer oaths and affirmation. 
(2)  Regulate the course of the investigation. 
(3)  Set the time and place for continued meetings. 
(4)  Fix the time for the provision of written documents as deemed appropriate. 
(5)  Provide for the taking of testimony by deposition or interrogatory. 
(6)  Make requests to the city council to seek or issue subpoenas for witnesses and documents relevant to investigation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-2, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-253. - Procedures. 
    The following are established to provide uniform procedures for the conduct of investigations by the investigating officer appointed by the city council: 
(1)  Regulation of investigation. The investigating officer shall in his discretion and pursuant to the nature of the investigation, regulate the course of the investigation using the powers granted in this division in order to find the facts and conclusions of law associated with the affairs of which he has been appointed. 
(2)  Representation. In all matters involved with the investigation, opportunity shall be afforded all parties subject to the investigation and any elected officer a representative of their choice. All arrangements for providing legal counsel shall be the responsibility of the party desiring such representation. 
(3)  Issuance of subpoenas. Subpoenas shall be issued without discrimination between public and private parties. When a subpoena is disobeyed, any party subject to the investigation and any elected officer may apply to the Superior Court of Clayton County for an order requiring obedience. Failure to comply with such order shall be cause for punishment as for contempt of court. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-3, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-254. - Evidence. 
    The investigation shall not be conducted according to rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence, including hearsay, shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the admissibility of such evidence in a court of law. The guiding principle shall be that the investigating officer shall have before it adequate information relevant to designated affairs of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-4, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-255. - Investigation findings. 
    The investigating officer shall, provide the city council and all parties to the investigation, updates, preliminary reports and a final report with findings of fact and conclusions of law as provided for by the investigating officer's appointing ordinance. If such ordinance is silent as to the investigation's findings, the investigating officer shall within 15 days from the close of the evidence, issue its findings of fact and conclusions of law to the city council. The findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be provided to the parties or their representatives. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-5, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-256. - Administrative investigation. 
    The procedures found in this division describe an administrative investigative procedure. In no case shall these procedures be used for any criminal investigation. If during the investigation if the investigating officer finds matters of a criminal nature, the investigating officer shall immediately cease the investigation until all proper criminal authorities are notified and have advised the investigating officer on the manner on which to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-6, 8-18-2007) 
Secs. 2-257-2-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HEARING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-271. - Jurisdiction. 
    Administrative allegations brought by the city council against an elected or appointed officer of the city shall be adjudicated pursuant to the procedures of this division. This division does not maintain the procedures for any allegations brought by the city council against an employee of the city. Such allegations shall be adjudicated pursuant to the procedures of the City of Jonesboro Employee Policies. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-15, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-272. - Appointment of a moderator. 
    The determination on whether to bring allegations and appoint a moderator shall be in the sole discretion of the city council. If the city council desires to bring allegations based on the investigation of this division, it shall do so within 30 days of its receipt of the investigation officer's final report. If the city council brings allegations it shall appoint a moderator to preside over a hearing regarding the allegations. The city council may appoint any individual it deems appropriate to serve as moderator, including the mayor or any member of the council. No adverse action shall be taken resulting from an investigation before the hearing process of this division is complete. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-16, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-273. - Authority and duties of moderator. 
    Any duly appointed moderator shall have the authority to do the following in connection with any hearing under this division: 
(1)  Administer oaths and affirmation. 
(2)  Regulate the course of the hearing. 
(3)  Set the time and place for continued hearings and prehearing conferences. 
(4)  Fix the time for filing written arguments as deemed appropriate. 
(5)  Dispose of motions to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction over the subject matter or parties or for any other grounds. 
(6)  Dispose of motions to amend or to intervene. 
(7)  Provide for the taking of testimony by deposition or interrogatory. 
(8)  Make requests to the city council to seek or issue subpoenas for witnesses and documents relevant to investigation 
(9)  Regulate the hearing and take steps deemed necessary by the moderator to ensure due process is protected. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-17, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-274. - Procedures. 
    The following are established to provide uniform procedures for the conduct of hearings by the moderator appointed by the city council: 
(1)  Notice of hearing. The official, who is party to the allegations shall be duly notified that a hearing shall take place upon a certain date and time, and shall be further advised as to the purpose of the hearing in such notice. Upon service of such notice, a hearing shall be held not less than ten days nor more than 60 days thereafter. 
(2)  Representation. Opportunity shall be afforded all parties subject to the investigation and any elected officer a representative of their choice. All arrangements for providing legal counsel shall be the responsibility of the party desiring such representation. 
(3)  Prehearing conference. The moderator may arrange a prehearing conference for the purpose of reviewing the allegations and establishing stipulations to expedite the hearing. 
(4)  Witnesses. The parties may request the attendance of witnesses when their testimony will aid in establishing the facts in the case. 
(5)  Subpoenas. 
a.  Request for subpoena. The elected or appointed official who is subject to the allegations or the moderator may request the city council to seek or issue subpoenas for witnesses and documents for hearings. 
b.  Issuance of subpoenas. Subpoenas shall be issued without discrimination between public and private parties. When a subpoena is disobeyed, any party subject to the allegations and any elected officer may apply to the Superior Court of Clayton County for an order requiring obedience. Failure to comply with such order shall be cause for punishment as for contempt of court. 
c.  Quashing or limiting subpoenas. Once issued, a subpoena may be quashed or limited by the moderator upon the motion of the moderator or any party subject to the allegations and any elected officer or at the request of the witness, if it appears that the subpoena was used primarily as a means of harassment, that the testimony or documents sought are cumulative, that the testimony or documents sought are not relevant or material, that to respond to the subpoena would be unduly burdensome or that for other good reasons basic fairness dictates that the subpoena should not be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-18, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-275. - Conduct of hearing. 
    In a hearing pursuant to this division, the proceeding shall be informal but orderly. The following procedure shall prevail: 
(1)  The moderator shall open the hearing by explaining the procedure to be followed in the hearing. At the discretion of the moderator, any or all witnesses may be sequestered. 
(2)  The moderator shall read or cause to be read the allegations and specifications as contained in the resolution passed by the city council as well as the final investigative report of the investigative officer. Any written response to the filed with the moderator shall then be read. By agreement, these documents may be inserted in the record without reading. 
(3)  The facts not in dispute shall be stipulated. 
(4)  Each party subject to the allegations and any elected officer shall be given the opportunity to make a brief opening statement identifying the issues and stating what is to be proven. 
(5)  All witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation. 
(6)  Each party subject to the allegations and any elected officer may conduct such examination of the witnesses as shall be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. In addition, the moderator may examine the witnesses. 
(7)  Before closing the hearing, the moderator shall allow both parties the opportunity to make brief oral or written closing statements. 
(8)  The moderator shall, within 15 days from the close of the evidence, issue its findings of fact and conclusions of law to the city council. The findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be provided to the parties or their representatives. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-19, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-276. - Evidence. 
    The hearing shall not be conducted according to rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence, including hearsay, shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the admissibility of such evidence in a court of law. The guiding principle shall be that the moderator shall have before it adequate information relevant to the pending matter. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of originals or copies. Excerpts of documents may be received at the discretion of the moderator. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-20, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-277. - Decision of city council. 
    The city council, after reviewing all evidence obtained from the hearing, may provide a ruling. Any ruling shall be made within 15 days of its receipt of the moderator's findings. Any administrative sanctions shall be at the discretion of the council and pursuant to the city's Charter and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-21, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-278. - Judicial review. 
    The decision of the city council under this division shall not limit the right of the officer subject to the allegations judicial review, and such decision shall be stayed by the filing of a petition for review in the Superior Court of Clayton County. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-22, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-279. - Dismissal of hearing. 
    The city council, at its discretion, may dismiss all allegations and any hearing under this division at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-23, 8-18-2007) 
Sec. 2-280. - Administrative hearing. 
    The procedures found in this division describe an administrative investigative hearing. In no case shall these procedures be used for any criminal investigation or hearing. If during the hearing if the moderator finds matters of a criminal nature, the moderator shall immediately cease the investigation until all proper criminal authorities are notified and have advised the investigating officer on the manner on which to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 90-24, 8-18-2007) 
Secs. 2-281-2-289. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-290. - Established. 
    Hereby is established the "Beautification Commission for the City of Jonesboro." 
(Ord. No. 2016-13 , § 1, 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 2-291. - Authority, purpose, powers and duties. 
    The beautification commission shall be noncommercial and nonpartisan. 
    The purpose of the beautification commission is to assist the city council in the preservation and maintenance of the overall appearance of the city. To implement this purpose, an informal program with a relaxed atmosphere will be provided and the following duties are imposed upon the beautification commission: 
(1)  To conduct public meetings concerning issues and matters related to the appearance of the city; and 
(2)  To receive, review and/or make recommendations to the city council on matters pertaining to the overall appearance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-13 , § 1, 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 2-292. - Membership, terms and quorum. 
    There shall be seven members of the beautification commission. The city council shall appoint by resolution members of the beautification commission. The following standards are applicable: 
(1)  Each member shall be a taxpayer residing in the city or an owner or operator of a business located within the county. 
(2)  The city's code enforcement officer shall also be a member. 
(3)  After service of their initial terms, as set forth by resolution, members shall serve terms of four years until their successors are appointed and sworn. 
(4)  A majority of active members shall constitute a quorum. 
    On an advisory level, the city manager and/or mayor shall serve as liaison to the city council and shall provide reports, recommendations, and information to the beautification commission, as necessary. 
    Members of the beautification commission shall receive no compensation for the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 2016-13 , § 1, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 5, 6-12-2017) 
Sec. 2-293. - Officers. 
    The commission shall annually elect from its members a chair, vice-chair, and a secretary. 
    The following officers shall be elected and shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Chair. 
a.  The chair shall preside at all meetings of the beautification commission. The chair may also: 
b.  Call special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the chair with a minimum of 48 hours' notice of said meetings. Appoint members to subcommittees when necessary or as directed by the beautification commission. 
(2)  Vice-chair. In the absence of the chair, or in the event of his/her inability to act, the vice-chair shall exercise all powers and duties of the chair. 
(3)  Secretary. 
a.  The secretary of the commission shall have the following responsibilities: 
b.  Prepare and record the minutes for all meetings of the beautification commission. 
c.  Record and report attendance at all meetings. 
d.  In general, perform all other duties incidental to the office of the secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2016-13 , § 1, 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 2-294. - Meetings. 
(a)  The regular meeting date of the beautification commission shall be the fourth Monday in each month, beginning at 5:30 p.m. 
(b)  Special meetings may be called by the chair or by any two members of the commission (through the secretary) and upon 48 hours' notice to all members. 
(c)  A total of four voting members shall constitute a quorum. Recommendations and decisions must be made by a majority vote of those present and voting. 
(d)  In the absence of a quorum, those members present may conduct a workshop, record attendance, and furnish minutes in lieu of a regular or special meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2016-13 , § 1, 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 2-295. - Rules of procedure. 
    The beautification commission shall conduct all meetings and activities in accordance to parliamentary law as stated in the most recent edition of Roberts Rules of Order and in accordance with the most recent Georgia Open Meetings Law, O.C.G.A. § 5-14-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2016-13 , § 1, 10-10-2016) 
Secs. 2-296-2-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DESIGN REVIEW COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-300. - Established. 
    Hereby is established the "Design Review Commission for the City of Jonesboro." 
(Ord. No. 2018-009 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 2-301. - Authority and intent. 
    The design review commission ("commission") shall be part of the planning functions of the city. The commission shall be nonpartisan. 
    The mayor and city council of the city intend for this commission to guide, protect, and enhance the aesthetic and historic quality of the city and believe that quality control of future development is essential to the promotion of the overall health, prosperity and general welfare of the people. 
    The mayor and city council intend for this commission to help revitalize the business districts and historic neighborhoods, and to help protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists, thereby promoting and stimulating business. 
    The mayor and council believe this commission to be a reasonable method of regulation for satisfying the legitimate purposes stated above. Therefore, the mayor and city council hereby adopt this division to establish a uniform procedure for the review of the development of future structures and the rehabilitation or significant modification of existing structures in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2018-009 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 2-302. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Applicant. A property owner or their authorized representative who has petitioned the city for approval of a zoning petition, conditional use, subdivision plat, site plan, development permit, building permit, variance, appeal, certificate of appropriateness, or any other authorization for the use or development of their property under the requirements of this Code. 
    Application. A petition for approval of a zoning map amendment, conditional use, project approval, development permit, subdivision plat, building permit, variance, appeal, certificate of appropriateness, or any other authorization for use or development of property under the requirements of this Code. 
    Arts & Entertainment District Overlay Zone. Specifically designated areas within the city limits, as provided in section 86-114, intended to facilitate creation of an arts destination, sustain established arts and cultural uses and promote new arts and cultural uses. 
    Assembly Overlay. Specially designated areas within the city limits, as provided in section 86-110, intended to guide and enhance future development within these areas. 
    Building. A structure with a roof, intended for shelter or enclosure, whether residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional. 
    Building addition. A walled and roofed expansion to the square footage of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. 
    Building facade. The elevation of a building extended from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation fronting a public street, excluding alleys and lanes; may also be referred to as the building face. 
    Certificate of appropriateness. A document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
    City. The City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    City council, mayor and council. The mayor and council of the City of Jonesboro. 
    Community development director. The director of the community development department, or his or her designee. 
    Conditional use. A use not automatically permitted by right, but may be permitted within a zoning district, subject to requirements specified in this division or imposed by the mayor and council. 
    Design review commission. An advisory commission that gives recommendations to the historic preservation commission, the community development department and the city council as to whether or not modifications to an existing building, site, or development or a new building, site, or development meet the standards established in this Code. 
    Development. Any project involving construction of streets, utilities, buildings or other improvements made to property to accommodate specific uses such as dwellings, office buildings, warehouses, an apartment complex, a store or shopping center; also any alteration to improved or unimproved property, including, but not limited to, construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, dredging, excavation, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, permanent storage of materials or other land disturbance; and any use or extension of a use of land; also the act of constructing or implementing a land development project, including the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
    Exterior modification. Any significant change, addition or modification in construction, occupancy or use or rearrangement in the supporting members of the facade or exterior of an existing building or structure, or any enlargement to or reduction of the facade or exterior of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another. 
    Historic district. A district consisting of various zones that have substantial historic, architectural or cultural significance, as provided in Code sections 86-102 and 86-103 and designated on the official zoning map of the city. 
    Historic residential overlay. Specially designated residential areas within the city limits, as provided in section 86-111, with an additional set of design or construction standards intended to protect and enhance the character of the city's historical neighborhoods within these areas. 
    Historic preservation commission. The city appointed commission assigned with upholding the standards of the city H-1 Historic District, the H-2 Historic District, the Historic Residential Overlay, and the federal standards of the Secretary of the Interior, related to historic preservation, rehabilitation, and replacement historic buildings and structures. 
    Improvement. Any man-made object that becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to real estate. 
    Landscaping. Actual plant materials or installation of such materials consisting of trees, shrubs, vines, turf, ground cover and other natural landscape materials utilized to enhance the aesthetic and functional qualities of a site. 
    Object. A material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
    Owner. An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, or other entity having sufficient vested legal property rights for which they seek an action under this division. 
    Parking lot. Any public or private area used for the express purpose of temporary storage of motor vehicles at grade otherwise in operation for personal or business use. 
    Principal building. A building on a lot in which is conducted the primary use. 
    Sign. A structure or device designed to attract attention or convey information to the public in written or graphic form, and regulated by section 86-475 et seq. 
    Site. A property, either already developed or to be developed. 
    Structure. Any object constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground. 
    Subdivision. The division of a property or tract of land into two or more tracts or lots; a land development project in which two or more lots are created, along with the streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots. 
    Subdivision, major. The division of a tract or parcel of land into greater than three lots which may or may not involve the construction of a new public or private street; or any subdivision that involves the construction of a new public or private street. 
    Subdivision, minor. A subdivision of three or fewer lots, which does not involve the construction of a new public or private street. 
    Tara Boulevard Overlay. A specially designated corridor within the city limits, as provided in section 86-109, intended to guide and enhance future development along Tara Boulevard. 
    Variance. A mechanism used to grant a property owner relief from specific provisions of the zoning ordinance when strict compliance would result in a particular hardship. 
    Zoning administrator. The person designated within the city who administers and enforces the city zoning code. Unless otherwise designated, the community development director of the city is the city zoning administrator. 
    Zoning change. An amendment to the official zoning map (re-zoning), approval of a conditional use, or approval of a change in the conditions of approval assigned with a re-zoning. 
    Zoning ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia as adopted and amended. 
(Ord. No. 2018-009 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 2-303. - Powers and duties. 
    The design review commission has the power to make certain advisory recommendations to the city council, the historic preservation commission, and the community development department. The commission's recommendations on review items are not binding, but are intended to be utilized by the city council, the historic preservation commission, and the community development department in making informed, binding decisions. 
    The commission shall be authorized to: 
(a)  Make recommendations to the historic preservation commission regarding certificate of appropriateness applications for any exterior modifications to existing developments, buildings and structures (including signs) within the historic districts and Historic Residential Overlay, prior to the scheduled historic preservation commission hearing on the applications. 
(b)  Make recommendations to the historic preservation commission regarding certificate of appropriateness applications for proposed and replacement developments, buildings and structures (including signs) within the historic districts and Historic Residential Overlay, prior to the scheduled historic preservation commission hearing on the applications. 
(c)  Make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding any exterior modifications to existing developments, buildings and structures (including signs) that require variances, generally within the city and, more specifically, within the Tara Boulevard Overlay, Arts & Entertainment District Overlay Zone or Assembly Overlay. 
(d)  Make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding proposed developments, buildings and structures (including signs) that require variances, generally within the city and, more specifically, within the Tara Boulevard Overlay, Arts & Entertainment District Overlay Zone or Assembly Overlay. 
(e)  Make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding any exterior modifications to existing developments, buildings and structures (including signs) that require conditional use hearings and/or zoning change hearings, generally within the city and, more specifically, within the Tara Boulevard Overlay, Arts & Entertainment District Overlay Zone or Assembly Overlay. 
(f)  Make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding proposed developments, buildings and structures (including signs) that require conditional use hearings and/or zoning change hearings, generally within the city and, more specifically, within the Tara Boulevard Overlay, Arts & Entertainment District Overlay Zone or Assembly Overlay. 
(g)  Make recommendations to the city manager and community development director regarding significant exterior modifications to existing developments, buildings and structures (including signs) that do not require public zoning hearings and do not lie within the historic district or overlays. 
(h)  Make recommendations to the city manager and community development director regarding significant proposed developments, buildings and structures (including signs) that do not require public zoning hearings and do not lie within the historic district or overlays. 
(i)  Make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding proposed text amendments to the city zoning code. 
(j)  Make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding applicable facade grant applications for existing buildings and structures within the city. 
    The commission shall not be authorized to: 
(k)  Make recommendations to the city manager and community development director regarding the permitting of minor buildings and structures (such as decks, sheds and other accessory buildings, etc.) that do not require variances or other public zoning hearings and do not lie within the historic district or overlays. 
(l)  Make recommendations to the city manager and community development director regarding the permitting of minor exterior modifications to existing buildings and structures (repairs, etc.) that do not require variances or other public zoning hearings and do not lie within the historic district or overlays. 
(m)  Make recommendations to the city manager and community development director regarding the permitting of solely interior modifications to buildings and structures. 
(n)  Make recommendations to the city manager and community development director regarding the replacement of sign faces or panels within an existing framework that do not require variances or other public zoning hearings, do not lie within the historic district or overlays, and do not significantly change the size of the former face or panel. 
(o)  Make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding conditional use and change of zoning applications that do not involve the construction of new buildings or the significant exterior modification of existing buildings. 
(p)  Make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding the review of major or minor subdivision plats. 
(Ord. No. 2018-009 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 2-304. - Membership, terms, and quorum. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be either taxpayers residing in the city or an owner or operator of a business located within Clayton County and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in zoning, planning and design-related matters. 
(b)  To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of planning or related professions, or be established business or civic leaders within the city. 
(c)  Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms unless otherwise approved by majority vote of the mayor and city council. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. 
(d)  Members missing more than three consecutive meetings shall be replaced per the discretion of the mayor and city council. 
(e)  Members are authorized to serve on more than one board, commission or authority except those members actively serving on the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 2018-009 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 2-305. - Officers. 
    The commission shall annually elect from its members a chair, vice-chair, and a secretary. The following officers shall be elected and shall have the following duties: 
(a)  Chair. 
(1)  The chair shall preside at all meetings of the design review commission. 
The chair may also: 
(2)  Call special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the chair with a minimum of 48 hours' notice of said meetings. Special called meeting times are subject to the approval of the city manager and the community development director. 
(3)  Appoint members to subcommittees when necessary or as directed by the design review commission. Subcommittees are subject to the approval of the city manager and the community development director. 
(b)  Vice-chair. In the absence of the chair, or in the event of his/her inability to act, the vice-chair shall exercise all powers and duties of the chair. 
(c)  Secretary. 
(1)  Prepare and record the minutes for all meetings of the design review commission. 
(2)  Record and report attendance at all meetings. 
(3)  In general, perform all other duties incidental to the office of the secretary. 
If members of the commission are unable to perform the duties of the secretary, then a designated member of the city hall staff may perform such duties. 
(Ord. No. 2018-009 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 2-306. - Meetings and quorum. 
(a)  The regular meeting date of the design review commission shall be the first Wednesday in each month, beginning at 4:30 p.m. 
(b)  Special meetings may be called by the chair, subject to approval by the city manager and the community development director, and upon 48 hours' notice to all members. 
(c)  A total of three voting members shall constitute a quorum. Recommendations and decisions must be made by a majority vote of those present and voting. 
(d)  In the absence of a quorum, those members present may conduct a workshop, record attendance, and furnish minutes in lieu of a regular or special meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2018-009 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 2-307. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. The design review commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business such as by-laws, removal of membership provision, and other criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this division. 
(b)  Meetings. The design review commission shall conduct all meetings and activities in accordance to parliamentary law as stated in the most recent edition of Robert's Rules of Order and in accordance with the most recent Georgia Open Meetings Law, O.C.G.A. § 5-14-1 et seq. The scheduled meeting time and agenda shall be posted in a conspicuous location at City Hall at least 48 hours prior to the scheduled meeting time. 
(c)  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia statutes and in the city Charter. 
(d)  Compensation. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for applicable expenses. 
(e)  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept at City Hall of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. Meetings shall be recorded and corresponding written minutes shall be compiled by the designated secretary. The minutes shall reflect all listed agenda items and the corresponding actions for those items. 
(f)  Submission of plans to commission. Detailed drawings, photographs, scaled plans and other documentation shall be provided by the applicant, as necessary for the commission to make an informed recommendation. Any application fees required for design review are at the discretion of city council. The community development director shall forward all information required of the applicant to the design review commission at least a week prior to the meeting date. The director shall also provide a staff report of each design review commission agenda item and make his or her own recommendation for each item. 
(g)  Applications and permits. 
(1)  Applications for variances, conditional uses, and changes in zoning shall not be approved prior to a review and recommendation by the design review commission concerning architectural elements, parking design, landscaping/buffers, signage, and other applicable elements of a site modification or development. (Design review may occur prior to an official application for a variance, conditional use, or change in zoning, but no approval by the city council shall occur if official design review recommendations are not made and applications are not complete.) 
(2)  Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall not be approved prior to a review and recommendation by the design review commission concerning architectural elements and other applicable items. 
(3)  Building permits for significant exterior modifications to existing buildings or significant proposed buildings (that do not require public hearings and do not lie within the historic district or overlays) shall not be approved prior to a review and recommendation by the design review commission concerning architectural elements and other applicable items. 
(h)  Acceptable commission reaction to review items. 
(1)  By a majority vote of present members, the commission may elect to recommend an agenda item for approval, based on substantial adherence to this Code, and on the following general criteria: 
a.  Is it aesthetically compatible with adjacent and nearby properties? 
b.  Does it utilize quality building materials? 
c.  Does it improve the appearance of any existing buildings or structures on the subject property? 
d.  Will its appearance cause substantial detriment to use and enjoyment of adjacent and nearby properties? 
(2)  By a majority vote of present members, the commission may elect to recommend an agenda item for denial, based on substantial lack of adherence to this Code, and on not following the above specified criteria. 
(3)  The commission may elect to provide no recommendation for an agenda item, based on specific reasons which must be recorded in the minutes. A tie vote by commission members on an agenda item is the equivalent of a "no recommendation." 
(4)  The commission may elect to postpone action on an agenda item until the next available meeting, if the board feels that there is insufficient information to make an informed recommendation. 
(i)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(Ord. No. 2018-009 , § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-007 , § 1, adopted May 31, 2016, revised the title of Ch. 6 from "Alcoholic Beverages" to "Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco Products"; Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 10, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1-6-201, and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. The former Ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 05-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 10, 2005; Ord. No. 007-001, Arts. I, II, adopted June 11, 2007; Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2011; Ord. No. 2014-004, § 1, adopted June 9, 2014; Ord. No. 2014-010, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2014. 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; public drinking or consumption of alcoholic beverages, § 46-14; open containers of alcoholic beverages in vehicles, § 46-15; public drunkenness, § 46-20. 
State Law reference- Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose and authority to regulate alcoholic beverages in city. 
(a)  This chapter has been enacted in furtherance of the police powers of the city and in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sales of alcoholic beverages, to protect and preserve schools and churches, to give effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable consideration, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhood and property values, and to protect against the evils of concentration of ownership or control of the retail outlets for alcoholic beverages or to prevent undesirable persons from controlling the retail alcoholic beverage industry. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are ordained under and by virtue of the authority granted by the laws of the State of Georgia, O.C.G.A. Chapter 3; Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages Generally. To adopt all reasonable rules and regulations as may fall within the police powers of the city to regulate any such business; O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90, authorizing each municipality to issue licenses, through ordinance, to sell distilled spirits for beverage purposes by the drink, the sales to be for consumption only on the premises; O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110, granting the city the full power to adopt all reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of any such licensee including, but not limited to, the regulations of hours of business, types of employees, and other matters which may fall within the police powers of the city; O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 and 3-5-42, authorizing city licenses for the business of manufacturing, distributing and selling malt beverages at wholesale and retail; and O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40, authorizing municipal license for the manufacturing, distributing and selling wine at wholesale and retail. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages and nudity on the premises are ordained by virtue of the authority granted by the constitution and laws of the United States and State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them: 
    Alcoholic: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverages: All alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, spirituous liquors, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
    Bar: An establishment that does not meet the definition of restaurant, private club, hotel, or golf club that is primarily devoted to selling and dispensing alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises. Bars shall not be permitted to operate in the city or obtain a license under this chapter. 
    Brown bagging: The act of patrons entering any restaurant, private club, golf club, hotel, or any other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and bringing in and consuming the patrons' own alcoholic beverage. 
    Brown bag establishment: Any restaurant, private club, golf club, hotel, or any other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. 
    City: The City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    City clerk: The City Clerk of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
    Church: Any permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
    Close corporation: A domestic corporation which does not: 
(1)  Have more than five stockholders; 
(2)  Have a corporation as a shareholder; or 
(3)  Have more than one class of stock. 
    Consumption on the premises: The sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
    Distilled spirits: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines, whiskey, rum, gin, brandy, vodka, tequila and all other alcoholic beverages of a similar nature and with similar alcoholic content. 
    Family: Any person related to the holder of a license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to civil law. 
    Fortified wine: Any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
    Golf club: A corporation or association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city prior to submitting an application for a license hereunder, having an 18-hole golf course or regulation size golf course, a restaurant/dining room used exclusively for the purpose of preparing and serving meals with a seating capacity of at least 60 patrons, a golf club membership and at least 100 paid-up members who have paid a membership fee for family or individual membership, and a full-time management staff for the social activities of the club, including the management of the premises where food and drink are sold. Food shall be served at least seven days a week, with the exception of weeks including holidays, vacation and periods of renovation. At least 55 percent of the receipts of the dining room shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring in the dining room, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other nonemployee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called in the dining room from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this section, the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 6-95. As used in this section, "seating" shall mean that no more than 25 percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two individuals. 
    Hotel: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential. To meet the definition of "hotel" under this chapter the facility must have 50 or more rooms used for sleeping accommodations of such guests and one or more public restaurants/dining rooms, with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least 25 persons, where meals are regularly served to such guests. As used in this section, "seating" shall mean that no more than 25 percent of the seating shall be at a common table or counter areas or shall be other than individual tables of booths designed for seating of at least two individuals. All sleeping accommodations and dining rooms must be conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith which are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meetings the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a restaurant on their premises, and the holder of such franchise shall be eligible for a license under the "hotel" classification. At least 55 percent of the receipts of the dining room shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring in the dining room, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other nonemployee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called in the dining room from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this section, the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 6-95. Receipts for room rentals shall not be included in the calculations. 
    Individual: A natural person, not a corporation or a partnership. 
    Interest in license: An individual is deemed to have an interest in a license if: 
(1)  He is the owner of the license. 
(2)  He is the co-owner of the license. 
(3)  He is a partner in any partnership that owns an interest in a license. 
(4)  He is a stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in any corporation and/or is a stockholder in any corporation which has fewer than 25 stockholders which owns an interest in a license. 
(5)  He shares in any income or corpus of any trust fund having any interest in a license to sell at retail. 
    License: License means an authorization granted by the city to operate as one of the classes of licenses described in section 6-36 of this chapter, namely a license for the retail sale of alcohol by the drink for consumption on the premises or via retail package sale as further described herein. 
    Licensee: The licensee for all businesses seeking or holding a license pursuant to this chapter shall be: 
(1)  The licensee shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  If the business is to be operated by an individual, the licensee shall be that individual. 
(3)  If the business is to be operated by a partnership, the licensee shall be an individual who is a partner; or, if all partners are non-individuals, then the licensee shall be an individual who is an officer of any corporation which is a partner, or, an individual who is an officer, manager or agent of any unincorporated entity which is partner. 
(4)  If the business is to be operated by a corporation, the licensee shall be an officer of the corporation. 
(5)  If the licensee is a resident of the city and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis, the licensee may also be the license representative of the business. If not, a license representative shall be named in accordance with this chapter. 
    License representative: The license representative shall be: 
(1)  If the business is to be operated by an individual, the license representative shall be that individual. 
(2)  A United States Citizen or a permanent resident alien, as defined by the Immigration and Nationality Laws of the United States. 
(3)  If the business is to be operated by a partnership, close corporation, corporation, or other business entity, the license representative shall be a managing full time employee who assumes an active role in the day-to-day operation of the business. 
    Malt beverage: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including, but not limited to, ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, malt liquor, small beer and strong beer, not to include sake. 
    Meal, regular meal: A meal which is prepared on the premises according to the order of the patron or customer given to a waiter or waitress at the table, booth or counter area where the customer is seated and served by the waiter or waitress at said table, booth or counter area. The term meal or regular meal does not include food served in a specialty shop; nor food served over the counter; nor "short order meals" such as sandwiches, hot dogs or hamburgers; nor prepackaged, individual meals. 
    Package: A bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original, unopened consumer container of an alcoholic beverage. 
    Person: Any individual firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Premises/outlet: A definite enclosed area and/or outside area with controlled ingress and egress wherein distilled spirits, alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wine may be sold for consumption on the premises, or where malt beverages and wine may be sold via retail package sale for consumption off the premises. 
    Private club: A corporation or association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city prior to the application for a license hereunder, having at least 50 members regularly paying dues, for at least six years prior to application for license, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purpose, not part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable sanitary kitchen and dining room seating of at least 25 persons and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servers and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of distilled spirits, wines, champagnes or malt beverages beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at an annual meeting, or by its governing body, out of the general revenue of the club. As used in this section, "seating" shall mean that no more than 25 percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two individuals. For the purpose of this subsection, tips which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered as profits hereunder. In addition, at least 55 percent of the receipts from the operation of the kitchen and dining room and serving of meals shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring on the premises, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other nonemployee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called to the premises from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this section, the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 6-95. A private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall not be licensed under this chapter, nor permitted to sell or serve such beverages at all. All distance requirements as set forth in this chapter shall apply. 
    Private residence: A house, dwelling or structure wherein not less than one, nor more than two families reside and shall not include a mobile home court, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, nor a boarding or rooming house where there are five or more boarders or roomers. Any building occupied as a residence located within an area zoned for business shall not be construed as a private residence. 
    Restaurant: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, but not including short order or quick or fast food shops, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room seating of at least 25 persons, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. Meals shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of weeks including holidays, vacations and periods of renovation, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wines to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. As used in this section, "seating" shall mean that no more than 25 percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two individuals. As used in this section, "principal business" shall mean that at least 55 percent of the receipts of such business shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring on the premises, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other nonemployee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called to the premises from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this section, the calculations or receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 6-95. 
    Retail consumption dealer: Any person who sells distilled spirits, alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, and/or wine for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
    Retail package dealer: Any person who sells malt beverages and/or wines in unbroken packages for consumption off the premises at retail, namely via retail package sales. 
    Retail package sale: The sale of malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages for consumption off the premises at retail and not for resale. Such sales must be in connection with sales of other products as further described below. 
    Sales by the drink: The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to licensees holding a license to conduct retail package sales, or to licensees holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
    Wine: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, grapes, or other natural products by natural fermentation. "Wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, saké, natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-3. - Sale of packaged distilled spirits prohibited. 
    The retail package sale of distilled spirits, except as provided herein, is hereby prohibited and made unlawful within the incorporated limits of this city. Only malt beverages and/or wine may be sold via retail package sale within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-4. - Sale, possession, etc., of alcohol beverages on which state tax or license fee not paid prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the city, possess, conceal, store or convey any wine, malt beverage, distilled spirits or other alcoholic beverages on which any tax or license fee imposed by the laws of the state or this chapter have not been paid, and any such beverages as above described that are found without a state tax stamp shall be seized as contraband and immediately delivered to the state revenue commissioner as provided by law. Any violation of this section shall be punished as provided for in sections 6-181 and 6-182. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-5. - Purchase, possession, etc., by underage persons. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law: 
(1)  No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any individual under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No individual under 21 years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  No individual under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such individual's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of an individual under 21 years of age. 
(5)  No individual under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his or her identity to use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(l), (2) and (4) above shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption by an individual: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; or 
(3)  In the home with parental consent provided that such individual is 18 years of age or older. 
(c)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) above shall not apply with respect to sale of alcohol beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the individual to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the individual, such individual's photograph, or both, and giving such individual's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(d)  Per O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24, the following limitations shall apply within the city: 
(l)  No person or licensee shall allow or require an individual in its employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  The restriction listed in subsection (d)(l) above shall not prohibit individuals under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, drugstores, or other such establishments from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-6. - Consumption prohibited; open containers. 
(a)  As used in this section, "open container" means any container, containing alcoholic beverages, which is immediately capable of being consumed from or the seal of which has been broken. 
(b)  No person shall possess an open container or any alcoholic beverage while operating a motor vehicle in this city or while occupying a motor vehicle as a passenger. An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger. This provision shall not apply if the alcoholic beverage is located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk, or other locked non-passenger area of the vehicle. This provision is intended to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages by the operator and passengers in motor vehicles. This shall not apply to possession of an open container by a passenger of a vehicle, bus, limo or self-contained motor home in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation and such driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to state law. 
(c)  No person shall possess an open container of alcoholic beverage while walking, standing or otherwise occupying any public street, road, or highway, sidewalk adjacent thereto, public park, or public parking lot. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in or on other publicly-owned properties of the city is prohibited. Notwithstanding the above, this prohibition shall not apply to city-sponsored special events or outdoor festivals for which vendors have been selected by the city to serve alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  To the extent that consumption of alcoholic beverages on public streets, roads, highways, sidewalks adjacent thereto, public parks, or public parking lots is allowed pursuant to subsection (c) hereinabove, such consumption is allowed as provided below: 
(1)  Defined area. Consumption of alcoholic beverages is allowed only in the geographic area of Main Street, bounded on the north by Smith Street and on the south by Church Street. 
(2)  One drink on-street limit. Any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages pursuant to an alcohol sub-permit is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup, or other container other than a can, bottle, or glass, for removal from the premises; provided, however, that no permittee shall dispense to any person more than one such alcoholic beverage at a time for removal from the premises, and no person shall remove at one time more than one such alcoholic beverage from the permittee. 
(3)  Size limited to 16 ounces. No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in possession on public streets, roads, highways, sidewalks adjacent thereto, public parks, or public parking lots within the defined area any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
(4)  Drinking from can, bottle, or glass prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, or glass or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the public streets, roads, highways, sidewalks adjacent thereto, public parks, or public parking lots of the defined area. 
(e)  No person shall possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage on the premises of any retail package licensee, including parking lots located adjacent thereto. 
(f)  No person shall enter or leave the premises of an establishment licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises with an open container of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015; Ord. No. 2016-09 , § 2, 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 6-7. - Public drunkenness. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the exterior property of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, when such condition of intoxication is made manifest by boisterousness, or by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or obscene language. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-8. - Quantity possessed restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be found in possession or control of more than one standard case of 1.75 liter, 1 liter, or 750 milliliter size containers of distilled spirits but not more than eight individual containers of distilled spirits of a size of 200 milliliter or four individual containers of distilled spirits of a size of 500 milliliters. Any distilled spirits found in the possession of any person shall have been purchased by the person for use and consumption from a lawful and authorized retailer and properly stamped. This prohibition shall not apply to possession of distilled spirits in a properly licensed premises only by the licensee, its representatives, or its employees for consumption of distilled spirits on the premises, or by a properly licensed wholesaler or its employees making deliveries to a properly licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-9. - Sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine by the drink for consumption only on the premises; combining retail package and retail consumption licenses prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall be allowed to sell, distribute, or give away distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises except as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  No business licensed for the retail package sale of malt beverages and/or wine may hold a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or otherwise allow the retail consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(c)  No business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may hold a license permitting the sale of malt beverages and/or wine via retail package sale. 
(d)  No license to sell malt beverages and/or wine via retail package sales shall be issued for, or in connection with, any restaurant, golf club, hotel, or private club. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-10. - Establishment to be kept in orderly manner. 
    It shall be the duty of all persons or employees of persons granted a license under this article to keep the premises clear at all times of all persons who are intoxicated, or who are becoming intoxicated, who fail to keep the peace, or who do anything tending to breach peace and cause a public disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-11. - Times for sales. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for licensees holding a license to sell, dispense, or deliver alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to sell, dispense, or deliver said alcoholic beverages to any customer or patron of the licensed business between the following hours: 
(1)  2:30 a.m. Sunday and 11:00 a.m. Sunday; 
(2)  12:00 a.m. Monday and 9:00 a.m. Monday; 
(3)  2:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Tuesday through Saturday. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for licensees holding a license to sell, dispense, or deliver alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to fail to remove from its retail service area where normal access to the public is available any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups or other containers used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages or to otherwise allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises 30 minutes after the business is prohibited from selling, dispensing, or delivering alcoholic beverages to any customer or patron of the business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for licensees holding a license to conduct retail packages sales or holding a wholesale dealer's license to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages between the following hours: 
(1)  12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday; and 
(2)  12:00 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. Sundays; and 
(3)  Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015; Ord. No. 2018-007 , § 5, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 6-12. - Signs to be posted. 
(a)  Each outlet for the retail sale of packaged malt beverages and/or wine shall post in a conspicuous place within the outlet a sign with letters at least two inches high reading: "Sale of malt beverages or wine to persons under 21 years of age is prohibited." 
(b)  Each outlet for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall post in a conspicuous place within the outlet, a sign with letters at least two inches high reading: "Sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits to persons under 21 years of age is prohibited." 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-13. - Display of warning signs for driving under the influence required. 
    All licensees holding a license to sell, dispense, or deliver alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, as defined by this chapter, shall have conspicuously displayed at every exit from the retail location a sign measuring not less than ten inches square, printed in not less than three-quarter-inch in height, in a color clearly contrasting to the background of such sign, containing the following language: "State law provides for conviction of driving under the influence if you are impaired by alcohol to any degree, regardless of your blood alcohol content." 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-14. - Possession to give away in order to induce trade. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on hand, for the purpose of giving the same away to induce trade, any fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverages, wine or distilled spirits that contain more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-15. - Deliveries prohibited off premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler or distributor to make deliveries of alcoholic beverages except to a location licensed for the retail sale of such beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any license holder of a license to conduct retail packages sales or a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverages to any location off the licensed premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any license holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to purchase alcoholic beverages for sale of beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises from any license holder of a license to conduct retail package sales. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-16. - Sales on licensed premises. 
    Only those individuals who are agents, clerks, or employees of the licensee shall handle, sell or serve alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises of said licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-17. - Sale to intoxicated person forbidden. 
    Alcoholic beverage licensees and their agents, clerks, and employees are prohibited from selling, bartering, exchanging, giving providing, or furnishing any alcoholic beverage to any person who is in a noticeable state of intoxication. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-18. - Alcoholic beverage sales for cash only. 
    All sales of alcoholic beverages shall be for cash upon sale. Sales on credit are specifically prohibited except that the use of a credit card for the purchase of distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine shall not be prohibited provided such retail credit card represents an unqualified obligation to pay without recourse on the part of the person, institution or agency issuing such card. The running of a "tab" at a licensed consumption premises shall not be prohibited provided the consumer pays all charges prior to departing the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-19. - License restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall hold a license to conduct sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or a license to conduct retail package sales who also has an interest in a license to operate as a wholesaler or wholesale dealer. 
(b)  No elected or appointed official, employee or agent of the city, directly or indirectly, shall be a licensee under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-20. - Person prohibited from interest in license. 
    No elected or appointed official or employee of the city may hold an interest in a license issued under this chapter. 
Sec. 6-21. - Sale of alcoholic beverage without city license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale, or possess, for the purpose of sale, any alcoholic beverage where such person does not have a license from the city to sell or possess for sale such alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Secs. 6-22-6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 6-36. - License required to sell alcoholic beverages. 
    Any person desiring to sell alcoholic beverages in the city, whether for consumption on the premises or via retail package sale, shall apply for and obtain a license from the city prior to commencing operations. Operating without a license shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as provided in sections 6-181 and 6-182. 
(1)  Licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued by the city clerk or his designee at an annual license fee as established herein: 
a.  Retail consumption on the premises (distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine) ..... $4,500.00 
b.  Retail consumption on the premises (malt beverages only) ..... $1,000.00 
c.  Retail consumption on the premises (wine only) ..... $1,000.00 
d.  Retail package sales (malt beverages and wine) ..... $2,000.00 
e.  Retail package sales (malt beverages only) ..... $1,000.00 
f.  Retail package sales (wine only) ..... $1,000.00 
(2)  All licenses issued herein shall constitute a mere grant of a privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter, the charter, and related ordinances of this Code, and the Constitution, laws and regulations of the state and the United States of America applicable to such business. 
(3)  All licenses issued under this article shall have printed on the face the following words: 
"THIS LICENSE IS A PRIVILEGE AND IS SUBJECT TO BEING REVOKED AND ANNULLED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF JONESBORO AND IS SUBJECT TO LAWS, ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS HEREAFTER ADOPTED." 
(4)  Both the licensee and/or license representative shall be the authorized and duly constituted agent for service of all notices and processes required to be served on or given hereunder for any action or proceeding or uses of any nature whatsoever permitted under the provisions of this chapter or under any other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-37. - License eligibility. 
    No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any applicant who operates a restaurant, private club, hotel, or golf club unless said establishment satisfies the requirements set forth in its respective definition in section 6-2 hereof and the restaurant/dining room of said establishment serves meals, which excludes the sale of alcoholic beverages, and said serving of meals accounts for at least 55 percent of the gross revenue of that restaurant/dining room. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-38. - Contents of application for license. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall apply to the city upon forms to be prepared and provided by the city and shall be considered by the mayor and city council. Such application shall state: 
(1)  The location of the proposed business; 
(2)  The nature and character of the proposed business; 
(3)  If the business is to be operated by an individual, the name, address, and telephone number of that individual; 
(4)  If the business is to be operated by a partnership, the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all general partners, the licensee, and the license representative; 
(5)  If the business is to be operated by a close corporation, the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all officers, directors, stockholders, the licensee, and the license representative; 
(6)  If the business is to be operated by a corporation other than a close corporation, the name of the corporation, the address and telephone number of the corporate office, the name, address, and telephone number of the registered agent for service of process for the corporation, and the name, address, and telephone number of the licensee and license representative; 
(7)  If the business is to be operated by a limited liability company ("LLC"), the name of the managing partner or partners, the address and telephone number of the principal place of business of the LLC, the name, address, and telephone number of the registered agent for service of process for the LLC, and the name, address, and telephone number of the licensee or license representative; 
(8)  Individuals who shall be listed on an application pursuant to subsections (a)(3) through (a)(7) above shall be required to undergo a background investigation, which may include a check through Georgia Crime Information Center and/or National Crime Information Center of such person, and shall fully comply with the process of conducting said investigation and shall supply information necessary to conduct said investigation as requested on the application; and 
(9)  Such other appropriate information as may be required by the governing body. 
(b)  The truth of the contents of an application for a license shall be sworn to by the licensee and the license representative. 
(c)  The licensee shall also file with the city a completed State of Georgia Department of Revenue Alcohol Tax and Control Unit form ATT-17, which has been filed with the state, if applicable. 
(d)  The application, when filed with the city, shall be accompanied by a processing fee of $500.00, plus $35.00 per individual that is subject to a background check pursuant to this section or section 6-101 or as otherwise required under this chapter. The processing fee and background check fee is payable by certified check or cash and is separate from and shall not be credited to the license fee. Said processing fee will not be refunded if the requested license is not granted. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-39. - Supporting documents to be filed with application. 
    Those applying for a license shall submit in support of the application for license the following documents: 
(1)  A certificate from a Georgia registered land surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises and the distance measured from the front door, where the alcoholic beverages are sold, in a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route to the main public entrance of the building, or the nearest portion of the grounds, of any church building or school building according to the following standards: 
a.  For those establishments selling distilled spirits, regardless of whether malt beverages and/or wine are sold thereby; a distance of no less than 100 yards from the nearest church and 200 yards from any school or education building, school ground, or college campus as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
b.  For those establishments selling malt beverages and/or wine but not distilled spirits; a distance of no less than 100 yards from any school or education building, school ground, or college campus as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
c.  For those establishments selling distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages; a distance of 100 yards from any alcoholic treatment center as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
(2)  Fingerprint card and approval to conduct a background check of each person whose name appears on an application for a license, pursuant to section 6-38, ensuring that each person has not, within five years prior to the date of the application, been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony, misdemeanor, or other charge relating to the sale, manufacture, distribution, taxability, possession or use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs including the offense of driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol or drugs; has not entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor of a crime opposed to decency and morality. Provided, however, that a person designated as a registered agent of a close corporation or a limited liability company on an application shall not be required to submit the affidavit required by this subsection unless such person is also designated as the licensee or license representative on such application. 
(3)  A copy of a deed showing the applicant to be the owner of the premises for which the license is sought or a copy of a lease showing any interest the owner of the premises has in the business for which the license is sought as well as contact information for said owner of the premises. 
(4)  Inspections of the premises by the following: 
a.  Fire marshal; 
b.  Building department; 
c.  Health department; or 
d.  Planning department. 
(5)  Notification from the police chief of the city certifying that each person named in an application pursuant to section 6-38 has been investigated and found not to have been convicted of nor have entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony, misdemeanor, or other charge relating to the sale, manufacture, distribution, taxability, possession or use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs within five years prior to the date of the application for the license; has not entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor of a crime opposed to decency and morality. For those applicants who, within the last five-year period, have resided or do reside in a state other than Georgia, the applicant must furnish a certified copy of a driver history and criminal background history from the state or states in which he or she has resided or resides to the city clerk of the city or his designee. A person designated as a registered agent of a close corporation or a limited liability company on an application, however, shall not be required to submit a certificate to the city unless such person is also designated as the licensee or license representative on such application. 
(6)  If the same person is serving as the licensee and the license representative, he/she shall submit an affidavit certifying that he/she is at least 21 years of age, and a manager of the business. 
(7)  If the licensee is not the license representative, an affidavit from the license representative certifying that the license representative is at least 21 years of age and a manager of the business. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-40. - Misleading, omitted or obsolete information. 
(a)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission left out of an original or renewal application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be cause sufficient for the denial thereof. 
(b)  Any information which changes or otherwise becomes obsolete shall be reported immediately. 
(c)  When any license is issued on the basis of an application containing misleading or untrue information or omitted or unreported changed material information, such circumstances shall be cause for revocation of same. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-41. - Required citizenship. 
    No license under this article shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or a permanent resident alien, as defined by the Immigration and Nationality Laws of the United States, for at least 12 months prior to submitting the application for the license. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements of this section shall apply to all partners. Once submitted, the applicant must maintain his residency status required in this section or the license shall be automatically revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-42. - Required license representative. 
    No individual may be the license representative for more than one business. "Business" shall be defined for the purposes of this section as any business establishment in possession of a license to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to this chapter at any other location, including locations outside the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-43. - Persons who are not eligible to obtain a license. 
    It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages to: 
(1)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(2)  A person who has entered a plea of nolo contendere within a five-year period prior to the date of application for license, entered a guilty plea or been convicted of a felony, crime involving illegal drugs or of a crime opposed to decency and morality; or who has entered a plea of nolo contendere within a five-year period prior to the date of application for a license, entered a guilty plea or been convicted of a crime involving violation of the ordinances of the city relating to the use, sale, manufacture, distribution, taxability or possession of beer, wine or liquor or violations of the laws of the state and federal government pertaining to the manufacture, possession, transportation, use, or sale of beer, wine or intoxicating liquors, or taxability thereof. 
(3)  A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause or who has had a license under this chapter revoked for cause. 
(4)  A person whose place or business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent qualifies as the license representative. 
(5)  Any person who is under the age of 21 years old or a person who is not of sound mind and memory. 
(6)  Any law enforcement officer or employee of the city, or any elected or appointed official of the city. 
(7)  Any person who is not eligible for a state alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-44. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
(a)  No license under this chapter shall be issued unless the location of the proposed premises meets currently applicable provisions of the zoning code of the city as amended; further, no license shall be issued unless the location of the proposed premises is within the areas of the city zoned C1, C2, H1, H2, M1, or within the Tara Boulevard Overlay District, which zones are further described in the city's zoning code. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to those business establishments holding a valid license to conduct retail package sales on the date of adoption of this chapter provided that such license remains current and does not become and remain inactive for a period exceeding 12 months from the date last issued. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-45. - Business entrance. 
    The front entrance of all licensed premises shall be clearly visible from a public street; however, this restriction shall not apply where the premises are located in a hotel, motel, private club, shopping center or multiple-story business building. No license shall be issued to an applicant under this chapter unless this requirement is satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-46. - Payment of taxes and other debts to city. 
    The city clerk or his designee shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have any outstanding taxes, special assessments, unpaid utilities or any other monies owed to the city. No license shall be issued, renewed or considered for issuance to an applicant which has any outstanding payments to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-47. - No licenses issued within prohibited distances. 
(a)  Licenses shall not be issued to authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages at any location which does not meet or exceed the following minimum distance separation requirements from the establishments set forth in this section. Provided, however, the minimum distance of separation specified herein shall be required only on the initial license application and will not be required on license renewals for the same premises. 
(1)  For dealers of distilled spirits, regardless of whether malt beverages and/or wine is also sold, the licensee's premises cannot be located within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school or education building, school ground, or college campus as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
(2)  For dealers of wine or malt beverages, and not distilled spirits, the licensee's premises cannot be located within 100 yards of any school or education building, school ground, or college campus as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
(3)  For dealers of distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages, the licensee's premises cannot be located within 100 yards of any alcoholic treatment center as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, all distances from the proposed licensed establishment to the applicable building, structure or grounds shall be measured by the most direct route of travel and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure or partial building unit from which beverage alcohol is sold or offered for sale; thence, 
(2)  In a straight line, regardless of obstructions, to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; thence, 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; thence, 
(4)  To the front door of the building or to the nearest portion of the grounds, whichever is applicable. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "building" shall mean any non-accessory structure located on the school ground, college campus or alcoholic treatment center which would not be considered an accessory use under the appropriate interpretations of the zoning ordinance of the county. 
(d)  As to any location licensed by the city, if the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of issuance of any license, or if a license has not yet been issued, but the structure in which an establishment is to be located has commenced construction pursuant to a lawfully issued building permit, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibited herein shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any owner of such property. Provided, however, that the distance requirements herein shall not apply to any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-48. - Notice of new application advertisement. 
(a)  The city shall give notice of a new application by placing a notice in the county legal organ for 10 calendar days prior to the date when the application shall be heard by the mayor and city council. An affidavit from the publisher of said legal organ shall be filed with the city clerk or his designee prior to the hearing. 
(b)  Said notice shall contain the location of the proposed business, names of all persons as they appear on the application as required by section 6-38, and the date and time the mayor and city council will hear the application. The advertisement shall be the type used for legal ads in the legal organ of the county, and the notice referred to shall be in the following form: 
"NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR RETAIL LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
An application has been submitted to the City of Jonesboro Mayor and City Council for a retail _______ license to sell alcoholic beverages at the following location: _______. The business name is _______. _______ has requested to be the License Representative. The application will be granted or denied by Mayor and City Council at ___________o'clock ___________.m. on the ___________ day of _______, _______ 
Signed:. ___________" 
Note: Names of the individual, general partners, corporation, licensee and license representative must be shown. 
(c)  The city shall place signs upon the location of the proposed business. Said signs shall read as follows: 
"Alcoholic beverage license applied for by ___________ for the establishment located at ___________. Hearing before the Mayor and City Council of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia at _______ a.m./p.m. on _______ day of _______, _______." 
    The signs described above shall be posted on the location of the proposed business for two weeks prior to the day of the hearing by the mayor and city council. Each sign shall be not less than 24 inches long and 36 inches wide, and shall face toward all public roads adjoining the proposed location. Such signs shall be placed where they can be easily seen from all public roads adjoining the proposed location. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-49. - Standards to be applied by mayor and city council in granting licenses; failure of applicant to attend public hearing. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall hear and consider an applicant's application for a license to conduct retail package sales or a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 45 calendar days of the city's receipt of said application. 
(b)  The standards to be applied by the mayor and city council, acting in its judicial capacity to grant or deny a license, shall include whether, in the best judgment of the council, the applicant, based on all information obtained in the application process as set forth in this chapter, possesses the qualities of sound judgment and discretion necessary for one who dispenses alcoholic beverages to the public generally. 
(c)  In addition to the foregoing standards, should any license representative of the applicant fail to attend a meeting at which it is considered before the mayor and city council regarding a new license, a request to change a licensee or a license representative, or a request to relocate the business of a licensee, the mayor and city council may consider such application or request to have been withdrawn by the applicant. The application fee is nonrefundable. 
(d)  In determining whether or not any application shall be granted and a license issued, the mayor and city council shall also consider the following information in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  If the license representative or any individual listed on the application or partner has ever violated any federal, state, city or county law or regulation regarding alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs, their sale, consumption, distribution or manufacture; 
(2)  The manner in which the license representative or any individual listed on the application or partner has conducted any business within the city as to the necessity for unusual law enforcement observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance or as to the necessity for city action to compel the applicant's and/or licensee's adherence to any city law, regulation or ordinance; 
(3)  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, public safety, the general character of the neighborhood and the effect of such an operation on surrounding property values; 
(4)  Whether the license representative or any individual listed on the application or partner has ever had an alcoholic beverage or business license suspended or revoked by the state or any political subdivision thereof; and 
(5)  Whether the applicant is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and the application meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-50. - Approval of application; issuance of license by city clerk. 
(a)  All applicants for a license meeting the ascertainable standards of this chapter will be granted the license or licenses requested upon the hearing by the mayor and council, and said decision to approve the application shall be stated in writing and entered upon the minutes. Written notification of said approval shall be mailed to the applicant at the address listed in the application, or personally delivered to the applicant, within 7 calendar days of the hearing of the mayor and council. 
(b)  A copy of the license shall be issued to the applicant upon approval of the application by the mayor and council, but the original license shall not be issued by the city clerk or his designee to the applicant until: 
(1)  The licensee fee, as further described in sections 6-36 and 6-52 hereof: is paid by the applicant by certified check or cash and submitted to the city clerk or his designee, which must occur within 30 calendar days of the date of the hearing of the application by mayor and council; and 
(2)  The applicant provides evidence to the city clerk or his designee that the state license has been issued. If the applicant fails to receive a license from the State of Georgia, any license fees paid to the city, other than the nonrefundable processing fee, shall be refunded. 
(c)  Once the requirements of subsection (b) above are met, the city clerk or his designee shall issue the original license to the applicant in the following manner: 
(1)  If issued to a corporation, said license shall be issued in the name of said corporation, the licensee, and the license representative. 
(2)  If issued to a partnership, said license shall be issued in the name of the partnership, the licensee, and the license representative. 
(3)  If issued to an individual, said license shall be issued to that individual as licensee and the license representative. 
(d)  If the mayor and council neither formally approves nor denies an application in writing within 45 days of receipt of the application from applicant, then on expiration of the 45th day, the application shall be deemed approved with the understanding that the mayor and council may, at any time thereafter, consider and deny said application pursuant to subsection 6-51(a) below, at which time the applicant must cease operating as a licensee under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-51. - Denial of application; appeal from decision of mayor and council. 
(a)  Whenever an application for license is denied by the mayor and council, the reasons for such denial shall be stated in writing and entered upon the minutes. A written notice of the denial shall also be mailed to the applicant at the address listed in the application, or personally delivered to the applicant, within seven calendar days of the decision to deny the application. Upon denial, the applicant may not re-apply for a license under this chapter for 24 months after the date of the denial. 
(b)  Should the applicant desire to appeal a decision of mayor and council to deny the applicant's initial application for a license under this chapter, the applicant may appeal said decision to the Superior Court of Clayton County by filing a petition for writ of certiorari with said Superior Court. Said appeal must be made within ten calendar days from the date of the written notice of the denial of the application by mayor and council or it shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-52. - Payment of license fee; license period. 
    Any license issued under this chapter shall be valid from January 1 of the year in which it was issued until December 31 of that year. The full license fee amount, corresponding to the type of license applied for, as set forth in section 6-36 above must be paid for a license application filed prior to July 1 of the year. One-half of the full license fee amount shall be paid for a license application filed after July 1 of the year, for the year of issuance only. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-53. - Time limit for commencement of business in licensed establishment; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of licenses hereunder must within six months after the issuance of said license open the establishment referred to in said license. If said license holder fails to open the licensed establishment or receive a time extension from the mayor and city council within said six-month period the license shall be canceled and all fees forfeited. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section, any holder of a license who, after beginning operation, ceases to operate the business for a three-month period automatically forfeits his or her license, and said license shall be automatically canceled and all fees forfeited. In the event a business ceases to operate due to a fire, flood or other physical damage to the building beyond the control of the license holder, the city may, at the request of the license holder, elect to merely suspend the holder's license until the license holder's business is again operational. If the license holder's business is not operational within the same calendar year of its destruction and said license shall be automatically canceled and all fees forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-54. - License transfers; change of licensee; business relocation. 
(a)  Licenses granted pursuant to this chapter are not transferable as to person or premises. 
(b)  (1)  All requests for a change in licensee or license representative must be approved by the mayor and city council and shall provide all appropriate information and supporting documents required under sections 6-38 and 6-39 as outlined in an approved form to be supplied by the city clerk or his designee for that purpose. 
(2)  A fee in the amount of $100.00 per applicant, licensee, or license representative is paid to the city upon the filing of the first request in a year (Jan.-Dec.). Subsequent requests in that same year will require payment in full of the initial application fee. 
(c)  All business relocations must be approved by the mayor and city council and the licensee and license representative shall provide all appropriate information and supporting documents as are required under sections 6-38 and 6-39. Requirements of section 6-48 relating to advertising and posting must be met. A processing fee established by the mayor and city council shall be required. 
(d)  Any violation of this section shall constitute due cause for suspension or revocation of the license or licenses granted by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-55. - Renewal of licenses; maintaining current list of employees. 
    All licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which they are issued unless they are renewed as set forth herein: 
(1)  The city clerk or his designee shall send a letter to all license holders by October 31 of each year to remind said license holders of the renewal deadline for the subsequent year. 
(2)  The licensee shall file a renewal application form with the city on or before November 15 of each year. A renewal application form, which is available from the city clerk or his designee, filed with the city after November 15 shall be subject to the following penalties: 
a.  Seventy-five dollars, if filed with the city after November 15 and on or before December 1; 
b.  One hundred fifty dollars, if filed with the city after December 1 and on or before December 15; and 
c.  The greater of $250.00 or 20 percent of the licensee renewal fee if filed with the city after December 15. 
(3)  All renewals require a new background check for all individuals for which background checks are required per sections 6-38 and 6-l01. Background checks shall also be required on any new shareholders, partners or owners that have been added to the business holding the license and would have been requited to submit to a background check had the renewal been a new application. 
(4)  As part of the renewal application, the licensee shall submit to the city a complete list of the names, social security numbers, and photos of the current shareholders, partners, owners, license representatives, and employees of the licensed establishment for whom fingerprint cards and background checks are required under sections 6-38 and 6-101 of this chapter so that the city may confirm all such persons are being properly investigated under this chapter and may confirm all employees are being issued the requisite employee identification cards as discussed in section 6-101 below. Furthermore, this list must be continually maintained and kept up to date by the licensee and the licensee representative in order to maintain compliance with this chapter. The city clerk or his designee may request a copy of this list from the licensee at any time during the course of the year upon seven calendar days' written notice to the licensee. Should this list not be maintained, not be submitted upon request from the city clerk, or not be submitted as a part of the license renewal application. such a failure shall constitute grounds for license suspension, revocation, or non-renewal as may be the case. 
(5)  If the police chief of the city or the city clerk reports any activity which constitutes due cause for not renewing a license, the renewal shall not be made. "Due cause" shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances of the State of Georgia or the city regulating the sale or use of alcoholic beverages, or violation of any regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such activities, or violation of any state or federal law, or violation of any city or county ordinance. 
a.  Written notice of the reason or reasons for such nonrenewal shall be mailed or delivered by the city clerk or his designee to the licensee at the licensed premises or mailed to the address shown on the renewal application. Licensee shall have 10 calendar days from the date of the written notice to request a public hearing before the mayor and city council, as provided for in sections 6-132 and 6-133. 
b.  Provided that "due cause" does not exist for not renewing the license, the city clerk or his designee shall issue the renewal license upon payment of the respective annual license fee set forth in section 6-36 above by the licensee on or before the last business day in December preceding the year for which the license is sought. Renewal licenses shall not be subject to proration as set forth in section 6-52 above. 
c.  Any change in the name of the licensee or license representative shall require the filing of the application and payment of the fee set forth in subsection 6-54 herein. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-56. - Automatic revocation. 
    Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license to deal in such products, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the mayor and city council or any other city officer being necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-57. - Temporary license for consumption on the premises. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this chapter, a person may apply for a temporary license to sell, dispense, or serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at a restaurant, hotel, private club, or golf club for up to 3 calendar days. Application for a temporary license must be made on forms maintained and available from the city clerk. The fees for such temporary licenses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Temporary license for one day: $100.00. 
(2)  Temporary license for two days: $200.00. 
(3)  Temporary license for three days: $300.00. 
(b)  The applicant for a temporary license must also pay a non-refundable $100.00 processing fee in addition to the above-stated license fees, plus $35.00 per individual who shall pour, handle, dispense, or serve alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises or anyone who manages or supervises said individual(s). These fees are required to be submitted simultaneously with the application. 
(c)  Approval or denial of an application for a temporary license may be decided directly by the city clerk. The applicant shall provide all information required on the application for temporary license, including information regarding any individual(s) who shall pour, handle, dispense, or serve alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises or anyone who shall manage or supervise said individual(s). The applicant shall submit his or her application to the city clerk no less than 14 calendar days before the scheduled date(s) the temporary license is needed to give the city clerk time to process the application and receive the fee amount. 
(d)  The city clerk shall issue a written determination either approving or denying the application for temporary license within seven calendar days of receiving said application. 
(1)  If the application is approved, the applicant must submit the license fee set forth in section (a) above within three calendar days of the city clerk's decision. Upon receipt of the fee, the city clerk shall issue the temporary license to the applicant. No person shall be eligible to obtain more than one such temporary license per consecutive three-month period. 
(2)  If the application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision to mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within seven calendar days of the date of the city clerk's written denial of his or her application. The mayor and council shall hold a hearing on the applicant's application within 30 calendar days of said applicant's notice of appeal. The mayor and council shall issue a written determination of the appeal within seven calendar days of said hearing. Should the mayor and council uphold the city clerk's denial of the person's application for a temporary license, the applicant may appeal said decision to the Superior Court of Clayton County by filing a petition for writ of certiorari with said Superior Court. Said appeal must be made within ten calendar days from the date of the written notice of the denial of the application by mayor and council or it shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Secs. 6-58-6-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATION OF PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 6-71. - Sale of package malt beverages, wine conducted in conjunction with other business. 
    No person shall be allowed to sell at retail package malt beverages, or foreign and domestic wines unless the same be sold in conjunction with foodstuffs which the inventory of which has at least a wholesale value of $3,500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-72. - Sanitary regulations, immoral conduct, etc.; inspection and report by fire department. 
(a)  All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of premises used for storage and sale of food for human consumption as established by the board of health. It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity, or public indecency on the premises. 
(b)  All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times with all fire regulations of the city. The fire department shall, upon request of the city clerk or his designee, inspect such premises and report its findings to the city clerk or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-73. - Interior visibility required. 
    No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or opening of any door of any retail package alcoholic beverage store, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-74. - Lighted electric advertising signs on wine or malt beverage establishments. 
    No licensed operating premises wherein package wine or malt beverages are sold shall operate lighted electrical signs or devices except during the hours that such products are being offered for sale to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-75. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-76. - Sale in poolrooms and billiard parlors prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to conduct retail package sales of malt beverages and/or wine in poolrooms or billiard parlors. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Secs. 6-77-6-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF SALES BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 6-91. - Licenses. 
    Any license for consumption on the premises may be granted only to: a restaurant, a private club, a golf club, or a hotel restaurant per the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-92. - Sale of food. 
    In order for an establishment to qualify for a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, only, as a restaurant, private club, golf club, or restaurant in a hotel such establishment must have at least 55 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises; and for this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other nonfood or nonalcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-93. - Standards to determine sleeping or seating capacity; inspections; compliance with fire requirements. 
    Where a minimum sleeping or seating capacity is prescribed in this chapter, the same shall be judged by existing ordinances of the city or state regulations or by reasonable standards. The fire department, shall, upon request of the city clerk or his designee, inspect such premises and report its findings to the city clerk or his designee. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times to all fire regulations of the city, county and state. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-94. - Sales outside of licensed premises. 
(a)  Except as provide herein, it shall be unlawful for any sale of alcoholic beverages to be made outside of the premises licensed for such sale. 
(b)  For golf club facilities, "licensed premises" includes not only the room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or served, and shall also include the entire building where the room is located and the entire boundary of the golf course except parking lots, alleyways, streets (private and public), and lakes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-95. - Pricing. 
(a)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on each licensed establishment or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner as to be in view of the paying public, and the schedule shall be effective for not less than one day. 
(b)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons. 
(2)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during that business day, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons at any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(6)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during that business day. 
(7)  Encourage or permit on the licensed establishment any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(8)  Issue to any customer any coupon, receipt, ticket or other item purporting to authorize the receipt of any free or reduced-price alcoholic beverage. 
(9)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any patron any alcoholic beverage if said patron has in such patron's possession or control any unconsumed alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed establishment, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (b). 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time provided all patrons or customers are allowed equal access to such free food or entertainment. No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals. No provision of this section shall prohibit a licensee from offering packages in which alcoholic beverages and food or lodging are offered as a unit; provided the value of the alcoholic beverage is established at a uniform level for each package so offered, and the alcoholic beverage delivered as part of the package does not exceed the package allowance, and the tax due on the package allowance is remitted in full to the city for each package sold. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-96. - Maintenance of premises; improper conduct; nudity prohibited. 
(a)  All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with provisions and regulations of the city, county and state governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(b)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage establishment shall mean any establishment holding a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  Substantially nude shall mean dressed or undressed in a manner so as to plainly expose to view any portion of a male's or female's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals, or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola. 
(3)  Simulate shall mean counterfeit, feign, imitate, or pretend in such a manner that a reasonable observer could be led to believe that the actual act is or may be occurring. 
(c)  No person shall appear substantially nude in any alcoholic beverage establishment, and no owner or manager of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall permit any person to appear substantially nude on the licensed premises. 
(d)  No owner or manager of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall permit any person to perform acts of, or acts which constitute or simulate: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited bylaw. 
(2)  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; provided that random acts of patrons or employees, whose actions do not constitute actions taken pursuant to encouragement or acquiescence of the management of the establishment and are not for the purposes of entertainment, promotion, publicity, or notoriety shall not constitute violations of this section. 
(e)  The restrictions of subsection (d)(2) shall apply to persons physically present on the licensed premises, and shall apply regardless of whether such persons are categorized as owners, agents, employees, patrons, independent contractors or otherwise. 
(f)  In addition to prosecution of any person for violation of this section, the alcoholic beverage license of any premises upon which a violation of this section occurs shall be subject to suspension or revocation. Any such revocation or suspension action shall follow the procedures outlined in article V of this chapter. Any conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the magistrate court to a charge of violation of this section shall be admissible in a license suspension or revocation proceeding. 
(g)  Should any phrase, clause, or sentence of this section be found to be unconstitutional or otherwise illegal and unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the remaining provisions of this section, which provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-97. - Reports of sales to be made quarterly; suspension; revocation. 
(a)  Licensees shall, within 30 calendar days following the end of each quarter, file with the city clerk or his designee a report sworn to be true by the licensee, setting forth gross sales of licensee for the quarter, sales of food and nonalcoholic beverages, and sales of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Should the total sales from food and nonalcoholic beverages reported by any licensee holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises not meet the required level of sales for that licensee as set forth in this chapter for any two consecutive reporting periods, the license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council after a hearing as provided for in section 6-133. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-98. - Additional certification. 
    In addition to the reporting requirements detailed in section 6-97, the city clerk or his designee may require that licensee furnish a statement from a certified public accountant that reports the percentage of the licensee's total sales derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages sold on the premises compared to the sale of all alcoholic beverages sold on the premises in the licensee's most recent reporting period. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-99. - Areas of sales. 
(a)  All of a restaurant's, private club's, hotel's, and golf club's eating areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room of licensed premises which is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties which have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Private clubs; and 
(3)  Golf clubs. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-100. - Employment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any establishment in which consumption on the premises is authorized pursuant to this chapter to employ any person in any capacity whatsoever, including performers, entertainers, independent contractors, and musicians, who has been convicted within the past five years, by this or any other state or by the United States or any other country, of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, any crime involving moral turpitude, or of any offense relating to the manufacture of sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Individuals under age 18 may be employed by these establishments but shall not be allowed to dispense, sell, deliver, take orders for or in any manner handle alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-10l. - Employee identification card. 
(a)  An employee identification card shall be required for any employee, agent, representative, or independent contractor of a licensee holding a license for the sale of .alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises who pours, handles, dispenses, or serves alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises or anyone who manages or supervises any employee who pours, handles, dispenses, or serves alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. 
(b)  No licensee shall employ any person required to have an employee identification card, in the capacity in which such a card is needed, until such person has procured such card. 
(c)  Any person required to obtain an employee identification card shall apply to the city clerk or his designee for such a card. When issued, such card shall be valid for a period of two years and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. The application must be made on forms provided by and available from the city clerk or his designee. A fee of $25.00 shall be paid with each card application, including renewals. This fee is non-refundable, even if the application is denied. Persons applying for cards shall make themselves available for, and supply such information as is necessary for, photographing, background checks, and such other investigation as may be required by the city clerk. The city clerk may engage the city's police chief in processing and investigating applications for employee identification cards. 
(d)  When a person applies for an employee identification card, the city clerk or his designee will order a background check of such person through Georgia Crime Information Center and/or National Crime Information Center. The conviction of a felony or crime of moral turpitude, conviction of an alcohol statute or ordinance violation including but not limited to DUI, selling alcoholic beverages to persons under age 21, etc., conviction of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature, within the past five years; or a record of other conduct prohibited by this chapter, or evidence that the person's employment would adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare shall preclude issuance of an identification card. A guilty plea or plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. 
(e)  The decision of whether to approve or deny the person's application for the employee identification card must be made in writing and mailed to the person at the address listed on his or her application within 14 calendar days of the date of receipt of said application by the city clerk or his designee. Upon receipt of a favorable investigation and report, the city clerk or his designee shall grant an employee identification card to the person applying for a card. If the investigation and report was not favorable, the city clerk or his designee shall decline to issue said identification card to the person, with the reasons therefore set forth in writing and mailed to the person at the address provided in his or her application. In the event of such a denial, the person may appeal the decision to mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within seven calendar days of the date of the city clerk's written denial of his or her application. The mayor and council shall hold a hearing on the person's application within 30 calendar days of said person's notice of appeal. The mayor and council shall issue a written determination of the appeal within seven calendar days of said hearing. Should the mayor and council uphold the city clerk's denial of the person's application for an employee identification card, the applicant may appeal said decision to the Superior Court of Clayton County by filing a petition for writ of certiorari with said Superior Court. Said appeal must be made within ten calendar days from the date of the written notice of the denial of the application by mayor and council or it shall be deemed waived. 
(f)  If the city clerk or his designee neither approves nor denies an application for an employee identification card within seven calendar days of the date such application was received then, on expiration of the seventh day, the applicant shall have the right to begin or continue his or her employment in the manner for which application was made with the. understanding that the city clerk may, at any time after said employee begins or continues his or her employment under these circumstances, deny said application, at which time the employee must cease working at the licensed premises in a capacity which requires issuance of an employee identification card. 
(g)  The identification card must clearly display the number of the employee's identification card, the expiration date of the employee's identification card, and the employee's name as it appears in the employee's records with the city. The information displayed on the employee's identification card must also correspond to the information contained for that employee in the list of employee names, photographs, and information supplied by the licensee and licensee representative to the city clerk or his designee pursuant to subsection 6-55(d). 
(h)  Any employee required to obtain an employee identification card must wear it on his or her person at all times while on the premises. This identification card must be worn by the employee in a location that is clearly visible to any city police officer or other law enforcement officer, such as around the employee's neck or elsewhere outside of said employee's clothing. Should an employee be present on the licensed premises not wearing his or her identification card, wearing another employee's identification card, or wearing an identification card that does not correspond to any other active employee, such action shall constitute a violation of this chapter by said employee. 
(i)  The city clerk may revoke an employee identification card and demand its return where the employee violates the provisions of this chapter or becomes one who adversely affects the public health, safety, or welfare. Revocation of an employee identification card is subject to article V of chapter 6. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose employee identification card has been revoked and upon whom demand for return of the card has been made to refuse to return the card or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the card. 
(k)  Alcoholic beverages shall only be served by employees, agents, representatives, or independent contractors of the licensee who possess a validly issued employee identification card. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015; Ord. No. 2016-002, § 1, 2-8-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-102. - Copy of regulations. 
    It shall be the duty of the management of the premises licensed under this chapter to maintain a copy of this chapter on such premises and to instruct each and every employee, representative, agent, performer, musician, or independent contractor regarding the terms thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-103. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-002, § 2, adopted Feb. 8, 2016, repealed § 6-103, which pertained to drinks served by employees and derived from Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015. 
Sec. 6-104. - Employee prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of a licensed establishment to engage in the following: 
(1)  Dance or sit with customers on the premises while on duty status, including "breaks;" 
(2)  Allow any customer to purchase food or drink, alcoholic or nonalcoholic, for an employee while on duty status, including "break periods;" 
(3)  To consume or simulate the consumption of any alcoholic beverage while on duty status at the premises of his or her employer, including "breaks;" 
(4)  Require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit at the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic; or money with which to purchase same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manage to solicit for himself, or for any other, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic. 
(b)  For purposes of this section the term employees shall also apply to performers, dancers, entertainers, musicians engaged in temporary work, independent contractors, as well as regular employees. 
(c)  For purposes of this section breaks or break periods is defined as that period of time that the employee is off duty but remains upon the premises of the licensed establishment waiting to go back on duty. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-105. - Size of containers. 
    Licensees under this chapter shall purchase distilled spirits in sizes of one liter or larger unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size containers in which case the licensee may purchase such brand in the nearest size to such containers. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-106. - Dancing on the premises. 
    Patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on the premises sales only where adequate space for dancing exists and all fire and safety regulations have been met per approval of the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-107. - Consumption on the premises, only. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverages sold by the drink for consumption on the licensee's premises shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. Alcoholic beverages may be consumed in or on a permanent patio or deck area attached to the permanent building located on the licensed premises. No alcoholic beverage may be consumed outside of the licensed premise's structure unless consumed on the permanent patio or deck area attached to the permanent building located on the licensed premises. Further, alcoholic beverages shall not be poured by anyone while on the deck or patio of the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises. Each licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person so removes any alcoholic beverages from the premises in any type of container. 
(b)  Each consumption on the premises licensee shall post in a prominent place at each exit from the licensed premises a sign in substantially the following form: "It is a violation of city ordinance to take any type of alcoholic beverage from this outlet." Such sign shall be uniform letters not less than one inch in height. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-108. - Lighted electric advertising signs on wine or malt beverage establishments. 
    No licensee operating premises wherein wine or malt beverages are sold by the drink for consumption on the premises shall operate lighted electrical signs or devices except during the hours in which such products are being offered for sale to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-109. - Sale in poolrooms and billiard parlors; minors prohibited if sold. 
    It shall be lawful to sell beer, malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises, only, in poolrooms or billiard parlors provided such poolrooms or billiard parlors also meet the requirements of the restaurant as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-110. - Brown bagging; brown bag establishments. 
    "Brown bagging" and "brown bag establishments" as defined in this chapter shall be prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-111. - Bars prohibited. 
    Bars as defined in this chapter are prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Secs. 6-112-6-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND PROBATION OF LICENSES; DUE PROCESS; HEARING 

Sec. 6-131. - Grounds for suspension or revocation; notice; hearing; bond for reinstatement. 
(a)  Any license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city may be suspended or revoked for the cause as hereinafter defined. "Due cause," for purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to; 
(1)  Arrest or conviction (to include a plea of nolo contendere) by local, state or federal authorities of the licensee, license representative or any employees of the licensee for any felony, or any misdemeanor, or any law, regulation or ordinance involving beverage alcohol, drugs, gambling, or tax law violations; 
(2)  Citations issued by local, state or federal authorities to the licensee, license representative or any employees of the licensee for violations of any part of this chapter or any regulation pertaining to state of federal licensing of the possession, sale or distribution ofbeverage alcohol; 
(3)  Material falsification of any fact given in application for a license issued under this article or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefore; any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this article shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented; 
(4)  The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report and maintain any records or remit of pay any renewal license fee imposed, sales taxes, or excise taxes required under the city ordinances; 
(5)  Any other factors known to the licensing authority whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, by reason of business experience, financial standing, trade association, personal association, record of arrests, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is licensed in conformity with federal, state or local laws. 
With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the violating act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such license did not know, assist or aide in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(b)  Action to suspend or revoke a license shall be commenced by the city clerk or his designee by giving written notice to the licensee, either by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service upon licensee or his agent at the licensed location, stating the grounds therefore, and the date, time and place such matter will be heard. Notice shall be served at least seven calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Included in the notice shall be an advisement of the licensee's right to be heard. Any licensee requiring subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses or documents at the hearing shall file a written request with the city clerk or his designee prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued for good cause only. 
(c)  Hearings shall only be as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney or his designee may present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. The licensee may be represented by legal counsel, may confront and cross-examine witnesses, and shall have the right to call witnesses and present evidence in his behalf: A hearing record shall be maintained by the city; however, either party may arrange transcription by a court reporter at his sole expense. Hearings shall be presided over by the city clerk or his designee who shall preserve order. The city clerk shall rule upon all matter of evidence. Irrelevant, immaterial and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(d)  After hearing any evidence presented,the city clerk or his designee shall either take no action,suspend, or revoke the license. All final decisions to suspend or revoke a license shall be made by the city clerk or his designee, in writing, with the reasons therefore stated. Written notice of a final decision shall be given to the licensee within ten calendar days of conclusion of said hearing. No license shall be suspended or revoked unless there is due cause as defined in this section. 
(e)  The city clerk or his designee shall not be required to strictly adhere to the progressive penalties in the penalty schedule and is authorized to invoke a more or less severe penalty based on the circumstances of the violation to include the forwarding of the violation directly to the mayor and city council for an administrative hearing. 
Penalty Schedule-State Violations 
(1) First violation 30 days suspension (2) Second violation 60 days suspension (3) Third violation Revoke license  
Penalty Schedule-City Ordinance Violations that are not also Violations of State Law 
(1) First violation Six months probation (2) Second violation Seven-day suspension of license and one year probation (3) Third violation Revoke license  
(f)  Upon the second suspension or revocation of a license within any five-year period, as a prerequisite or reinstatement or reissuance of the license, the licensee, in addition to the requisite fees assessed under this article, shall post a surety bond, payable to the city, in the amount of $5,000.00, conditioned upon the licensee maintaining the operation for which he is licensed in conformity with all federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. Upon any subsequent act giving due cause for suspension or revocation of the license, the bond shall be forfeited and license revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-132. - Appeal from decision of city clerk. 
    A licensee may appeal within ten calendar days the action by the city clerk or his designee to the mayor and city council and request a public hearing on the decision. Such hearing shall be held within 30 calendar days following receipt of a written request for a hearing from the licensee. Upon receipt of an appeal requesting a public hearing, the city clerk or his designee shall delay the enforcement of the penalty pending the outcome of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-133. - Hearing to be conducted by mayor and city council. 
(a)  The mayor and city council are authorized to conduct all hearing relating to violations of city, county or state laws regulating the sale or use of alcoholic beverages and any regulations issued pursuant thereto. The licensee should be prepared to prove or show evidence of all business practices and procedures instituted to ensure compliance with this chapter and state law. The council inquiry shall include but not limited to: 
(1)  Employment standards of the licensee. 
(2)  Employee direction/supervision. 
(3)  Enforcement check reports. 
(4)  Previous violations. 
(b)  The mayor and city council are authorized to affirm, reduce, increase or reverse the penalty applied by the city clerk or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-134. - Appeal from final decision of mayor and council. 
    Should the licensee desire to appeal the decision of mayor and council regarding the licensee's violation, the licensee may appeal said decision to the Superior Court of Clayton County by filing a petition for writ of certiorari with said Superior Court. Said appeal must be made within ten calendar days from the date of the written notice of the decision by mayor and council or it shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Secs. 6-135-6-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAXATION OF PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 6-151. - Excise tax report; penalty for failure to file; payment. 
(a)  In addition to the annual retail license fee required for the sale of alcoholic beverage, there is hereby levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the city a specific excise tax in the amount of $0.004166 per ounce on malt beverages sold by each wholesale dealer except when malt beverages are sold in individual containers with a capacity of 151/2 gallons or more, the excise tax shall be $6.00 per 151/2 gallon container, or if the container is larger than 151/2 gallons, the tax shall be proportioned at the rate of $0.387 per each additional gallon or portion of a gallon capacity of the container. However, malt beverages which contain less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume shall not be subject to any tax levied under this section. 
(b)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on wine sold within the limits of the city at the rate of $0.22 per liter. However, the taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to: 
(1)  Wine sold to, and used by, established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only. 
(2)  Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state under the Constitution of the United States; 
(3)  Wine sold to persons outside this state for resale or consumption outside this state; or 
(4)  Wines which contain less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
(c)  Each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city limits shall file a report by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages by size and type of container, constituting a beginning and ending inventory for the month, sold within the incorporated city limits. Each wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day for the month succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made, the amount of excise tax due in accordance with the section. 
(d)  The excise tax provide for in this section shall be in addition to any license fee, occupation tax or other charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages or wines at retail or wholesale, within the city. 
(e)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty of ten percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of ten percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Secs. 6-152-6-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TAXATION OF BEVERAGES BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 6-161. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
    Agent. The license representative. 
    County. Clayton County, Georgia. 
    Drink. Any alcoholic beverage served for consumption on the premises which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
    Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
    Purchase price. The consideration received for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Purchaser. Any person who orders and gives present or future consideration of any alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
    Tax. The tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-162. - Tax levied. 
    There is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a tax of three percent of the purchase price of every sale of an alcoholic beverage (but not including malt beverages, fermented wines or fortified wines) purchased by the drink in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-163. - Collection of tax; information to city. 
    Every licensee or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax herein imposed from purchasers of alcoholic beverages (but not including malt beverages, fermented wines or fortified wines) by the drink sold within his licensed premises. Such licensee or his agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the city to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-164. - Payment of tax by licensee; collection fee. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All taxes collected by the licensee or agent hereunder shall be due and payable to the city on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth herein. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; execution. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city, in such form as the city may prescribe, by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
(c)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the City of Jonesboro, address: 124 North Avenue Jonesboro, Georgia 30236. 
(d)  Collection fee allowed licensees or agents. Licensees or agents collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment The rate of deduction shall be the same under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951, (Ga. Laws, p. 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-165. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, the finance director may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the finance director may offset overpayments; for a period or periods, against underpayments; for another period or periods, against penalties; and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on overpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (b) hereof. 
(d)  Penalty; negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to gross negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of such deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency determination has been made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provision of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto, in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in subsection (d). 
(f)  Notice of finance director's determination; service of. The finance director, or his designated representative, shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the finance director. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office. 
(g)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-166. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in the city which is subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the finance director. Upon the basis of this estimate, the finance director shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(b)  Manner of computation; offsets; interests. In making a determination, the finance director may offset overpayments for a period or periods against the interest, penalties or underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c). 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payments. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in section (a) hereof. 
(e)  Giving of notice; manner of service. Promptly after making his determination, the finance director shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-167. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. 
    Any person who fails to pay the tax herein imposed to the city or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required, shall pay a penalty in the amount of 15 percent of the tax plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 6-165. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-168. - Administration; enforcement; rules; records; confidentiality or reports. 
(a)  Authority of the finance director. The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(b)  Rule and regulations. The finance director shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the State of Georgia, or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from licensee; form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the finance director may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The finance director or any person authorized in writing by the city may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the finance director may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or person's possession or custody information relating to the sales of alcoholic beverages which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance director and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the date or dates of such sales and such information as the finance director may require. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Secs. 6-169-6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 6-181. - Violations prohibited. 
    No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or assist another in evading or avoiding the licensing requirements or in the payment of the taxes and fees imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 6-182. - Penalties. 
    Any person knowingly violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense against the city, punishable upon citation before the municipal court. Any person convicted for violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. These penalties may be levied in addition to those penalties discussed in section 6-131 where applicable. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1, any citation issued to an individual licensee, employee or any person holding a financial interest in the license of the licensee cited with violation of any provision of this chapter, and any information required in addition to said citation, shall be forwarded to the state department of revenue within 45 days after issuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015; Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Secs. 6-183-6-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - VESTED RIGHTS 

Sec. 6-201. - Vested right status for existing establishments. 
    No establishment, by virtue of being in operation prior to January 10, 2005, shall be allowed to sell distilled spirits by the drink without meeting all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2015) 
Secs. 6-202-6-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SOCIAL HOSTING 

Sec. 6-211. - Findings and intent. 
    The mayor and the Jonesboro City Council finds and declares as follows: 
(1)  In 2007, the U.S. Surgeon General issued a report entitled "The Surgeon General's Call to Action to Prevent and Reduce Underage Drinking," which can be found at http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/topics/underagedrinking/calltoaction.pdf. ("Surgeon General's Call to Action"). 
(2)  "Early alcohol consumption by some young people will result in an alcohol use disorder-that is, they will meet diagnostic criteria for either alcohol abuse or dependence." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 4. 
(3)  "[A] higher percentage of youth in 8th, 10th, and 12th grades used alcohol in the month prior to being surveyed than used tobacco or marijuana, the illicit drug most commonly used by adolescents." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 5. 
(4)  Various surveys have found that: approximately ten percent of children who are nine to ten years old have started drinking alcoholic beverages; nearly 33 percent of youth start drinking alcoholic beverages before the age of 13; more than ten percent of youth who are 12 to 13 years old; and over 33 percent of youth who are 14 to 15 years old reported drinking a whole alcoholic beverage in the year before they were surveyed and the peak years of alcohol initiation are when youth are in 7th and 8th grades. Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 6. 
(5)  While adolescents typically drink alcoholic beverages less often than adults, when they do drink alcoholic beverages, adolescents tend to drink more alcoholic beverages at each event than adults. Surgeon General's Call to Action, at pages 6-7. 
(6)  Persons who are less than the age of 21 often possess or consume alcoholic beverages at social parties or gatherings held at or on private residences and other private property under control of a person who either has provided the alcoholic beverages or who knows or reasonably should know of such conduct, but fails to take steps to prevent it. 
(7)  "Annually, about 5,000 people under age 21 die from alcohol-related injuries involving underage drinking." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 10. 
(8)  Underage drinking "[p]lays a significant role in risky sexual behavior, including unwanted, unintended, and unprotected sexual activity, and sex with multiple partners. Such behavior increases the risk of unplanned pregnancy and of contracting sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), including infection with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 10. 
(9)  Underage drinking "[i]ncreases the risk of physical and sexual assault." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 10. 
(10)  Underage drinking "[c]an cause a range of physical consequences, from hangovers to death from alcohol poisoning." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 11. 
(11)  Underage drinking "[c]an cause alterations in the structure and function of the developing brain, which continues to mature into the mid-to-late twenties and may have consequences reaching far beyond adolescence." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 11. 
(12)  Underage drinking "[c]reates secondhand effects that can put others at risk. Loud and unruly behavior, property destruction, unintentional injuries, violence, and even death because of underage alcohol use afflict innocent parties. For instance, about 45 percent of people who die in car crashes involving a drinking driver under the age of 21 are people other than the driver." Surgeon General's Call to Action. at page 11. 
(13)  Law enforcement agency responses to disturbances involving underage consumption of alcoholic beverages at gatherings at or on dwelling units, private residences or other private property frequently require the use of extensive public resources. Further, when law enforcement personnel respond to such disturbances it limits their ability to respond to other service calls in the community, thereby placing the community at increased risk. Law enforcement is not currently reimbursed for their expenses when called to a gathering at or on a dwelling unit, private residence or other private property. 
(14)  The prohibitions found in this article are reasonable and expected to deter the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages by persons under the age of 21 by holding responsible persons who encourage, are aware of, or should be aware of, the illegal conduct, yet fail to take steps to prevent it. In addition, the revenue received by the city, after cost reimbursement to the responding law enforcement agency, will be directed toward law enforcement strategies and prevention programs in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002, § 3, 4-13-2015) 
Sec. 6-212. - Title. 
    This article shall be referred to as the "Jonesboro Social Hosting Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2015-002, § 3, 4-13-2015) 
Sec. 6-213. - Definitions. 
    The words, terms, and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section 6-213. If no meaning is ascribed for a particular word, term, or phrase in this section 6-213, then said word, term, or phrase shall have the meaning set forth in section 62 of article I of chapter 6 of this Code, if applicable, or the generally accepted definition of said word, term, or phrase if no definition appears in section 6-2 of article I of chapter 6. 
    Dwelling unit means, without limitations, any of the following: 
(1)  Any single and/or multi-family residence including, but not limited to, any apartment, cabin, condominium, townhouse, duplex, house, or log cabin, and the land on which it is located, whether owned, leased, rented, or occupied for no compensation by the occupant or occupants; 
(2)  Any mobile home and the land upon which the mobile home is located, whether or not rent is paid for the mobile home, for the land upon which the mobile home is located, or for both; 
(3)  Any recreational vehicle, whether located on privately-owned or publicly-owned property, and whether rent or not is paid for the recreational vehicle, and the land upon which the recreational vehicle is located. 
    Gathering means an assembled group of two or more people for the purpose of a social occasion or activity. 
    Legal guardian is a person who is lawfully vested with the power and charged with the duty of taking care of an underage person. 
    Other private property includes the following locations when said location is: i) occupied by one or more persons on a temporary or permanent basis; and/or ii) occupied as a dwelling, permanent residence, or temporary residence for a gathering or for any other social function; and/or iii) owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation: 
a.  A hotel or motel room; 
b.  An assembly hall or meeting room; 
c.  A common room of a dwelling unit used for a gathering (e.g., a recreation room of an apartment building or a common room of a condominium complex); 
d.  A site in a privately-owned campground; 
e.  A privately-owned vacant lot; or 
f.  Privately-owned land or real estate of any type. 
    Parent means any person who is a natural parent, an adoptive parent, a foster parent, a step-parent, or a person who stands in loco parentis. 
    Person who has a right of possession means, with respect to a private residence or other private property, as follows: 
(1)  Owner of the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; 
(2)  The record owner of the title to the property as of the time of the gathering regardless of where that person currently resides; 
(3)  Tenant or lessee of the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; 
(4)  Landlord of another person who has a right of possession in the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; 
(5)  The person or persons who are in charge of the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; or 
(6)  Social host (as defined in Section 6-213(i) below). 
    Private residence means the following: 
(1)  A dwelling unit, whether occupied on a temporary basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for a gathering or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation; 
(2)  Any other item on the same land parcel as the dwelling unit, which includes but is not limited to, any of the following: an animal pen, an animal shed, a barn, a boat dock, a boat house, a cabana, an equipment shed, a free-standing office, a garage, a gazebo, a granary, a hot tub, a hunting cabin, a corn crib, a sauna, a stable, a studio, a swimming pool, a private office, a shed, a silo, a tent, a tool shed, a tree-house, a tractor, or a vehicle of any type or nature; 
(3)  Other items or areas accompanying or on the same land parcel as the dwelling unit, whether improved or unimproved, such as a yard (whether fenced or unfenced), patio, outdoor grilling or eating area, open fields, jetty, pier, dock, or lake shore; 
(4)  Water bodies contiguous to or on the same land parcel as a dwelling unit, such as a basin, bayou, brook, creek, dam, lagoon, lake, marsh, pond, river, stream, or swamp. 
    Reasonable steps mean steps that include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Controlling access to alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Verifying the legal minimum drinking age of persons at the gathering by inspecting drivers licenses or other government issued identification cards of all those persons in attendance; and 
(4)  Supervising and monitoring the activities of underage persons at the gathering. 
    Social host means: 
(1)  The person or persons who organize, supervise, officiate, conduct or control a gathering at or on a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by that person or those persons; and 
(2)  The person or persons receiving money or any other type of consideration for granting access to a gathering at or on a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by that person or those persons. 
    Underage person means any person under the age of 21. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002, § 3, 4-13-2015) 
Sec. 6-214. - Prohibition. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for a social host or any person who has a right of possession of a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property to knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place or continue at or on such dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property if any underage person at said gathering possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage and the social host or person knows or reasonably should know, after taking all reasonable steps to prevent alcoholic beverage possession or consumption by the underage person, that the underage person is possessing or consuming any alcoholic beverage at the gathering. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for the parent or legal guardian of an underage person to knowingly allow that underage person to attend a gathering if that parent or legal guardian knows or reasonably should know that the underage person will possess or consume any alcoholic beverage at that gathering (except as may be permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended). 
(c)  It is the duty of any person having a right of possession of a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property, who knowingly hosts, permits or allows a gathering at or on the dwelling unit, the private residence, or other private property, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by any underage person at the gathering. A breach of this duty shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)  Any violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended, shall also be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002, § 3, 4-13-2015) 
Sec. 6-215. - Protected activities. 
(a)  Nothing in this article should be interpreted to prohibit legally protected practices held at or on a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property that includes the possession and/or consumption of alcohol by persons under the age of 21: 
(1)  As part of religious practices on private property; 
(2)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state and the consumption occurs on private property pursuant to and in accordance with that prescription; or 
(3)  When the parent or legal guardian of the underage person physically gives the alcohol to that underage person when in their own residence and while in their presence and as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the exemptions for protected activities found in section 6-215(a) of this article, if an underage person leaves said private property intoxicated where he or he was provided the alcohol and is found in public, then said furnishers of alcoholic beverages to that underage person shall be held responsible in the same manner as furnishers of alcoholic beverages to underage persons at non-protected activities. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002, § 3, 4-13-2015) 
Sec. 6-216. - Separate violation for each incident. 
    Each incident in violation of section 6-214 shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002, § 3, 4-13-2015) 
Sec. 6-217. - Enforcement authority. 
    The city police department, city code enforcement department, the city attorney, and any other person designated by the mayor and city council are authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The city police department, city code enforcement department, the city attorney, and any other person designated by the mayor and the city council may exercise any enforcement powers provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002, § 3, 4-13-2015) 
Sec. 6-218. - Penalties and enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Consistent with O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10(a), the first violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 shall also be a violation of this article. Any person who violates O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 shall be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum fine for which the Georgia Statutes provide for a violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
(b)  Any parent or legal guardian who violates section 6-214 (b) of this article may be assessed the maximum penalty for which the City's Code of Ordinances and Georgia State Statutes provide for a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person who violates section 6-214 (a), (b), and/or (c) of this article has committed a public nuisance constituting an immediate threat to public health, safety, and welfare warranting summary abatement, and is guilty of violating section 34-81 of the City's Code of Ordinances, which section is set forth in article III of chapter 34 of the City's Code of Ordinances. Said individual shall therefore be subject to all penalty and enforcement procedures that apply to the commission of a public nuisance as set forth in sections 34-82, 34-83, and 34-86 of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002, § 3, 4-13-2015) 
Article XI. - Tobacco 

Sec. 6-219. - Tobacco use prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any time to use any form of tobacco, including but not limited to electronic nicotine delivery systems and smokeless tobacco, at or in any indoor or outdoor recreational facilities owned or operated by the city or the State of Georgia, including but not limited to any restrooms, athletic fields, beaches, aquatic areas, parks, walking/hiking trails, city or state-owned vehicles, and spectator and concession areas. 
(b)  The city shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting the use of tobacco products in all designated areas. 
(c)  Any person found violating this policy may be subject to immediate ejection from the recreation facility. 
(d)  The use of tobacco in an area that has been designated as such by a no-smoking sign shall, in addition to a violation of this section, be a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2, which prohibits smoking in designated public places. 
(Ord. No. 2016-007 , § 1, 5-31-2016) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; carnivals and circuses, § 18-146 et seq.; noisy outdoor amusements, § 34-123. 
State Law reference- Exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c); Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq.; authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2; state licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, adopted March 10, 2008, amended Art. II in its entirety, with the exception of § 10-31 to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 10-32-10-54, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, adopted March 10, 2003. 
State Law reference- Nudity and related acts on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41; employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42. 

Sec. 10-31. - Purpose. 
    Based on city officials' own observations of establishments that exploit live human nudity and human sexuality for commercial profit, euphemistically referred to as adult entertainment, and the experiences of other urban cities and counties including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas; Manatee County, Florida; the State of Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and Phoenix, Arizona, and as further described in City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000), which experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the City of Jonesboro, Georgia, and based on the evidence and testimony of persons who have appeared before the mayor and council, the mayor and council take note of the well-known and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of live human nudity and human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within the country. 
    Moreover, it is the finding of the mayor and council that the commercial exploitation of live human nudity and human sexuality, in all the forms in which such exploitation may be manifested has deleterious effects on the community where it takes place and that such effects are intensified and exacerbated when adult entertainment is provided in conjunction with the service or consumption of alcohol. The mayor and council find that adult entertainment causes an increase in criminal behavior in nearby areas, including, but not limited to, disorderly conduct, public intoxication, prostitution, solicitation, drug trafficking, drug use and corruption of public officials. The mayor and council further find that adult entertainment establishments escalate undesirable community conditions, including blight, diminish property values, increase the need for law enforcement and emergency medical response resources, and increase the burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. 
    The mayor and council expressly find that the negative effects of adult entertainment are not limited to adult entertainment that offers live or recorded performances with human nudity or the depiction of sexual acts. Other forms of adult entertainment also have a deleterious effect upon the quality of life in nearby neighborhoods and commercial districts and on urban life in general. Such other forms of adult entertainment include, but are not limited to, adult bookstores, peep shows, adult theaters, massage parlors, bath houses, adult gift or novelty shops, and lingerie modeling studios. 
    Further, based on the investigation conducted by the city regarding lingerie modeling studios, it is the finding of the mayor and council that lingerie modeling studios are establishments that offer adult entertainment in the form of live human nudity in a private setting. Based on the evidence presented to the mayor and council, it is apparent that lingerie modeling studios, by providing adult entertainment in a private setting, lead to criminal behavior including, but not limited to, masturbation for hire, prostitution, and sodomy. 
    Furthermore, based on the investigation conducted by the city, it is apparent that lingerie modeling studios pose a more difficult challenge to the enforcement of regulations pertaining to adult entertainment business, in that the activity occurs within a private setting, as opposed to in an open area which is visible to all patrons of the establishment. For the same reason, the mayor and council have identified massage parlors as presenting similar risks of criminal behavior and problems of enforcement. The mayor and council have determined that lighting, visibility and access are measures that can reduce the risk of crime to patrons and others. 
    Accordingly, the mayor and council find that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to limit and regulate adult entertainment within the corporate boundaries of the city, so as to limit the adverse impact on property values, other business uses, residential uses and public and semi-public uses; to ensure that adult entertainment uses and adult entertainment facilities do not impede development, redevelopment and neighborhood revitalization efforts; to restrict adult entertainment and adult uses in heavily-used public pedestrian areas and to protect patrons of adult entertainment business from unreasonable risk of crime. 
    After giving due consideration to the considerations stated in these findings and the current state of growth and development of the city, the mayor and council find that properties located within the city limits and abutting the right of way of Tara Boulevard are so situated as to provide sufficient vehicular access to patrons and suppliers, while providing the desired containment from residential uses and pedestrian traffic, regarding adult entertainment facilities and adult entertainment businesses. 
    This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally-protected forms of expression. This article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of providers and patrons of adult entertainment. 
    It is a matter of governmental interest and concern and in the interest of the public welfare to minimize the proliferation of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments that commercially exploit human sexuality through adult entertainment to limit adult entertainment uses of property to certain prescribed areas of the city. To that end, this article is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions. 
    Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. 
    Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which more than 20 percent of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale of any book or publication, film, or other medium or device which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to or used for specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or which derives more than ten percent of its net sales from materials which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. For purposes of this section, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors. 
    Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult entertainment establishment shall be defined to include the following types of business: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein; 
(2)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her specified anatomical areas as defined herein or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities," as defined herein; 
(3)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) herein; 
(4)  Any commercial establishment where the display maintains more than 20 percent of floor space for its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions or devices manufactured for the principal intended effect of which is to excite the sexual arousal, desire or gratification of the user or another person whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities as defined herein or specified anatomical areas as defined herein or which derives more than ten percent of its net sales from materials which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(5)  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
(6)  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined herein; and 
(7)  The definition of "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or live theater (mainstream theater) which means a theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. 
(8)  An entertainment establishment where the display maintains more than 20 percent of floor space or which maintains more than ten percent of the net sales from the sale or rental of books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions or devices manufactured for the principal intended effect of which is to excite the sexual arousal, desire or gratification of the user or another person whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities. 
    Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
    Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein; 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and when the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein; 
    Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies, other reproductions, books, magazines or other periodicals, or devices manufactured for the principal intended effect of which is to excite the sexual arousal, desire or gratification of the user or another person whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities as defined herein or specified anatomical areas as defined herein, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than ten percent of its net sales from materials which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Children's day care facility shall be defined as a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article the term "children's day care facility" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," or "pre-school." 
    City means the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment; 
    Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 20 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment; 
    Police department means the Police Department of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    Premises means the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult entertainment is performed; 
    Public indecency means the performance of any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  An act of sexual intercourse; 
(2)  A lewd exposure of the sexual organs; 
(3)  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; or 
(4)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person. 
    Specified sexual activities shall be defined to mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
    Specified anatomical areas shall include the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or public region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 10-33. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the incorporated area of the city an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article without first procuring an annual license to do so except as provided in subsection 10-42(b) when the mayor or his/her designee fails to approve or deny an application for an adult entertainment license within 30 days as required by this article. The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. No annual license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued by the city if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within the city in the amount of $5,000.00, to be used for the costs of administration and enforcement of this article. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the city within ten days after the mayor or his/her designee approves the initial application for an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal thereof. In any event, no adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the city on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal application received after November 30 shall pay, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of ten percent. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs as hereinafter set forth in this article will be assessed. All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 10-34. - On-premises operator required. 
    An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 10-35. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)  Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the unincorporated areas of the city shall make application to the city. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the city, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name(s) of the operator(s) as defined herein and of the owner(s) as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. 
    At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee payable in cash or by certified check in the amount of $2,000.00 shall be paid to the city to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The mayor or his/her designee shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. 
    The application for license does not authorize the operation of, engaging in, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s) are at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The operator(s)' height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the operator(s) at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension; 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its ordinances of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the city clerk shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  With respect to the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), all convictions, (excluding misdemeanor traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past five years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his/her or her criminal records to the permits unit of the city police department; 
(12)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operator(s); 
(13)  If the person or business entity on whose behalf application for a license is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in the state, including ordinances of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(14)  At least three character references for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or any operator(s) or owner(s) and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted. The city shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s), who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(15)  The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(16)  A plat by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any residential area, church, school, public park or children's day care facility, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine or other adult entertainment establishment; 
(17)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual; 
b.  If application is made on behalf of a partnership, by a general partner; 
c.  If application is made on behalf of a corporation, by the president of the corporation; or 
d.  If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(c)  Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the mayor or his/her designee and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the mayor and city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(d)  Investigation; standards for granting of license. The city shall have 30 days from the date of actual receipt of the application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s). The mayor or his/her designee shall stamp the date of actual receipt of each application on the first page thereof and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within five business days of actual receipt of such application. The mayor or his/her designee shall approve or deny any application for an adult entertainment establishment license within 30 days of actual receipt of such application. In the event the mayor or his/her designee fails to approve or deny the application within 30 days of the stamped date on the first page of the application, the applicant shall have the right to proceed as though the application was approved. The application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be granted if the mayor or his/her designee finds; 
(1)  The required $2,000.00 investigative fee has been paid; 
(2)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(3)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of a "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 within a period of five years. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself/herself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his/her first offender treatment; 
(4)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) had had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit revoked for cause by this city or any other city or municipality located in or out of this state prior to the date of application within the preceding five years; 
(5)  The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(6)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(7)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an operator(s) as defined herein on the premises at all times during which the business is open; 
(8)  The proposed premises will be located at least the minimum distances set forth in this article from any residential use, church, school, public park or children's daycare facility or establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, or another adult entertainment establishment; and 
(9)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of and will not be in conflict with this article or any other law, ordinance or regulation, of the city, the State of Georgia or the United States. 
The mayor or his/her designee shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment license if the application fails to meet any requirement contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 10-36. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Location. No building maintaining an adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land which is used for residential uses or purposes ("residential area"); 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land on which a church, school, college campus, public park or children's day care facility is located; 
(3)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is located; 
(4)  In any zoning district other than an industrial district with zoning specifications substantially similar to the M-1 zoning district; or 
(5)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
For purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from building of the adult entertainment establishment to the closest point on the property line of the parcel of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(1)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No employee employed as an adult entertainer shall have been convicted of an offense described in subsection 10-35(d)(3) within the five years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment. Any adult entertainer who is convicted of any such crime while employed as an adult entertainer shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "licensed premises" shall mean the premises where an adult entertainment establishment for which a license is obtained pursuant to this article operates, conducts or carries on its business. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Permit for employment. Before any person may work as an adult entertainer on a licensed premises, as defined in subsection (1), he or she shall file a notice with the police department of his or her intended employment on forms supplied by the police department and shall receive a permit for such employment from the police department. The prospective employee shall supply a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the police department. The prospective employee shall also provide a list of all of his or her convictions of offenses (including pleas of nolo contendere) within the past five years. The police department shall approve or deny the permit within 45 days of the application. If the prospective employee is found to meet the requirements of this subsection (b), and upon payment of the permit fee, the police department shall, within 48 hours of such finding, issue a permit approving such employment. Upon receipt of a permit, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If the police department does not approve or deny an application for a license within 45 days of the date such application was received by the police department, then on the expiration of the forty-fifth day: (1) the application shall be approved and the police department shall immediately issue the license for which application was made, and (2) the applicant shall have the right to begin operating in the manner allowed by the license for which application was made. The annual permit fee shall be $5,000.00. 
(3)  Suspension or revocation of permit; procedure. Violation by an adult entertainer of the provisions of this article and/or conviction of an offense described in subsection 10-35(d)(3) shall subject an adult entertainer to suspension or revocation of the permit for employment. Whenever the mayor or his/her designee finds that reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a permit for employment issued hereunder, the mayor or his/her designee shall notify the employee, at least 20 days prior, that a hearing shall take place before an independent arbitrator who shall be chosen by the mayor or his/her designee. The notice shall further state the time and place of the hearing and the proposed action and grounds therefor. The employee and the city shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses with or without legal counsel. The independent arbitrator shall provide the mayor or his/her designee with its recommendation within ten days of the hearing. The mayor or his/her designee possesses the final decision and shall notify the employee promptly in writing. In the event that a permit for employment is suspended or revoked by the mayor or his/her designee, a $500.00 appeal cost shall be assessed against the permit holder. 
(4)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors working as adult entertainers shall be considered as employees and shall be required to satisfy the provisions of this article relating to employees of adult entertainment establishments, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  Hours of operation. An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. 
(d)  Display of licenses. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this article. 
(e)  Performance area. All dancing by adult entertainers at adult entertainment establishments shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(f)  Lighting. All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(g)  Covering of windows and doors. All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this article shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 10-37. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 18 years or an adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Sale, consumption of alcohol. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(c)  Contact between patrons, employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(d)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(e)  Public indecency prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in this article. 
(f)  Advertising without license. No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. Any establishment which advertises through material which conveys the message of sexual adult entertainment shall automatically be classified, for a period of no less than one year, as an adult entertainment establishment and shall be required to possess all permits and licenses as required by this article and shall comply with all terms and restrictions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 10-38. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of section 10-37 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. Each day of operation in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 10-39. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 10-40. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  Cleaning of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city and the state. 
(b)  Inspection of licensed premises. The fire marshal in charge of the city's fire service shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments, to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes of the city. 
(c)  Inspection for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The police department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 10-41. - Physical layout of establishment. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(b)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
(1)  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall; 
(2)  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same; 
(3)  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable; 
(4)  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned, and 
(5)  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten footcandles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(c)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 10-42. - Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. A license may be denied to persons or entities that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements of this Code. 
(1)  Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license: 
a.  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
b.  Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this article; or 
c.  With respect to the applicant, operator(s) and owner(s), conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license under section 10-35. 
(b)  Denial; procedure. Within 30 days of actual receipt of an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the mayor or his/her designee shall either approve or deny the application. In no event shall the mayor or his/her designee's decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be withheld for more than 30 days after actual receipt of the application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than 30 days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The mayor or his/her designee shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the mayor or his/her designee of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than 30 days following actual receipt of the application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by this sentence shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations contemplated by the application, the mayor or his/her designee shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the mayor or his/her designee denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five business days of such denial. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, its officials, employees or agents, pursuant to this article, may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the Superior Court of Clayton County or any other court of competent jurisdiction including, but not limited to, a mandamus petition pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 9-6-20 through 9-6-28. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation; procedure. Whenever the mayor or his/her designee finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the mayor or his/her designee shall schedule a hearing to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefor. The licensee and the city shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The mayor or his/her designee shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five business days of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 10-43. - Obscenity. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 10-44. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
    Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. 2008-000, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Secs. 10-45-10-54. - Reserved. 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2010, repealed Ch. 14, Arts. I and II, §§ 14-1, 14-31-14-38, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Ch. 14 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; fish, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-30 et seq.; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings as ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned animal means any animal that is placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of such private property. Any animal shall also be considered as abandoned which is upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of the animal for a period of time in excess of 36 hours unattended or without proper food and water. 
    Animal at large means an animal not under restraint. 
    Animal control officer shall refer to an individual employed by the city or the county to perform and execute the provisions of this article, and his office shall have the power to issue citations in violation of this article. 
    Animal under restraint means any animal: 
(1)  Secured by a leash or lead or enclosed by way of fence or other enclosure; 
(2)  Under the control of a responsible and competent person and obedient to that person's commands, that person being actually present with the animal; or 
(3)  Confined within a vehicle that is parked or in motion. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that according to the records of any appropriate authority: 
(1)  Inflicts injury on a human without provocation on public or private property; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification; or 
Such categorization shall not apply to a dog if it bites a human: 
a.  When being used by a law enforcement officer. 
b.  When its owner is being attacked. 
c.  Who is a willful trespasser on the property of the owner or who is committing another tort or crime. 
d.  Who has tormented or abused it or who in the past has been observed or reported to have tormented or abused it. 
    Exotic animal means any animal of any kind which is not indigenous to the State of Georgia, but not included in the definition of a domestic animal, but shall include any hybrid animal which is part exotic animal. 
    Health officer shall mean the animal control officers of Clayton County, or his authorized representative so long as Clayton County is under contract with the City of Jonesboro to operate the dog pound and perform animal and rabies control services for the city. 
    Kennel means a dedicated structure or portion of a structure for the care, grooming, boarding, breeding, whelping, and feeding of domestic dogs. 
    License tag shall mean a metal tag issued on behalf of Clayton County by the health officer after showing proof of vaccination for the animal and paying, when required, the license fee. 
    Nuisance means whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render the soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome, or unreasonably offends or impairs the senses of smell, sight, and hearing. 
    Pound shall mean the facilities operated by the health officer for confining dogs impounded under the provisions of this regulation. 
    Vaccinate shall mean the injection, by a licensed veterinarian, of a specified dose of USDA approved vaccine. 
    Vaccination tag shall mean any metal tag issued by licensed veterinarians in the State of Georgia and supplied to dog owners upon vaccination. 
    Vicious animal means any animal which, because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or other domestic animals. The term shall include an animal that has on one or more occasions caused physical injury to a human being or other domestic animal without provocation whether on public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-1), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-2. - City designated a bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The area embraced by the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  Adequate signs shall be erected and maintained at entrances to the city signifying the designation of the area within the corporate limits as a bird sanctuary. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to hunt, kill, maim or trap; hunt with a slingshot, gun or attempt to in any manner shoot or otherwise molest birds or any wild fowl; to rob or otherwise molest the nests of birds nesting or located within the corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-2), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-3. - Same; birds constituting a nuisance; disposition. 
    In the event starlings or other similar birds are found roosting, nesting or inhabiting any locality within the corporate limits of the city in such numbers as to constitute a nuisance or health menace to persons or property, it shall be the duty of the mayor and council to notify representatives of the Audubon Society, Garden Club, Birdwatchers' Club, or Humane Society, if representatives of any of these organizations are available, advising them that such a condition exists and requesting that immediate action to eliminate same be taken by them. If the condition has not been eliminated by representatives of the above named organizations within a reasonable time, then the mayor and council shall take whatever action it deems necessary to eliminate such condition or health menace. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-3), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-4. - Animals at large; impoundment. 
    Every owner or person in control of any animal or fowl shall keep it under restraint within the city. Any animal or fowl not under restraint may be impounded by any police officer or animal control officer and transported to the county pound where it shall be held or disposed of in accordance with regulations of the pound. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-4), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-5. - Noisy animals. 
    No person shall keep or harbor any animal which, by loud or frequent barking, howling, yelping, growling, snorting, clucking, crowing or any other noise, causes annoyance to reasonably sensitive neighbors or people passing on the street. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-5), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-6. - Hogs prohibited. 
    Notwithstanding section 14-9(f) it shall be unlawful for any person to have or keep any hog within the city, either on his own premises or on the premises of another, and whether kept in a pen or otherwise kept or confined on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-6), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-7. - Diseased animals. 
(a)  Diseased animals or fowl which might infect healthy animals or cause a menace to the public health, shall be isolated or destroyed and disposed of, as the animal control officer deem necessary. 
(b)  Any person who is the owner, or person having the charge of any animal or fowl, and knows that the animal or fowl has any contagious or infectious disease, or has "been recently exposed thereto, and who sells, trades or disposes of such animal or fowl without first disclosing to the person to whom the same is sold, traded or disposed of, that such animal or fowl is so diseased, or has been exposed, or knowingly permits the animal or fowl to run at large, or knowing the animal or fowl to be diseased, knowingly allows the same to come into contact with any such animal or fowl of another person without his knowledge or permission, shall be punished as provided by section 1-1-8. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-7), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-8. - Setting [o]ut poison 
(a)  No person shall leave or deposit any poison or any substance containing poison in any street, lane or thoroughfare of any kind in the city. 
(b)  (1)  Any person who shall expose or put out, or cause to be exposed or put out, upon his premises, or upon the premises of another, or upon the property owned or held through easement by the city, any substance known to be poisonous to dogs and cats, which is poured over, wrapped in, or otherwise combined with food, with the apparent intent to entice such animals to eat poisonous substance and become poisoned thereby, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this code. 
(2)  The finding of such poisonous substance or poisoned food, together with proof as to the identity of the person exposing or putting out same, shall be prima facie evidence of the intent to poison and destroy such animals. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-8), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-9. - Housing; other limitations. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section "residential area" shall mean any area zoned R-2, or R-4, R-C, R-A, H-1, H-2 and MX by the city. 
(b)  All housing or enclosures used by any animal or fowl shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement, any objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. Excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the county health department. 
(c)  The maximum number of animals permitted to be kept in residential areas shall not exceed the following: 
ANIMALS MAXIMUM NUMBER Dogs 5 Cats 5 Rabbits 15  
(d)  The keeping of domestic pets, as authorized by this section, shall be so controlled that they will be kept at a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling except the dwelling unit of the owner. 
(e)  Cages, dog houses or pens, including fenced areas, for all animals and fowl shall be such that it will safely contain and hold the animal and prevent its encroachment upon unauthorized property. 
(f)  No livestock shall be kept in residential areas unless the tract of land exceeds five acres in size and otherwise meets the requirements of this section. 
(g)  In the case of licensed pet shops, veterinary hospitals, stock yards, poultry houses, and similar commercial establishments, the mayor and council may modify these requirements where undue hardship would result from their strict enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-9), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-10. - Licenses for dogs and cats; vaccination/license tag required. 
(a)  The owner, possessor or harborer of each dog or cat over four months of age kept, maintained or harbored within the municipal limits of the City of Jonesboro at any time during the year shall apply for and obtain a license for such dog or cat from Clayton County. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons having custody of any dog or cat over four months of age brought into the City of Jonesboro to obtain a dog or cat license within 14 days from the date of entry. 
(c)  In order to maintain a centrally located record of all vaccinated dogs, cats, or other animals kept, maintained, or harbored in Jonesboro and Clayton County, the owner, custodian, or harborer of such dog, cat, or other animal is required to apply to the Clayton County Animal Control for a vaccination/license tag. 
(d)  A vaccination/license tag shall be issued upon presentation of a certificate showing that the dog, cat, or other animal for which the tag is issued has been vaccinated against rabies as prescribed by this article, provided that the owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog or cat also make payment of a license fee. The vaccination/license tag shall be available throughout the year and is issued on behalf of Clayton County by the health department or its designee(s), which may include licensed veterinarians. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-10), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-11. - Wild or exotic animals. 
    Each owner, custodian, or harborer of any wildlife or exotic animal must obtain all necessary state and/or federal permits and/or meet all state and/or federal requirements for keeping such an animal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-11), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-12. - Running at large prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, or any person having an animal in his custody, to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the streets and highways of the city, or on the property of another person without permission of the owner of that property or of the person in possession of that property. Such restriction shall not apply to cats. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-12), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-13. - Duty to keep animal under restraint while on property. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or any person having any animal in his possession or custody, to ensure that the animal is enclosed by a fence or other enclosure or is restrained by a leash or in some other physical manner or under control by a competent person so that it cannot wander off of the real property limits of its owner, possessor or custodian except as provided in this article. It is the intent of this article that all animals be prevented from leaving while unattended the real property limits of their owners, possessors or custodians thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-13), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-14. - Duty to keep animal under restraint while off property. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal or any person having an animal in his possession to keep that animal under control at all times while the animal is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor, or custodian. Under control means confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion, secured by a leash or other device held by a competent person, or properly confined within an enclosure with the permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-14), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-15. - Public nuisance. 
    Any animal which satisfies one (1) of the following conditions is hereby declared to be a public nuisance: 
(1)  Is found at large in violation of this chapter; 
(2)  Is a vicious animal and while on the property of its owner is not kept in a locked pen or kennel with secured sides and an attached top; or while off the real property of its owner, is not muzzled and kept secured by a leash or chain held by a competent person; 
(3)  Produces, because of quantity, manner or method in which the animals are domesticated or maintained, unsanitary conditions in the city; 
(4)  Attacks passersby or passing vehicles; 
(5)  Violates the leash provisions of this article and turns over garbage containers or spreads garbage over the rights-of-way of the City of Jonesboro; 
(6)  Makes or causes frequent or long continued noise which disturbs the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity; or 
(7)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare or safety according to rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health. 
    Any person who knowingly keeps, owns, harbors or acts as custodian of an animal constituting a nuisance shall be guilty of an unlawful act and shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-15), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-16. - Removal of excrement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing, harboring, or having care, charge, control or custody of a dog not to remove any excrement left by that dog on any sidewalk, gutter, street, lot, public park or other area traversed by the public. Dog waste shall be immediately removed from areas traversed by the public by placing said matter in a sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in a trash receptacle or refuse container. This section shall not apply to visually impaired persons who have the charge, control or use of a guide dog. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-16), 9-13-10) 
Secs. 14-17-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-31. - Notice to dangerous or potentially dangerous dog owners. 
(a)  When an animal control officer or City of Jonesboro code enforcement officer classifies a dog as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the officer shall notify the dog's owner. The notice shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has the right to request a hearing on the officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before a Clayton County Magistrate or City of Jonesboro Municipal Judge; 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing. 
(b)  When a request for a hearing, as provided in this section is received, it shall be scheduled within 30 days after receiving the request. The initiating officer will notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and, in addition thereto, the judge shall receive such other evidence and hear such officer testimony as the judge may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(c)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the judge shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of his determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(d)  A certificate of registration to the effect that the dog owner has a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall also be issued by the animal control officer, and is contingent upon the dog owner presenting to the animal control officer evidence of: 
(1)  An enclosure as prescribed in this chapter for confinement of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog; 
(2)  The proper posting of the premises as prescribed in this chapter; and 
(3)  An insurance policy or surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00, insuring the owner against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by a dangerous dog. This shall apply to a dog, classified as dangerous, only. 
(e)  An annual fee may be charged in addition to regular dog licensing fees, to register dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. This registration fee is subject to change as dictated by the Clayton County Board of Commissioners. Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, an animal control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this division. 
(f)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the animal control officer does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in this chapter are maintained by the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration, or following the date of any renewal of such certificate. 
(g)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer immediately if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, or been sold, stolen or donated. If the dog is sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. If sold or donated to another resident of the City of Jonesboro, the new owner has ten days after taking possession of the dog to register the dog with Clayton County Animal Control. If the owner moves with the dog from one jurisdiction to another within the State of Georgia, the owner shall register the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(h)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the State of Georgia shall register the dog as required in this article within 30 days after becoming a resident. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-21), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-32. - Impoundment of animals. 
(a)  Dogs or other animals within any of the following classes may be captured and impounded: 
(1)  Animals whose ownership is unknown. 
(2)  Vicious dogs or dangerous dogs not properly confined or restrained as defined by section 8.1.22 [O.C.G.A § 4-8-42]. 
(3)  Dogs in heat off the premises of their owners. 
(4)  Dogs or other animals which have bitten a person or animal or which have been bitten by a dog or animal suspected of having rabies. 
(5)  Dogs not wearing a current vaccination tag. 
(6)  Dogs which have strayed from the premises of their owners. 
(7)  Wandering dogs. 
(8)  Warm-blooded animals suspected of having rabies. 
(9)  Unconfined warm-blooded animals in quarantine areas. 
(10)  Animals whose safety, health, or life is in danger. 
(b)  No dog or cat shall be exempted from this provision by virtue of vaccination, license tag or certificates. 
(c)  When a dog's owner can be readily identified and located, the health officer shall notify the owner that such dog has been impounded. If any impounded dog is not claimed within three days of the date such dog is impounded, such dog shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health officer. Animals under observation for rabies symptoms shall remain in the pound for such period of time as the health officer may deem necessary to protect the public health. The health officer may, at his discretion, offer for adoption any dog not redeemed or claimed within three days by the person having right of possession. 
(d)  Before the release of any impounded animal, the owner or person adopting such animal shall pay the following: 
(1)  A vaccination fee on any unvaccinated animal when vaccination is required by this article. 
(2)  A license fee for any unlicensed dog. 
(3)  An impoundment fee. 
(4)  A daily boarding fee. 
(e)  The health officer shall exercise every reasonable care to prevent injury, illness, death, escape, or pilfering of any animal with which he deals in carrying out the provisions of this regulation, but he shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-22), 9-13-10) 
Sec. 14-33. - Reporting dog bites. 
(a)  In the event any person is bitten by a dog within the limits of the city, it shall become the duty of such person or the owner of such dog when he has knowledge of the incident, to report such incident to the city police or county health department within 24 hours hereafter. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner, to report to the police department the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the city his diagnosis of any animal observed by him as a rabies suspect. 
(d)  Copies of such reports shall be immediately submitted to the county health officer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-23), 9-13-10) 
Secs. 14-34-14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POULTRY 

Sec. 14-51. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to authorize and to provide standards for the keeping of poultry in the rear or side yard of a single-family detached residence. It is intended to enable residents to keep poultry on a non-commercial basis, while limiting the potentially adverse impacts on surrounding neighbors. 
(1)  Number of poultry allowed. The maximum number of poultry allowed is 25 birds per single-family detached residence located in any residential zoning district. For the purposes of this article, "poultry" shall mean any domesticated bird, including but not limited to, chickens (including roosters), ducks, geese, guineas, quail, pigeons and turkeys. 
(2)  Housing types allowed to keep poultry; adult residents deemed keepers or owners. Only those residing in single-family detached residences may keep poultry as authorized in this chapter. Each adult residing at any single-family detached residence at which poultry are kept shall be deemed a keeper or owner of the poultry. 
(3)  Personal use only. The keeping of poultry pursuant to this chapter is for non-commercial, personal use only. 
(4)  Poultry enclosed. Each keeper of poultry is required to have an accessory structure and/or fenced area to house and control said poultry. Such accessory structures shall meet all requirements for accessory structures set out in the zoning ordinance, including those for setbacks and location. Poultry shall be kept only in the rear or side yard and must be within a fenced area. No poultry shall roam free. 
(5)  Nuisance prohibited. The keeping of poultry authorized under this chapter shall not create a nuisance as defined by the Jonesboro City Code. The keeping of poultry shall be conducted in a manner that does not disturb the use or enjoyment of adjacent properties. Odor generated shall not be perceptible at the property boundaries, and noise generated shall not disturb people of reasonable sensitivity at the property boundaries. Only motion-activated lighting shall be used to light any fenced area. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, § 1(14-3-30), 9-13-10) 
Chapter 16 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; historical preservation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 50; signs, ch. 52; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; numbering of houses and buildings, § 58-1; deposit of building materials on streets and sidewalks, § 58-6; subdivisions, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Self-inspection of sewer lines by plumbers and utility contractors. 
    The city council, pursuant to 1996 Ga. Laws, page 1632, exempts the city from the alternative inspection procedure as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 78. 
Secs. 16-2-16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 2014, deleted the former Art. II, §§ 16-26 and 16-27, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1987, §§ 8-2-21, 8-2-31, 8-2-41, 8-2-51, 8-2-61, 8-2-71 and 8-2-81; and an ordinance adopted Mar. 8, 1999, §§ 1, 2. 
State Law reference- Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

Sec. 16-26. - State minimum standards adopted. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council to enforce the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and from time to time amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
(1)  International Building Code (I.C.C.). 
(2)  International Fuel Gas Code. 
(3)  International Mechanical Code. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code. 
(5)  National Electrical Code (as published by the National Fire Protection Association). 
(6)  International Fire Code. 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code. 
(8)  International Residential Code. 
(b)  The following codes, the latest editions as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (I.C.C.). 
(2)  International Property Maintenance Code (I.C.C.). 
(c)  The city also adopts the State Minimum Standards Codes as defined by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9). 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-27. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-28. - Code remedial. 
(a)  General. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof - which are public safety, health, and general welfare - through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use, and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The City of Jonesboro, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-29. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  One and two-family dwellings. In addition to those codes referenced herein, the provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the building, mechanical, and gas systems in new one- and two-family dwellings, including additions, alterations, renovations and general repairs of existing one- and two-family dwellings. 
(8)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating, and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices. Any appendices referenced in section 16-26 shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-30. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair, or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within the fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-31. - Building official. 
(a)  Creation of building official office. There is hereby established an office with the city to be called the building official. The mayor and council shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. The duties of the building official may be contracted out in full to a third party entity. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the building official, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the office. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, acting for the mayor and council in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall submit a report each year coveting the work of his/her office during the preceding year. He/she may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the mayor and council during said year. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-32. - Building official, powers and duties. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. The city may contract with a third party to provide the duties of the building official. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination, pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not specifically covered by the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-33. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. A permit shall not be issued to an owner, who is neither a licensed contractor nor the occupant of a residential structure being altered. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs, with a value of less than $2,500.00, may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m^ 2) or more in area. 
d.  For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
e.  Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor, or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes, and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment, and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents; plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley, or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he/she proposes to build, erect, or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon. 
(e)  Contractor responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler, or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his place, a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he/she shall mark, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his/her authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination, and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (6), herein below. He/she may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
a.  Building. 
1.  Foundation and foundation wall inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated, the reinforcement is in place, and the forms erected, prior to the placing of concrete. 
2.  Slab inspection: To be made prior to the placing of concrete. 
3.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking, bracing and fasteners are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents are complete. 
4.  Moisture barrier inspection: To be made prior to the installation of the exterior finishing materials. 
5.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for immediate occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches arc excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and all soil, waste, and vent piping is complete, and prior to [the] installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
4.  Note: See Section 312 of the International Plumbing Code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
2.  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(i)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature, or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a commercial building, which in the opinion, of the building official, may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. The temporary/partial certificate of occupancy shall be forfeited if the certificate of occupancy is not issued within 90 days. 
d.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel, or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure, or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate all immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial, or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage; and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor, or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial, or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate, Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-34. - Tests. 
    The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his/her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-35. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure, or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the mayor and council whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(l)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. The mayor and council, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(l)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures, or service system. 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will made possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or service system. 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
    In granting the variance, the mayor and council may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced of completed or both. In addition, the mayor and council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(1)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(2)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-36. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of the construction codes is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-37. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish, or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-38. - Maintenance of proper sanitary conditions on premises required; procedures; enforcement. 
(a)  Every person, whether owner, tenant, agent, or employee owning, holding, or occupying property in the city shall, at all times, maintain the property, whether a vacant lot or otherwise, in a clean and sanitary condition, keeping all grass and weeds cut, wastepaper, trash and other rubbish of every sort cleaned off of the property. Said duty to maintain property in a clean and sanitary condition shall include the duty to cut and remove undergrowth, such as grass, kudzu, briars, weeds in excess of ten inches in height, honeysuckle, other vines and seedlings, whenever such undergrowth becomes a nuisance to persons residing in the area or operating businesses in the area. If such undergrowth exists upon an unimproved lot, the code enforcement officer may reduce the extent to which the property must be maintained in such condition, provided there are no imminent threats to public health and safety. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer or a designee thereof to give five days' written notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and take reasonable steps to deliver in person to any owner of property or other person violating this section to appear before the mayor and council to show cause why these provisions have not been complied with. In addition, the code enforcement officer or a designee shall immediately post a notification upon the property in violation of this section in order to provide visual notification to property owners for a period of five consecutive days. 
(1)  In lieu of inability to contact owners in other manners prescribed above, posted notice shall serve as the official notice for the mayor and council hearing on this matter. 
(2)  After hearing, if it is deemed by the mayor and council that this section has not been complied with, such owner or other person shall be given five days to comply and if he/she fails or refuses to do so, the public works director shall thereupon cause the work to be done. 
(3)  For purposes of giving the notice to the owner of the property, as provided for herein, the person shown as the owner of said property on the ad valorem tax records of the city shall be sent such notice at the address shown thereon, unless the city receives actual notice that another person owns said property that owner shall be responsible for said violation. 
(4)  The mayor and council may, by majority vote, refer any and all cases described in this section to the municipal court, and all hearings heretofore described as being before the mayor and council may be before the municipal court if the mayor [and] council decides. 
(c)  When the public works director has caused grass and/or weeds to be cut from any premises, or wastepaper, trash, or other rubbish removed, a notice shall be prepared addressing the cost of the cutting or cleaning and rendering sanitary such vacant lot or other property against the owner, tenant, agent, or employee owning, occupying, or controlling the property. The cost of such action shall be a lien upon the property so cleaned and rendered sanitary, said lien to have the same affect and priority as, and be enforced as, a lien tor municipal taxes. The debtor lien shall date from the completion of the work on the property as declared under city council ordinance. 
(d)  A written statement shall be furnished by the city clerk to the owner, agent, or other party in charge of the property subject to the assessment provided for herein showing the amount of the assessment. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, or other party in charge of the property subject to the assessment to pay the city within 30 days after the receipt of the statement the entire amount of the assessment against the property and the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in charge of the property. 
(e)  Any owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of property subject to assessment as provided herein who fails or refuses to pay to the city the amount of such assessment at the expiration of 30 days after the service of the notice of statement provided above, the city clerk shall issue an execution bearing date of its issuance in the name of the city and specifying the purpose for which it is issued against the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of the property subject to the assessment and also against the property of the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of the property upon which the work in question is performed. The execution shall assert and be a lien against the property from the day of the completion of the performance of the work hereinbefore described and shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date on which it is issued. For the purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Secs. 16-39-16-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 16-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
    Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
    Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-47. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the building official. Citations for violations may be issued by the building official of the city. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
Sec. 16-48. - Prohibited fixtures. 
    On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
Sec. 16-49. - When effective. 
    The requirements of section 16-48 shall apply to any construction initiated after July 1, 1991, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
Sec. 16-50. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of this article when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles in schools, institutions, etc., not residential. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall apply for such exemption at the office of the building official. A fee as established by the city council from time to time shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
Secs. 16-51-16-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UNSAFE AND DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 34-81 et seq. 

Sec. 16-71. - Findings. 
    The city council finds that there exists within the city: 
(1)  Dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to: 
a.  Dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
b.  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or 
c.  Other conditions rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city. 
(2)  Vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes may be being committed. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1999(1), § 1) 
Sec. 16-72. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
    It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, ordinance, or regulation, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 03-17, § 1, 12-8-2003) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-17, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed former §§ 16-72-16-77, and enacted new provisions as set out herein. Former §§ 16-72-16-77 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from § 1 of an ordinance adopted Sept. 13, 1999. 
Sec. 16-73. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this article is as set forth in this section. 
    Applicable codes mean: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 of Title 8 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
    City means the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
    County means Clayton County, Georgia. 
    Drug crime means any act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16, of the O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A.) known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
    Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
    Governing authority means the Mayor and Council of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
    Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based on a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
    Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or city. 
    Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
    Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
    Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 03-17, § 1, 12-8-2003) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 16-72. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-74. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property, and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia, appoint and designate the city code enforcement and building official officer, city fire marshal, city fire chief, city police chief and his/her designees, and the Director of the Code Enforcement Department of Clayton County and his/her designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists, and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner or the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5 at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and is not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair alter, or improve a structure may be considered income. The financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 43 of the O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(h)  The lien provided for in subsection (g) above, shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Clayton County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Clayton County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the Clayton County Tax Commissioner (hereinafter "tax commissioner"). It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem tax, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(i)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of Clayton County. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(j)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property on the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(k)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the Clayton County Superior Court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the Clayton County Superior Court as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(l)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in any court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(m)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 03-17, § 1, 12-8-2003) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 16-72. 
Sec. 16-75. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 03-17, § 1, 12-8-2003) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 16-72. 
Sec. 16-76. - Powers of public officers. 
    The public officers designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinance; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. No. 03-17, § 1, 12-8-2003) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 16-72. 
Sec. 16-77. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner: In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of Clayton County. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the city or county; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 4, of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings, and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. Nonresidents of the state whose mailing address is unknown, shall be served by a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served. If such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the Judge of the Clayton County Probate Court at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the Judge of the Clayton County Probate Court shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this article, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 03-17, § 1, 12-8-2003) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 16-72. 
Secs. 16-78-16-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 16-91. - Adopted. 
    That a certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Jonesboro, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Jonesboro, in the State of Georgia for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provision, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the office of the City of Jonesboro are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 2 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-003, §§ 1, 2, 8-11-08) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 2008-003, adopted Aug. 11, 2008, has not been set out in this article at the editor's discretion, however said section provided the following: "That Ordinance No. 2008-003 of the City of Jonesboro entitled International Property Maintenance Code and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed as detailed in Section 1." 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; handbills, § 46-17; display or deposit of merchandise upon streets, sidewalks or parkways, § 58-2; retail establishment parking lots, § 58-8; taxation, ch. 66; telecommunications, ch. 70; storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles, ch. 74-3; utilities, ch. 78; C-1 general business district, § 86-161; C-2 highway commercial district, § 86-162; M-1 industrial district, § 86-163; O-I office and institutional district, § 86-165. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 9, 2015, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 18-31-18-63, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Jun 19, 2000, § 1; an ordinance adopted Aug. 14, 2000, § 1; Ord. No. 03-19, §§ 1-3 adopted Dec. 8, 2003; Ord. No. 05-04, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 10, 2005; and Ord. No. 2011-006, §§ I-III, adopted Dec. 12, 2011. 
Cross reference- Taxation, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors, and utility contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; registration of nonresident contractors with state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-31. 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section; except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    Business shall maintain its ordinary and customary usage according to context but also may be used to generally identify a person or entity carrying on a trade, occupation, profession, or other non-commercial enterprise, including the operations of a local government that are proprietary in nature. 
    City means the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, which is the major and principal source of income of such business. 
    Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues a form I.R.S. W-2, but not a form I.R.S. 1099, to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation. 
    Gross receipts means total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period including, without being limited to, the following: 
(1)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred. 
(2)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness. 
(3)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services. 
(4)  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered. 
(5)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
(1)  Sales, use, or excise taxes; 
(2)  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
(3)  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent- subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
(4)  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
(5)  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
(6)  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
    Nonprofit organization means an entity or organization described in Section 501(c), 501(d), 501(e) 664 or 401 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
    Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business and enacted by a local government as a revenue-raising ordinance or resolution. 
    Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit organizations, or any other form of business organization. 
    Practitioners of professions and occupations or practitioner means those who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation as designated by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
    Regulatory fee(s) means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the local government. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. No local government is authorized to require any administrative fee, registration fee, or fee by another name in connection with a regulatory fee, except an occupation tax, as defined in the definition of the term "occupation tax" in this section. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-32. - Purpose and scope. 
    The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such business, trade, occupation, or profession. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses, trades, occupations, and professions which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 through 48-13-28. All other applicable businesses, trades, occupations, and professions are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 )) 
Sec. 18-33. - Levied; required for business dealings in the city. 
    Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a Location in the city or, in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state, exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 or real estate brokers, agents, or companies that sell any real property located in the city, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation, which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the location or office (except for those entities defined in this article as practitioners of professions and occupations who are lawyers or attorneys engaged in the practice of law) if the taxpayer has a fixed business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no fixed business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city upon request. However, for practitioners of professions and occupations, display of such tax registration shall not be a prerequisite to the practice of their professions. 
    The registration certificate referred to in this article shall automatically expire on December 31st of the year subsequent to its issuance. Renewal applications and payment of the tax for all businesses required to register shall be completed on or before April 15th of each year. The failure to renew registration by the date required shall be a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-34. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to penalties as authorized under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. Except, however, that this article shall in no manner authorize the city's municipal court, or any court, to punish or penalize, by incarceration, practitioners of professions and occupations who fail to comply with this article. For practitioners of professions and occupations, the fine, not to exceed $500.00, is to be collected in the same manner as delinquent taxes in section 18-62. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-35. - Amendment or repeal of article. 
    This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the mayor and council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-36. - Business classifications and North American Industry Classification System. 
    The following business tax classifications are hereby adopted, drawing from the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS): 
NAICS Code Business Description Tax Class 11 Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting 2 23 Construction 3 31-33 Manufacturing 2 42 Wholesale Trade 3 44-45 Retail Trade 1 48-49 Transportation and Warehousing 3 51 Information 2 52 Finance and Infrastructure 6 53 Real Estate and Rental and Leasing 5 54 Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services 4 55 Management of Companies 5 56 Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Service 3 61 Educational Services 3 62 Health Care and Social Assistance 2 71 Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation 3 72 Accommodation and Food Services 3 81 Other Services (Except Public Administration) 2 92 Public Administration 2  
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-37. - Registration; compliance with other laws. 
    All business and occupation taxpayers are required to comply with the provisions of all regulations, ordinances, and laws of the city, the state, and the United States of America. The issuance of an occupation tax registration to any business shall not authorize that business to violate any regulation, ordinance, or law of the city, the state, or the United States of America, nor shall an occupation tax registration relieve any business from any requirement to obtain any license or permit otherwise required by ordinance, regulation or law. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-38. - Duty of taxpayer to keep information current. 
    All persons required to pay any tax or fee imposed by this article shall notify the city in writing within 15 days of the following changes: 
(1)  Any change of business or occupation address; 
(2)  Any change of business ownership; or 
(3)  The termination of any business or occupation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015) 
Sec. 18-39. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee, in an amount to be established by mayor and council by resolution from time to time, shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of accounts. The annual administrative fee shall be due no later than April 15th of each year. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on applicable businesses for which regulations under the city's police power are adopted. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-40. - Criteria; occupation tax structure; restrictions. 
(a)  Basis. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, and upon real estate brokers, agents, or companies that sell real property located in the city. The occupation tax amount shall be determined by the sum of two components: 
(1)  A nonrefundable annual administrative fee; and 
(2)  An amount determined by applying tax rates, as determined in subsection (b) below, upon gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedules. The tax rates determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be developed and updated from time to time by the city clerk and approved by mayor and council. The city clerk shall classify the entire gross receipts by dominant service or product. 
(c)  Practitioners of professions and occupations, as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9, shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on the gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth by the procedures established in this article; or 
(2)  A fee per practitioner with an office or location in the city who is licensed to provide the service; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person employed by the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. The fee referenced above shall be established by the mayor and council by resolution from time to time. 
(d)  The election, referenced in subsection (c) is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by April 15th of each year. If no election is made, the tax shall be levied as if subsection (a)(2) above were elected. 
(e)  It is the intention of the mayor and council that no portion of this taxation plan be construed to be, or have the practical effect of, regulation of or a precondition on the practice of state regulated professions. If any provision hereof shall be construed by a court of competent jurisdiction to be an unlawful regulation of such profession, then such provision shall be considered rescinded by the mayor and council as if such provision had not been adopted, and in such case, the remaining provisions of this article shall be applied to such practitioner. 
(f)  Restrictions. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business's gross receipts. 
(3)  No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any manner other than that described in this section. 
(5)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the taxing jurisdiction or in the state. 
(6)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in the state shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, which are reasonably attributable to sales or services in the State of Georgia. 
(7)  Where the gross receipts of a business or practitioner do not exceed $10,000.00 in a year or where federal or state law precludes the imposition of a gross receipts tax upon a particular class of business, trade, occupation, or profession, including but not limited to the airline industry which business, trade, or occupation is otherwise subject to taxation by the city, such occupation tax levied shall be based upon a flat rate and the administrative fee. 
(8)  Real estate brokers, agents, or companies that sell real property located in the city, but do not maintain a principal or branch office within the city, shall only have taxes levied upon them based on the administrative fee and profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts. 
(g)  The mayor and council shall, by resolution, from time to time, establish the administrative fee, the flat rate referenced in subsection (f)(7) herein, and an occupation tax schedule to set the occupation tax determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession, or occupation. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-41. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state; exemption for tax paid in other state. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting Business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Any business or practitioner with no location or office in the state shall be exempt from assessment of an occupation tax under this article if such business or practitioner submits proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state on the business's or practitioner's sales or services in the state. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-42. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
    The business registration of each business operated in the city's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. Except for practitioners of professions and occupations, no business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city clerk, and that line of business being noted by the city clerk upon the occupation tax certificate form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Secs. 18-43, 18-44. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-45. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
    Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to register or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-46. - When due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax is delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year based upon gross receipts for the preceding calendar year, and continuing in succeeding years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and occupation tax shall be due and payable April 15th of each year and shall, if not paid by May 1st of each year, be subject to a ten percent penalty for delinquency. An administrative fee will accrue at the rate of one and a half percent per month on the entire unpaid balance of any delinquent taxes. On any new profession, trade, or occupation begun in the city, the registration and occupation tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty shall be imposed. the occupation tax certificate shall be issued by the city clerk. 
(b)  Except for practitioners of professions and occupations, if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to pay an occupation tax after the occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, profession, trade, or occupation subject to this article, such offender may, upon conviction by a municipal judge, be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $500.00, which may be enforced by the contempt power of the municipal court. In addition, delinquent taxpayers shall be subject to the penalties provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
(c)  For those entities defined in this article as practitioners of professions and occupations, each such occupation tax shall be for the preceding calendar year. The registration and occupation tax shall be due and payable May 1st of each year for the 12-month period ending December 31st of the preceding year and shall, if not paid by May 1st of each year, be subject to a ten percent penalty for delinquency. An administrative fee will accrue at the rate of one and a half percent per month on the entire unpaid balance of any delinquent taxes. 
(d)  In the case of practitioners of professions and occupations, if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to pay the occupation tax shall fail to pay such tax in a timely fashion, such offender, upon conviction by a municipal judge, may be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $500.00, which may only be collected in the same manner as delinquent taxes pursuant to section 18-62. Such offender may also be subject to the penalties imposed on delinquent tax payments of practitioners of professions and occupations found in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. But in no event shall practitioners of professions and occupations be subject to incarceration for failure to pay occupation tax in a timely fashion. For practitioners of professions and occupations, all penalties listed in this section shall only be invoked by delinquency of tax payment rather than by continuation of operations after failure to pay taxes due. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-47. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses and practitioners having multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-14(a)(2). At the time of annual registration, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business or practitioner has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied by a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local government, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-48. - Prohibition on occupation tax. 
    No occupation tax, regulatory fee, or administrative fee shall be levied upon any state or local authority or nonprofit organization, as defined under this article pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13(5). 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-49. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the occupation tax certificate may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-50. - Evidence of qualification required, if applicable. 
    Any person required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter as a condition of engaging in business must show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-51. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
    All persons subject to the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary tax certificate for the business as described in this article, and, in default thereof, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a tax certificate. Except for practitioners of professions and occupations, each person commencing business in the city after January 1st of each year shall likewise obtain the tax certificate provided for in this article before commencing business. Any person transacting or offering to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained the tax certificate, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. However, in the case of practitioners of professions and occupations, if any such person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain an occupation tax certificate shall fail to pay such tax in a timely fashion, such person shall be subject to the penalties provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21 and as otherwise provided in state law and in this article, except that in no event shall practitioners of professions and occupations be subject to incarceration for failure to pay occupation tax in a timely manner. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-52. - City clerk; subpoena. 
    The city clerk and his duly designated officers and inspectors or successors shall be classified as deputy marshals-business inspectors with full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-53. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
    The following businesses and activities are not covered by the provisions of this article, but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state's public service commission or the department of public safety. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. Title 46, Ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agri-business. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 40-1-116. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls). 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Disabled veterans of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the United States armed forces was involved, whether under United States' command or otherwise. 
(11)  Blind persons. 
(12)  Veterans of peace-time service in the United States armed forces having a physical disability which was incurred during that service. 
(13)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United Stales, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state. 
(14)  Any state or local authority, nonprofit organization, or vendor acting pursuant to a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair. 
(15)  Real estate brokers, except at the principal or branch office of a real estate broker. 
(16)  Motor vehicles required to be registered with the department of public safety. 
(17)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-54. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing laws. 
    An occupation tax based on gross receipts shall not apply to any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-55. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during the current calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding year; final return and adjustment. 
(a)  Except for practitioners of professions and occupations, all occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business transacted during the preceding calendar year. Each person subject to the occupation tax levied in this article, on or before the dates hereinafter set forth, shall file with the city clerk the return hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be supported by a signed copy of the applicable federal or state income tax return and shall be used as the basis for making payment of the estimated occupation tax for the current calendar year. If an estimated amount of gross receipts is used for the preceding year, complete the form specified in subsection 18-55(c) to determine a final tax amount for the preceding year. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, on or before April 15th of the current calendar year, file with the city clerk, on a form furnished by said officer, a signed return setting forth the amount of actual gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year, said return to include a signed copy of the applicable federal or state income tax return as attached documentation to support said amount. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  In the case of a business or profession subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, for which the business or profession was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding calendar year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business or profession liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid pursuant to requirements of this article. For the following year, the actual amount of gross receipts for such part of the prior calendar year shall be reported in the return supported by a signed copy of the applicable federal or state income tax return, and further payment made or refund provided within 60 days of the date of the return. 
(d)  The owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, on or before April 15th of the current calendar year, file with the city clerk, on a form furnished by said officer, the following information required by O.C.G.A § 48-13-20.1: 
(1)  The legal name of such business and any associated trade names; 
(2)  The mailing address of such business and the actual physical address of each location of such business if different from the mailing address; and 
(3)  The sales and use tax identification number assigned to such business if such business is required to have such number. 
Failure or refusal to provide such information shall not toll or extend the time of payment of such occupation tax. 
(e)  For those entities defined in this article as practitioners of professions and occupations electing to pay occupation tax based upon gross receipts, all occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business which was transacted during the previous calendar year. Each person subject to the occupation tax levied in section 18-33 shall, on or before the date set forth in this section, file with the city clerk the returns specifically provided for in this section, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making payment of the occupation tax for the current calendar year. For all other practitioners of professions and occupations electing to pay a flat fee in lieu of an occupation tax based upon gross receipts, such return is not required. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-56. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-57. - More than one place or line of business. 
    Where a business or profession is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the business or profession shall be required to obtain the necessary tax certificate for each location and line, and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-58. - Returns confidential. 
    Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax levied by this article, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, or agent of the city, or any other person, to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of the return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, or agents of the city using the returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication by city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items there of or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States, and other local governments. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-59. - Inspections of books and records. 
(a)  In any case, the city clerk of the city, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business or profession for which the returns under this article are made. The city clerk shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business or profession of which the return was made in this city and, upon demand of the city clerk, such books or records shall be submitted to the city clerk for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax certificate. 
(b)  In the case of practitioners of professions and occupations, the city shall be sensitive to the issues of client or customer confidentiality. In such cases, the practitioner may redact information claimed to be privileged before disclosing books or records of financial transactions. If such practitioner alleges that redaction provides inadequate protection to the confidences of its clients or customers, such practitioner may petition the superior court of the county for an in-camera inspection, prior to examination by the city clerk. 
(c)  Except for practitioners of professions and occupations electing to pay a flat fee in lieu of a gross receipts tax, adequate records shall be kept in the city, for examination by the city clerk at that officer's discretion. 
(d)  If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, an administrative fee in the amount of one and a half percent per month, in addition to a ten percent penalty, will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-60. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay, file returns, or permit inspection of books. 
    Upon the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of the returns within the time required in this article, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 18-59, any occupation tax certificate granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of the business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new occupation tax certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article is at that time unpaid; or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 18-59. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to practice their profession, the imposition of civil penalties may be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-61. - Effect of failure to comply with article; continuing in business after revocation. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, said business shall be in violation of this article. No new occupation tax certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit the information and records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in this article. 
(b)  Except for practitioners of professions and occupations, any person, his manager, agent, or employee, who does business in the city after the occupation tax for said business becomes delinquent, or who is required to make occupation tax returns, and who fails to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, or who refuses to amend any such return so as to set forth the truth, or who makes false returns, and, any person, his manager, agent, or employee who refuses to permit an inspection of books in his charge when the officer, agent, employee, or representative of the city requests such inspection, during business hours, and under the terms and conditions set forth herein, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties and administrative fees as provided in sections 18-34 and 18-46 and as authorized under the laws of this state. 
(c)  Practitioners of professions and occupations who fail to pay the occupation tax, who fail to make returns within the time and in the manner provided in this article or who refuse to amend each return as to set forth the truth, or who make a false return shall be subject to penalties as provided in sections 18-34 and 18-46 and as authorized under the laws of this state, including actions by lien and garnishment. Except, however, that this article shall in no manner authorize the city's municipal court, or any court, to punish or penalize, by incarceration, practitioners of professions and occupations who fail to comply with this article. For practitioners of professions and occupations, the fine is to be collected in the same manner as delinquent taxes in section 18-62. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-62. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
(a)  In addition to the other remedies provided in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the city clerk, upon any tax or installment of the tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of the tax against the person liable for the tax, said execution shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person liable for the tax. The lien of the occupation tax shall become fixed on and dated from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. 
(b)  The execution shall be levied by the chief of police of the city upon property of the defendant located in the jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the laws of the state, and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. 
(c)  For all taxpayers, except for practitioners of professions and occupations who practice law, when a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-63. - Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained in this article, nothing herein shall be construed to place any limitation upon the practice of law, nor to allow any court to impose any sentence of incarceration for the violation hereof. It being the intention of the city council that no portion of the taxation scheme in this article be construed to be, or have the practical effect of, regulation of, or a precondition on the practice of law, or other state regulated professions. If any provision of this article shall be construed by a court of competent jurisdiction to be an unlawful regulation of such profession, then such provision shall be considered rescinded by the city council as if such provision had not been adopted, and in such case, the remaining provisions of the article shall be applied to such practitioner. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-64. - Refunds; final returns. 
(a)  Each and every business that ceases operations in the city or has otherwise been required to register and pay the occupation tax must file a final return with the city clerk and pay an administrative fee for the processing of the final return. 
(b)  If a business ceases operation within a year for which an occupation tax has been paid or credited, the tax shall be refundable, upon request, if, after a final return is filed and after the actual tax liability is calculated, the business tax credited exceeds that liability. If the final return requires a payment, such payment must be made with the final return. 
(c)  Taxes are also refundable upon written request after a valid amendment is accepted and the business tax credited exceeds the tax liability. 
(d)  In the case of erroneous tax collection, or when a taxpayer has voluntarily or involuntarily overpaid occupation taxes, the taxpayer may proceed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(e)  Refund claims shall contain a summary statement of the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any additional information the city may request. 
(f)  After receiving a written refund request, the city shall process the request in a manner consistent with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-65. - Effect of article upon previous ordinance. 
    The outstanding liabilities under prior ordinances shall continue and remain in force until such tax, fee, assessment, penalty or interest shall be fully paid. 
Sec. 18-66. - Public hearings. 
(a)  The city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate. 
(b)  In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the city shall hold one or more public hearings as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
( Ord. No. 2015-011, § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015 ) 
Secs. 18-67-18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - HOOKAH LOUNGES AND SMOKING BARS 

Sec. 18-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them herein unless the context clearly indicates a contrary meaning: 
    Hookah means a single or multi-stemmed water pipe and any associated products and devices which are used to produce fumes, smoke and/or vapor from the burning of material including, but not limited to, tobacco products, shisha or other plant materials. 
    Hookah lounge or smoking bar (used interchangeably) means an establishment that occupies exclusively an enclosed indoor space and that primarily is engaged in the retail sale of tobacco products for consumption by customers on the premises. 
    Shisha means a flavored or syrupy mixture of tobacco or herbal products which is intended to be smoked/consumed by a user through a hookah. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001A , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-92. - Regulations. 
    A hookah lounge or smoking bar shall: 
(1)  Derive revenue from the sale of food, alcohol or other beverages that is incidental to the sale of the tobacco products; 
(2)  Prohibit entry to a person under the age of 18 years of age during the time when the establishment is open for business; 
(3)  Prohibit any food or beverage not sold directly by the business to be consumed on the premises; 
(4)  Maintain a valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco products as required to be issued by the appropriate authority in the city or town where the establishment is located; 
(5)  Maintain a valid permit to operate a smoking bar issued by the state department of revenue; 
(6)  Be and remain licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages; 
(7)  Abide by the provisions in section 6-11 of this Code regarding times for sales of alcoholic beverages; 
(8)  Be and remain engaged in the business of selling cigars and or sales/rental of hookahs and generated 40 percent or more of its total annual gross income from the on-site sale of such tobacco products and the rental of humidors, not including sales from vending machines, in a calendar year; 
(9)  Be and remain registered with the local health department in the municipality in which the bar is located. A smoking bar registration shall remain in effect for one year and shall be renewable only if in the preceding calendar year the smoking bar generated 40 percent or more of its total annual gross income from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors; 
(10)  Post signs at each entrance and exit clearly stating that smoking is allowed on all or part of the premises and anyone under the age of 18 is prohibited from entering the premises; 
(11)  Clearly mark outdoor seating and dining areas within ten feet of an entrance or exit of the smoking bar as "non-smoking"; 
(12)  Abide by the following air ventilation requirements: 
a.  Smoking bar must have and maintain a ventilation system that exhausts smoke from the business and is designed in accordance with the state building code standards for the occupancy classification in use. The air handling systems from the smoking area shall be independent from the main air handling system that serves all other areas of the building and all air within the smoking area shall be exhausted directly to the outside by an exhaust fan. No air from the smoking area shall be recirculated to other parts of the building. 
b.  During the hours of operation, the interior of the premises of a smoking bar shall be maintained with adequate illumination to make the conduct of patrons within the premises readily discernible to a person with normal vision. 
(13)  Smoking, ashtrays and outdoor smoking areas within ten feet of entrances, exits, windows that open, ventilation intakes and accessibility ramps leading to and from an entrance or exit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001A , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Secs. 18-93-18-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10. 

Sec. 18-146. - Nature and scope of article; adoption of Standard Amusement Device Code. 
(a)  Pursuant to the power and authority vested in the city council, and in order to promote the general health, welfare, and safety, a plan has been devised in order to regulate and control the operation of carnivals, circuses, road shows, tent shows, amusement rides, and migratory entertainment of like kind. Such operations are referred to in this article as an "enterprise." 
(b)  This article shall apply to those firms, businesses, corporations, partnerships and sole proprietorships who derive their income by placing various forms of entertainment upon the property of another for the purpose of amusing or entertaining the general public in the form of enterprises, and charging a fee for their use and enjoyment. 
(c)  The city does adopt hereby the Standard Amusement Device Code, 1985 edition, with any subsequent editions thereof, including any fee schedule included therein, as published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. Said code is adopted, referred to, and made a part of this article as if fully set out at length in this section. A copy of this code shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the Standard Amusement Device Code, and the provisions of this article, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this article, state law or ordinances, shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 1(9-7-1); Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-147. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person, firm, partnership or corporation properly cited with a violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as set forth in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 1(9-7-6); Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-148. - Liability insurance and permit required for operators of certain amusement devices. 
(a)  All persons shall, prior to operating an amusement device (as such term is defined in the Standard Amusement Device Code) where human beings are conveyed, obtain from the city a permit. Upon requesting a permit the applicant must show evidence of personal liability insurance in an amount as fixed from time to time by the city council, but in no event less than $1,000,000.00 for each person and $1,000,000.00 for each accident, plus $50,000.00 property damages, and name an agent for service domiciled in the county. 
(b)  All traveling motion picture shows, carnivals, and circuses shall obtain a fire prevention regulatory license from the state fire marshal, as set forth in rules and regulations promulgated by the safety fire commissioner. The fee for the license shall be $100.00 for each calendar year or part thereof, payable to the state fire marshal. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 1(9-7-2); Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-149. - Licensing procedure and requirements. 
(a)  Any enterprise desiring to conduct business shall apply for a business license at city hall during regular business hours. The fee for the license shall be in an amount as listed in the schedule of fees and charges per day, which is payable at the time of issuance. 
(b)  Such application shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in such an amount as the city council may require. 
(1)  The deposit shall secure the removal of all litter and refuse as may be generated by the enterprise. 
(2)  After the removal of all equipment, and upon inspection by a code enforcement officer, the deposit shall be refunded to the enterprise. If the city must expend funds to remove litter and refuse, such funds may be drawn from the deposit. 
(c)  The application shall be accompanied by a certification of the owner of the property as set forth in subsection (d) below. 
(d)  The application shall contain a certification by the enterprise of the total number of seats available on each and every amusement ride. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 1(9-7-3); Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-150. - Parking facilities required; site restrictions. 
(a)  Any enterprise which engages in the operation of various amusement rides, i.e., Ferris wheel, merry go rounds and rides or devices of a similar nature, must meet a minimum requirement of parking spaces for use by its patrons. 
(b)  Such minimum parking facility shall be as follows: 
(1)  For every 15 seats that are available for use by the public on each and every amusement ride, there must be one parking space available for use by the patrons; 
(2)  However, a minimum number of 25 parking spaces shall be required at all times for each and every enterprise regulated under the terms of this article; and 
(3)  No parking shall be allowed on public rights-of-way. It shall be the duty of the license holder to monitor rights-of-way adjacent to the enterprise to ensure compliance with this subsection. 
(c)  The enterprise shall obtain and supply the city, upon application, with a certification by the owner of the property upon whose premises the enterprise will operate, or upon whose premises the automobiles are to be parked, that there exists on such property sufficient parking space for a given number of vehicles, and further, that the minimum number of parking spaces is equal to, or greater than, one ride for every 15 seats available on such amusement rides, and that there exist 25 or such greater number as required of parking spaces available to the public on the leased premises. Any property owner who gives false certification shall be deemed to be in violation of the terms of this article and shall be cited according to law. 
(d)  Enterprises shall be allowable only in C-1, C-2 and M-1 zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 1(9-7-4); Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-151. - Term of license. 
(a)  A license issued under this article shall be valid for a period not to exceed 15 days. 
(b)  At the expiration of 15 days, no such license shall be renewed or reissued to the same enterprise until such time as a period of 30 days has elapsed after the expiration date of the original license term. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 1(9-7-5); Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 5-17-2004) 
Secs. 18-152-18-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLEA MARKETS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- State roadside market incentive program, O.C.G.A. § 2-10-130 et seq.; exception from local peddler or itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fee means any compensatory arrangement between a flea market promoter and his flea market vendors. 
    Flea market means any event at which two or more vendors offer personal property for sale or exchange and either a fee is charged to these vendors for the privilege of offering or displaying personal property for sale or exchange; or a fee is charged to prospective buyers for admission to the area where personal property is offered or displayed for sale or exchange. 
    Flea market promoter means a person who engages in the business of operating or promoting a flea market, or having a financial interest in a flea market. 
    Flea market vendor or vendor means a person who engages in the sale of personal property to the general public at a flea market. 
(Ord. of 1-12-1998, § 1(9-7-1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-182. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  Records; identification. All flea market vendors shall keep accurate records of all transactions of $100.00 or more where cash, credit or merchandise is bought or traded for by such vendors. The record of each transaction shall be made on a form prescribed by the city clerk and furnished by vendor. The form shall be dated and require an accurate description of the personal property and the name and address of the person involved in the sale or trade. 
(b)  Forms to be supplied to law enforcement officers. Each business covered by subsection (a) of this section shall provide law enforcement officers with requested forms on demand. It shall be the duty of flea market vendors to keep the forms prescribed in this section up to date and located on the premises of the flea market. 
(Ord. of 1-12-1998, § 1(9-7-4)) 
Sec. 18-183. - Operating regulations. 
    All flea markets shall comply with the following regulations, the compliance therewith to be the responsibility of the flea market promoter and any and all flea market vendors: 
(1)  Permanent restroom facilities must be installed on the premises where the flea market is operating. All such restroom facilities must be contained in a building or other structure. Portable toilets shall not be considered as permanent restroom facilities. 
(2)  Water fountains must be installed on the premises where the flea market is operating. Any such water fountain shall be permanently affixed to the premises. 
(3)  No flea market shall be open for business during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(4)  Off-street parking shall be provided in the minimum amount of one parking space for each 100 square feet of first floor area, plus one space for each 200 square feet above the first floor. 
(5)  Flea markets must be operated within one principal building or permanent structure. Accessory buildings which meet all other requirements of this Code may be used for storage purposes, but under no circumstances may such buildings be used to display merchandise. 
(6)  No merchandise offered for sale or exchange shall be displayed outside of the market's principal building or structure. 
(Ord. of 1-12-1998, § 1(9-7-5)) 
Sec. 18-184. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  An event which is organized for the exclusive benefit of any community chest, fund, foundation, association or corporation organized and operated for religious, educational or charitable purposes, provided that no part of any admission fee or parking fee charged vendors or prospective purchasers or the gross receipts or net earnings for the sale or exchange of personal property, whether in the form of a percentage of the receipts or earnings, a salary, or otherwise, inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or person participating in the organization or conduct of the event; or 
(2)  Any event at which all persons and entities selling, exchanging and offering or displaying personal property for sale or exchange are manufacturers or licensed retail or wholesale merchants. 
(Ord. of 1-12-1998, § 1(9-7-6)) 
Sec. 18-185. - Display of merchandise or personal property for sale. 
    All displays of merchandise or personal property for sale comply with section 86-278 et seq. of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 2, 6-10-2002) 
Secs. 18-186-18-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROMOTER'S LICENSE 

Sec. 18-206. - Required. 
    All persons, before beginning the business of operating and promoting a flea market, shall make proper application for and receive the appropriate business license as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. of 1-12-1998, § 1(9-7-2(a))) 
Sec. 18-207. - Applications. 
    Applicants for a license under this article shall file a written, sworn application on a form provided by the city clerk, signed by the applicant, if an individual; by the partner making application, if a partnership; and by the president, if a corporation, with the city clerk. The content of such application shall be within the discretion of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 1-12-1998, § 1(9-7-2(b))) 
Sec. 18-208. - Updating requirements. 
    It shall be the duty of any licensee to submit any information required under this article to the city clerk on a continuing basis as changes occur. 
(Ord. of 1-12-1998, § 1(9-7-2(c))) 
Sec. 18-209. - Revocation. 
    The city clerk shall have the right to revoke the license of any flea market promoter or vendor when: 
(1)  The city clerk determines that such revocation is necessary to prevent the purchase, sale, barter or trade of stolen property. 
(2)  The city clerk determines that such revocation is necessary to prevent the purchase, sale, barter or trade of property with minors. 
(3)  The city clerk determines that material misrepresentations were made in an application for license or that such application has not been properly updated in accordance with section 18-208. 
(4)  The city clerk determines that the promoter or vendor has failed to comply with any terms and conditions of the license defined in this article. 
(Ord. of 1-12-1998, § 1(9-7-3)) 
Secs. 18-210-18-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOTOR VEHICLE SALES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 02-04, § 3, adopted June 10, 2002, repealed the former art. VI and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former art. VI, §§ 18-241-18-245, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 1(a)-(e) of an ordinance adopted June 13, 1988. 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Control of junkyards, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-240 et seq.; purchase and resale of used motor vehicles and used parts, O.C.G.A. § 40-4-40 et seq.; junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq.; Used Motor Vehicle Dismantlers, Rebuilders and Salvage Dealers Registration Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-48-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-241. - Motor vehicle sales displays. 
    All motor vehicles sale displays shall be governed by section 86-278 et seq. of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 3, 6-10-2002) 
Secs. 18-242-18-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PAWNBROKERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 18-276. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Violation of any of the provisions of the article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-13) 
Sec. 18-277. - Recordkeeping; information to be shown upon request of police. 
    All pawnbrokers shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged or sold to them. Such description shall include the name of the maker of the article, any identifying mark or number and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. In such books there shall be entered also the name of the person by whom the property was deposited or sold, and the time when the transaction was done. These entries shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible, in no event more than one hour thereafter. Such books and the articles themselves, so pledged or sold, shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by the police. Any person engaged in the business of pawnbroker, who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section, or who shall make false entries concerning the transactions named, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any police officer of the books and of the property pledged with or sold to them shall be guilty of an offense and punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-1) 
Sec. 18-278. - Daily report to police. 
    Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report in writing to the police department, of all property pledged to or bought by him during the 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. Such reports shall be typewritten. They shall show: The name and address of the pawnbroker; time of transaction; serial number of pawn tickets; amount paid or advanced; full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry and all identifying names, marks and numbers; and a description of persons selling or pawning, including name, address, color, weight and height. In addition, pawnbrokers shall make daily reports of all typewriters, adding machines and radios coming into and going out of their places of business. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-2) 
Sec. 18-279. - Purchased articles not to be disposed of for 15 days after acquisition. 
    Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who purchases goods other than those purchased through wholesalers or on order in the normal course of business as defined by written rules and regulations of the police department, taking full title thereto, the word "goods" being here used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold such goods purchased for at least 15 days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-3) 
Sec. 18-280. - Dealing with minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his agents or employees, to receive in pawn, from minors, goods of any character or description. Any pawnbroker taking from an applicant a statement in writing that such applicant is of age will not be deemed to have violated this section if the appearance of such applicant as to age and size is such to make it uncertain that he is not 18 years of age. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-4) 
Sec. 18-281. - Pawned articles not to be disposed of for 30 days. 
    Any pawnbroker or person operating as a pawnbroker under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn, the word "goods" being here used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold such goods pawned for at least 30 days, unless redeemed by the owner, before disposing of such goods by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-5) 
Sec. 18-282. - Articles that have had serial number removed or have no serial number shall not be accepted. 
    No pawnbroker shall accept any article; such as, but not limited to, radios, typewriters, televisions and stereos, which have had the serial number removed from the article or which the pawnbroker knows should have a serial number upon it. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-6) 
Sec. 18-283. - Identification required from purchaser of articles. 
    When a pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license sells property which he acquired from pawn or which he purchased, he shall maintain a record of an accurate description of the property as it appeared on the original pawn ticket or purchase ticket. The record shall also include the name and address of the buyer, signature of the buyer, date of the transaction, and the amount paid for the property. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-7) 
Sec. 18-284. - Compliance with article provisions. 
    No article will be accepted unless the provisions of section 18-277 are followed. No pawnbroker will take goods or buy goods, taking full title thereto, without entering the goods on his books as provided for in section 18-277. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-8) 
Sec. 18-285. - Records maintained for four years. 
    The record of each pawn or purchase transaction, as provided in this article, shall be maintained for a period of not less than four years. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-9) 
Sec. 18-286. - Penalties relating to records of pawnbrokers. 
    Any pawnbroker, and any clerk, agent or employee of such pawnbroker, who shall: 
(1)  Fail to make any entry of any material matter in his permanent record book; 
(2)  Make any false entry therein; 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate, write so that information is unreadable, destroy or remove from his place of business such permanent record book; 
(4)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such permanent record book, or any goods in his possession, during the ordinary hours of business or any reasonable time; or 
(5)  Fail to maintain a record of each pawn or purchase transaction for at least four years, 
shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-10) 
Sec. 18-287. - Fingerprint required. 
    All pawnbrokers will require any person from whom he accepts goods on pawn or from whom he purchases goods to place the fingerprint of his right index finger in ink on the back of the copy of the pawn ticket which is to be sent to the police department. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-11) 
Sec. 18-288. - Standard form required. 
    All pawnbroker's licenses will use a standard form for pawn and purchase tickets. The design for the form will be provided by the police department. Each pawnbroker will be required to purchase the standard tickets from his own source of supply and at his own expense. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-12) 
Sec. 18-289. - Revocation of business license upon conviction. 
    Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license or whose clerk, agent or employee shall be convicted for a total of two violations of any of these sections in any one calendar year shall have his business license to operate a pawnshop or as a pawnbroker suspended by the administration and upon recommendation or direction, after a hearing, may be revoked by the city council. 
(Code 1987, § 9-3-14) 
Sec. 18-290. - Licensing considerations. 
(a)  No further licenses for the business of pawnbrokers shall be issued when the total number of such licenses issued and in effect would number more than one for each 1,000 persons residing in the city. It is the intent of this section to require a population of 1,000 persons for each license issued. An example follows: 
(1)  Population equals 1,000, then one license may be issued; 
(2)  Population equals 1,001, then one license may be issued. 
(b)  If a licensee shall go out of business or if a license is revoked and the number of such licenses in effect shall continue to exceed the limit prescribed in this section, such license may not be reinstated. The population shall be determined by the latest relevant decennial census. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1991) 
Secs. 18-291-18-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
State Law reference- Exemption from local licensing of disabled veterans and blind persons, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-321. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canvasser or solicitor means any individual, whether resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. 
    Peddler means any person, firm or corporation which makes house-to-house or personal calls displaying samples, model goods, wares or merchandise or taking orders for shipment directly from a manufacturer; excluding, however, any person, firm or corporation: 
(1)  Which sells agricultural, forestry or other farm products grown and sold on its farm, orchard, dairy, poultry farm, garden or other similar facility; or 
(2)  When the net proceeds of any such sale are to be used solely for charitable purposes. 
    Transient merchant means any person, firm or corporation which is not a regular retail or wholesale merchant with a permanent place of business in the city, but which does display samples, model goods, wares or merchandise in any lot, building, room or structure of any kind, whether fixed or mobile, or on any public right-of-way, for the purpose of the sale of or securing orders for the sale of such items or items of like kind or quality for immediate or future delivery; excluding, however: 
(1)  Peddlers; 
(2)  Any person, firm or corporation which conducts business at any industry or association trade show; or 
(3)  Any person, firm or corporation which sells items at a yard, rummage, garage, antique or similar sale when such person, firm or corporation is a resident of the state or has a permanent place of business within the state and such sale is not a part of the regular business activity of such person, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1992, § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-322. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1987, § 9-5-6) 
Sec. 18-323. - Hours of operation. 
    No person shall engage in activity as a solicitor, peddler or canvasser within the city except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday; provided, however, that calls may be made to private residences between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. with the prior advance permission of the occupant of the residence. No sales or calls shall be made on Sunday. 
(Code 1987, § 9-5-2) 
Sec. 18-324. - Registration; photograph. 
    Every solicitor, peddler or canvasser engaged in the activities set out in section 18-321 shall be required to register with the chief of police and pay such daily registration fee as fixed from time to time by the city council. The solicitor, salesman, peddler or canvasser shall furnish a photograph of himself one inch in width and two inches in length. 
(Code 1987, § 9-5-3) 
Sec. 18-325. - Prohibited upon property where sign forbids. 
    No solicitor, peddler or canvasser shall go upon any residential property where the owner or person residing on the residential premises has posted a sign reading as follows: "No Solicitors." 
(Code 1987, § 9-5-4) 
Sec. 18-326. - Failure to leave premises upon request. 
    Any solicitor, peddler or canvasser upon being requested to leave the premises of any residence by the owner or person in charge of those premises who fails to do so shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 9-5-5) 
Sec. 18-327. - Transient merchants. 
    Transient merchants are prohibited within the city limits. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1992, § 2) 
Secs. 18-328-18-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 18-361. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Yard sale means the sale or trading of clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise, other than in the normal course of business, or the sale or trading of such goods, as outlined in this definition, by a person not regularly engaged in such business. Such goods or merchandise do not need to be attended for a sale to be deemed to be in existence. The term "yard sale" shall include garage sales, carport sales and similar types of sales or events. 
(Code 1987, § 9-6-2(a)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-362. - Permit required. 
    At least 24 hours prior to conducting a yard sale, a permit for said sale shall be secured from the city clerk. Upon application for a permit, applicant shall be given opportunity to review the provisions of this article. Permit shall be placed in a conspicuous location in the area where yard sale is to occur, and in view of the general public. Failure to post permit will result in closure of yard sale. Future non compliance will result in the issuance of a citation, Municipal Court appearance and fines. 
(Code 1987, § 9-6-2(b); Ord. No. 2011-005, § 2, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 18-363. - Number and duration. 
    Yard sales shall be allowed not more than 12 times in any calendar year for any premises. No sale shall run for more than three consecutive days. 
(Code 1987, § 9-6-2(c); Ord. No. 2011-005, § 3, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 18-364. - Displays. 
    All displays of yard sale merchandise shall be additionally regulated by section 86-278 et seq. of this Code. 
(Code 1987, § 9-6-2(d); Ord. No. 02-04, § 4, 6-10-2002) 
Sec. 18-365. - Prohibited acts. 
    No individual, firm, corporation or partnership shall be permitted to engage in the business of promoting or conducting yard sales for others for a fee or other consideration. No merchandise shall be purchased in anticipation of resale at a yard sale. 
(Code 1987, § 9-6-2(e)) 
ARTICLE X. - TATTOOS AND BODY PIERCING 

Sec. 18-400. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article: 
    Body piercing establishment: Any location where piercing occurs either for compensation or in conjunction with a purchase of goods. 
    Communicable disease: An illness or disease that can be communicated from one person to another through the air, through routine contact with the human skin, or through open wounds. 
    Pierce: To attach earrings, studs, or other jewelry, either precious, semiprecious or costume, or accessories to the human epidermis by piercing through the skin at any location on the human body, including but not limited to the ear, nose, tongue, eyelid, eyebrow, lip, or nipple. 
    Tattoo: Shall have the meaning set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 31-40-1. 
    Tattoo studio: Shall have the meaning set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 31-40-1. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 18-401. - Tattooing/piercing prohibited under certain circumstances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to tattoo or pierce any person who is under 18 years of age, any person who is under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs, any person who exhibits symptoms of any communicable disease, or any person of unsound mind. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, when under 18 years of age, under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs, infected with any communicable disease, or of unsound mind, to tattoo or pierce any other person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to sell at any tattoo studio or body piercing establishment any 'drug related object' as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. Section 16-13-32 or any device or paraphernalia that is designed principally for sexual activities, but not including contraceptive devices. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 18-402. - Permit, compliance with article required. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment without a permit from the city. It shall be unlawful to operate a tattoo studio or body piercing establishment in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 18-403. - Application; minimum age; fingerprinting, photographing, medical certificate required. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment shall make application for a permit to the city clerk on forms supplied by the department. 
(b)  The minimum age of each applicant shall be 18 years of age. 
(c)  Fingerprints of all applicants shall be taken by the department of police prior to submission of the application to the city clerk. 
(d)  An applicant for a permit shall present to the city clerk proof of identification with a photograph of applicant. 
(e)  An applicant for a permit shall present to the city clerk, for each person who will be tattooing or piercing, a medical certificate not more than one month old from a medical doctor certifying that the person is sound physically and mentally, has good eyesight and is not infected with a communicable disease. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 18-404. - Approval of health authorities required for tattoo studios. 
    It shall be unlawful for any tattoo studio to operate without a permit from the Clayton County Board of Health or the state department of human resources, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 18-405. - Permit contents, transferability; term; fee; time for action. 
(a)  Every permit granted under this article shall be issued in the name of the individual person applying therefor, shall contain the location of the tattoo studio or body piercing establishment where the applicant shall operate, and shall not be transferable. 
(b)  Each permit issued under this article shall be valid until December 31 of the year of issuance. 
(c)  No application for a permit under this article shall be accepted by the city unless accompanied by payment of a permit fee in such amount as the mayor and council may set from time to time. 
(d)  All applications for new permits shall be passed upon by the city clerk within 60 days of the date of filing of the completed application. Date of filing shall be the time that a properly completed and executed application, along with the fee, is received by the city clerk. Upon the expiration of the 60-day period without a decision being made on the application by the city clerk, the applicant shall be permitted to begin and conduct business as a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the city clerk denies the application for a new license. No person or entity conducting business as a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the city clerk later denies the application, the business must cease. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 18-406. - Reporting and records requirements. 
    All permittees under this article shall adhere to the following reporting and records requirements: 
(1)  Monthly updates of the medical certificate or certificates required by section 18-403(e) shall be retained at the place of business and subject to inspection by city personnel. Failure to present said certificate updates upon request of city personnel shall result in suspension of the permit until such time as proper updated certificates can be presented to the city. 
(2)  A list shall be maintained on the premises of every person on whom tattooing or piercing is performed. As to each such person, the list shall include the following information: 
a.  Name; 
b.  Address; 
c.  Home and work phone numbers, if applicable; 
d.  Social Security Number or driver's license identification number; and 
e.  Proof of age. 
    The above information shall be retained at the tattoo studio or body piercing establishment for at least three years as to each person and is subject to inspection by city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 18-407. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment within 100 yards of any establishment that sells malt beverages, wine, or distilled spirits. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment within 100 yards of any school. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to operate a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment within 100 yards of any church building or school building. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to operate a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment within 100 yards of any property zoned R-1, R-2, R-2D, R-3 or R-4. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to operate a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment within 100 yards of any adult entertainment business, establishment or facility as described in the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 18-408. - Limitation on number of permits. 
    Only two permits shall be issued per 1,500 persons living in the city according to the most recent decennial census of the United States as published by the United States Bureau of the Census (in making this calculation, fractions of the required population minimum shall not be counted toward the establishment of an available license). 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 18-409. - Revocation, suspension. 
    Any permittee who shall violate any provision of this article shall subject the permit to revocation or suspension upon appropriate notice of hearing. Additionally, revocation of a permit procured by the Clayton County Board of Health or the department of human resources, as appropriate, shall, upon notice of hearing, constitute grounds for revocation of the permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 18-410. - Appeal. 
(a)  Should the city determine that grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit exist under this article, the city shall send by certified mail to the permit holder written notice of the permit suspension or revocation with a statement of the grounds supporting such action. Such suspension or revocation shall be effective beginning three business days from the date of the notice. Any permit holder may request a hearing within ten days of the date of such notice before the city manager for the purpose of presenting evidence and asking for reconsideration of such action. Failure to request such reconsideration within ten days of the date of the notice shall result in a waiver of any appeal rights hereunder. 
(b)  If a hearing for reconsideration before the city manager is requested, a hearing shall be held not more than 30 days from the date the written notice requesting such hearing is received by the city manager. Upon the expiration of the 30-day period without a hearing, the permit holder shall be permitted to begin or resume business as a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the city manager sustains or modifies the original determination. No person or entity conducting business as a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the city manager later sustains or modifies the original determination, the business must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(c)  The city manager may sustain, overrule, or modify the original determination. The decision of the city manager following the hearing on the matter shall be issued within 20 days of the date of the hearing and shall be final. Upon the expiration of the 20-day period without a decision of the city manager being issued on the matter, the permit holder shall be permitted to resume business as a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment under this statutory provision unless and until such time as the city manager sustains the original determination. No person or entity conducting business as a tattoo studio or a body piercing establishment under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the city manager later sustains or modifies the original determination, the business must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Secs. 18-411-18-429. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - GAME ROOMS, ARCADES AND BUSINESSES CONSISTING MOSTLY OF COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES 

Sec. 18-430. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article, the term: 
    Applicant means a person applying for any license authorized by this article. 
    Application means a form supplied by the city for the purpose of applying for any license authorized by this article. 
    Business consisting mostly of coin-operated amusement machines means any business location at which more than five bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are located, regardless of how the business is identified for marketing purposes. Provided, however, that no business which is licensed as a restaurant and satisfies all applicable health department criteria to serve food shall be included in this definition. 
    Coin means any form of hard currency issued by a government, including a coin, bill legal tender, negotiable instrument, or other form of money; any token, ticket, or similar object issued in exchange for payment of a coin or currency; or monetary credit associated with a credit card, debit card, bank card, electronic wire transfer, or similar device or method of payment. 
    Coin-operated amusement machine means: 
(1)  Any machine or device of any kind or character designed to provide amusement or entertainment whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin and the result of whose operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, and which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law. Examples of coin operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
a.  Pinball machines; 
b.  Console machines; 
c.  Video games; 
d.  Crane machines; 
e.  Claw machines; 
f.  Pusher machines; 
g.  Bowling machines; 
h.  Novelty arcade games; 
i.  Football or table soccer machines; 
j.  Miniature racetrack, football, or golf machines; 
k.  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
l.  Basketball machines; 
m.  Shuffleboard games; 
n.  Kiddy ride games; 
o.  Skeeball machines; 
p.  Air hockey machines; 
q.  Roll down machines; 
r.  Coin-operated pool tables or coin-operated billiard tables as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1; 
s.  Foosball machines; 
t.  Dart boards with electric or electronic features; 
u.  Any other similar amusement machine which can be operated in Georgia. 
(2)  Every machine of any kind or character used to provide music whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin such as jukeboxes or other similar types of music machines. 
The term "coin-operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
(1)  Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; 
(2)  Vending machines which for payment of money dispense product or services; 
(3)  Gas and electric meters; 
(4)  Pay telephones; 
(5)  Pay toilets; 
(6)  Cigarette vending machines; 
(7)  Coin-operated scales; 
(8)  Coin-operated gumball machines; 
(9)  Coin-operated parking meters; 
(10)  Coin-operated television sets which provide cable, network, or satellite programming; 
(11)  Coin-operated massage beds; and 
(12)  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
Provided, however, that each player station of a multi-player coin-operated amusement machine shall be considered a separate machine for purposes of this article. 
    Clerk means the city clerk. 
    County means Clayton County, Georgia. 
    Family means any person related to a licensee within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
    Game room means any business location at which more than three coin-operated amusement machines are located, regardless of whether the business calls itself an arcade, casino, game room, or by similar nomenclature for marketing purposes, and regardless of whether the business is open to the public or is limited to only private members. Provided, however, that no business which is licensed as a restaurant and satisfies all applicable health department criteria to serve food shall be included in this definition. 
    Interest in license means an interest held by an owner or co-owner of a license; a partner of a partnership which owns or co-owns a license; a stockholder in any corporation who owns ten percent or more of the stock in a corporation which owns or co-owns a license; or anyone sharing in the income or corpus of any trust or estate having such an interest. 
    License means authorization granted by the city to operate as a license holder under this article. 
    License department means the city clerk, or in his or her absence, the city manager. 
    Licensee means a person holding a license and any person, including a staff member, employee, or agent, acting on behalf of a person holding a license. 
    Machine means a "coin-operated amusement machine" as defined in this article. 
    Natural person means a human being. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, non-profit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
    Premises means the property owned or occupied by a licensee or otherwise used for operation of a game room, including the improvements, appurtenances, and curtilage associated with the business. 
(b)  Words and terms not explicitly defined in this article shall have meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-431. - License-Compliance with state law; required. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license for operation of a game room, or any other business operated in conjunction with a game room, must first show proof of compliance with state requirements precedent to granting of such license by the city. 
(b)  No person shall operate, maintain or keep a game room, or any other business operated in conjunction with a game room, within the city without first having obtained a license therefore as herein required. 
(c)  No person may operate a game room, or business in conjunction with a game room, in the city unless it is permitted by state law and this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-432. - Application for license-Contents; execution. 
(a)  Every applicant shall attach a copy of the licenses issued by the county, if one is required by the county, to the application. 
(b)  Every applicant for license under the provisions hereof shall file written application with the city clerk, giving the full name and address, and the full names and addresses of all parties interested shall be given if more than one. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall contain the names and addresses of all officers and managers. The state incorporation application shall further state the exact address where the game room is to be conducted; the number of games or coin-operated machines; the age of the applicant or manager; when, where and how long the applicant previously operated a game room; and the name and address of the owner of the property where the business is to be opened. The application must be signed by the applicant, or if a corporation by an officer. 
(c)  Every application for a license shall be accompanied by the affidavit of the applicant, sworn to before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths, stating that the applicant is a citizen of the United States; that he has not been convicted of a felony; that he will not permit vagrants or persons under the influence of beer, wine or intoxicating liquors to enter or play in his place; that the applicant will have personal charge in management of the business; and that he will not permit gambling nor permit the games or coin operated amusement machines to be used in any manner other than as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-433. - Same-Investigation; issuance conditions. 
    The clerk shall cause a complete investigation to be made into all of the above particulars and provide a copy of the application and all pertinent information to the mayor and city council. After review of the information presented, the mayor and council shall determine whether or not the license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-434. - Same-Rejection conditions; notice of denial. 
    All applications for a license to operate a game room, or any other business operated in conjunction with a game room, shall be granted by the city for a period of up to one year, expiring on the last day of December in each year, unless the applicant has suffered a revocation of a previous license, or has violated any laws, ordinances, or regulations relating to alcoholic beverages, game rooms, businesses operated in conjunction with a game room, coin-operated amusement machines, gambling, or the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-435. - License-Fee based on gross receipts. 
    The annual business license fee for each game room, or any other business operated in conjunction with a game room, shall be determined based upon the gross receipts of the business, or as provided by ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-436. - Location of game room. 
(a)  Game rooms, or any other business operated in conjunction with a game room, shall be located in the properly zoned commercial area. No game room may be opened in the city on any level other than the ground floor or first floor of a building. 
(b)  A license for a game room, or any other business operated in conjunction with a game room shall not be issued where the place of business of the applicant is within 300 yards of any public school or public school grounds. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-437. - Premises-Sanitation requirements. 
    All public game rooms, or any other business operated in conjunction with a game room, shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition and shall comply with all sanitary rules and regulations of the State of Georgia, Clayton County and the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-438. - Same-Clear view of interior required. 
    No person who operates a game room, or any other business operated in conjunction with a game room, shall permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions, or other obstructions to be used to prevent a clear view of the interior, which clear view must be maintained at all times. No partitions forming rooms, stalls or other enclosures shall be permitted. However, this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the maintenance of washrooms and toilet rooms for proper purposes nor the maintenance of closets for storage purposes exclusively. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-439. - Operating hours. 
    The operating hours of all game rooms shall be from 9:00 a.m. until midnight, Monday through Saturday, and from 1:00 p.m. until 6:00 p.m. on Sundays. It is unlawful to operate a game room during any other time. If another business is operated in conjunction with a game room, it shall be the owner's or license holder's responsibility to cease the operation of all games during the prohibited hours. No child of school age shall be allowed on the premises of a game room during school hours while school is in session unless under the direct supervision of one of the child's parents. Any game room found not in compliance with this subsection is subject to the provisions of section 18-414. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-440. - Gambling, posting of sporting results, and gambling devices prohibited. 
(a)  No dice, cards, dominoes, or other games of chance shall be permitted, nor any form of gambling, commercial gambling, or gambling device allowed, in any game room except to the extent allowed by state law. No racing or other betting pool shall be exhibited or sold in such places or business. The use of baseball tickers and the posting of results of sporting events is expressly prohibited in game rooms. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, "gambling," "commercial gambling," and "gambling device" shall be defined in the manner provided for in Article 2, Chapter 12 of Title 16 of the official code of the State of Georgia, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-441. - Alcoholic beverage sale, possession, and use prohibited; enforcement of tobacco, gaming, and gambling regulations required. 
(a)  No intoxicating liquors, distilled spirits, wine or beer shall be sold, served, possessed, used, or allowed to be used in or on the premises of any game room, or any business operated in connection therewith. 
(b)  Any licensee who personally sells tobacco products, including cigarettes and cigars, to customers shall comply with all applicable state laws and shall ask each patron for a legal form of identification establishing that they may lawfully purchase such products prior to closing a sale. 
(c)  Licensees shall be responsible for complying with all state laws and regulations governing gaming, gambling, and redemption of credits, tokens, points, tickets, or vouchers for non-cash merchandise. Provided, however, no intoxicating liquors, distilled spirits, wine or beer shall be provided to a customer in redemption of any credits, tokens, points, tickets, or vouchers. 
(d)  Any person who shall knowingly violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-442. - Compliance with section 46-9; curfew for minors. 
    All owners, operators, managers and proprietors of a game room and all persons holding a license for the operation of a game room are placed on notice that the city has enacted a curfew for minors after the hour of 12:00 midnight. No such owner, operator, manager, proprietor or license holder shall take any action which would cause or otherwise encourage a minor to be in violation of any state law or city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-443. - Limitation on percent of annual income derived from machines; revocation or suspension of license for violation. 
(a)  No person operating a game room, or a business in conjunction with a game room, shall derive more than 50 percent of such person's annual income from the business location in which the coin operated amusement machines are situated from those machines. Each person shall submit a report, acceptable as to form to the city, which demonstrates compliance with this section. Such reports shall be submitted on a monthly basis on or before the tenth day of the following month. 
(b)  In accordance with this section, the city may refuse to issue or renew a license or may revoke or suspend a license for violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 18-444. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Every person, firm or corporation operating a game room within the city without a license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not less than $50.00 or no more than $500.00; and each day that the game room is operated without a license, shall be a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(b)  Any licensee who knowingly violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, work on the public streets or public works of the city for a term not to exceed six months, or a combination thereof. Each violation thereof, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. A knowing violation of this article by any licensee shall be grounds for license suspension, revocation or refusal to issue a renewal license. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2004) 
Secs. 18-445-18-459. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 18-460. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bed and breakfast establishment means a structure occupied and operated by all of its owners, wherein lodging or lodging and breakfast only are provided to guests for compensation for a period no longer than 14 consecutive days. The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast takes place shall be the principal residence of the owner, and the owner shall live in the structure when the bed and breakfast establishment is in operation. 
    Guest means a person who pays a fee to the owner of a bed and breakfast establishment for the purpose of lodging at that establishment. 
    Lodging room means a room that is used for temporary occupancy for a fee. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-461. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to hotels, inns, motels, motor lodges, boardinghouses, roominghouses, or other establishments providing rooms to guests for compensation. None of these establishments shall be permitted in the city except as otherwise allowed by ordinances of the city. No bed and breakfast establishment shall be operated except as allowed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-462. - Temporary establishments. 
    This article shall not apply to bed and breakfast establishments being operated on a temporary basis for charitable or civic organizations. These establishments shall be permitted at the discretion of the mayor and city council upon application for no more than four consecutive days and for no more than eight days per calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-463. - License required and regulatory fee. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bed and breakfast establishment without having first obtained a license. The annual regulatory fee for operation of a bed and breakfast establishment in the city shall be set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for the whole or any part of one year, and shall be paid at city hall not later than December 15 of the preceding year or upon the filing of an application for the license. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-464. - Guest register. 
    The owner shall keep a register of all guests of the bed and breakfast establishment. Such list shall be available for inspection by the city and/or its designee at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-465. - Materials needed for license application. 
    An applicant for a bed and breakfast establishment license shall submit the following materials for review: 
(1)  A floor plan for the single-family dwelling unit, illustrating that the proposed operation will comply with all ordinances and regulations of the city, and all other governmental agencies or bodies; 
(2)  A completed and signed application form; 
(3)  A plat or survey of the subject real estate signed and sealed by a state registered land surveyor which shows all improvements located on the real estate; and 
(4)  A nonrefundable administrative fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for processing the application. This fee is in addition to the regulatory fee which must be paid at the same time as the administrative fee but is refundable if the license application is not approved. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-466. - Inspection of premises. 
    No bed and breakfast establishment license shall be granted to any applicant until the bed and breakfast premises has been inspected by the building inspector, who finds that the electrical and plumbing systems of the premises are in safe and satisfactory condition. All establishments shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16, Article II of this Code regarding construction codes as adopted and from time to time amended. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Cross reference- Construction codes, §§ 16-26-16-45. 
Sec. 18-467. - License period. 
    All licenses granted under this article shall be issued for a period of one year or until December 31 of the year the application is made, whichever date is earlier. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-468. - Financial records. 
    All license holders shall maintain separate records which show all activities of their bed and breakfast establishment. All of such documents and related papers shall be available to the city and/or its designee at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-469. - Council consideration of license. 
    In deciding whether or not to grant, renew, suspend or revoke a license under this article, the mayor and council shall consider the following: 
(1)  Compliance by the applicant or license holder with the provisions of this article and all other relevant laws or ordinances, regulations and resolutions of the city and any other governmental body or agency. 
(2)  The documented conduct of the business of the applicant or license holder. 
(3)  The actual or proposed effect of the bed and breakfast on nearby properties, including but not limited to noise, pollution, dirt, property values and all other relevant considerations. 
(4)  The actual or proposed effect of the bed and breakfast on the city including but not limited to the services and utilities of the city. 
(5)  All other relevant issues, including but not limited to the public health, safety, morals, interest and convenience. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-470. - Zoning classification. 
    Bed and breakfast establishments shall be allowed in areas zoned "RS" (single-family residence district), areas zoned "RS" found within the historic district, and areas that were previously zoned "R3" immediately prior to their current zoning classification. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Cross reference- Zoning, §§ 86-6, 86-81, 86-156. 
Sec. 18-471. - Conditions for operation. 
    No premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast establishment unless all of the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  There shall be no more than eight lodging rooms and no less than three lodging rooms per dwelling unit used for a bed and breakfast establishment; 
(2)  Each guest room must have its own private indoor lavatory and bathing facility. Where one guest room in a bed and breakfast establishment does not meet the requirements of this paragraph, the mayor and council may nevertheless issue a license under this chapter; 
(3)  Adequate off-street parking must be available for the bed and breakfast establishment. No on-street parking for guests or owners of the bed and breakfast establishments shall be permitted; 
(4)  The owner shall furnish clean bed linens, unused by any other person since the last laundering thereof, on all beds assigned to the use of any quest of the establishment; 
(5)  The owner shall keep the closets and restrooms used in connection with the bed and breakfast establishment in a clean and sanitary condition; 
(6)  No cooking by guests shall be allowed; 
(7)  The entire dwelling unit shall contain at least 2,500 square feet of heated living area, and shall be detached from any other dwelling; 
(8)  There shall be no outside evidence of a bed and breakfast establishment, and no changes within six months of the date of application by the applicant shall be made in the bed and breakfast structure that are visible from the exterior except the posting of one non-illuminated identification sign. The size of such sign shall not exceed the signable area of eight square feet and such shall be made of natural materials which are substantially similar to the facade materials of the principal structure. Such sign shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 86, Article VIII of this Code; 
(9)  The bed and breakfast shall be totally operated in the principal existing structure and not to any degree in any accessory structure, unless the accessory structure was under the same ownership as the principal structure as of the effective date of this article and was in existence prior to the effective date of this article; 
(10)  No more than three non-family workers shall be employed to work inside the premises; 
(11)  Food shall be prepared in a sanitary manner. Storage of food and the temperature at which food must be stored shall be in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations of the state, county and city. No meals except breakfast may be served to any guest. 
(12)  Bed and breakfast establishments shall be available for occupancy on a continuous basis except for repairs, renovations, or the absence of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Cross reference- Signs, §§ 86-278-86-300. 
Sec. 18-472. - Activities restricted. 
(a)  All bed and breakfast establishments located in an area zoned "RS" (single-family residence district), "RS" within a historic district, and areas that were previously zoned "R3" immediately prior to their current zoning classification, shall be used exclusively for residential and for bed and breakfast purposes. No type of home occupation or commercial activity shall be conducted on any portion of the subject real estate, except for the sale of memorabilia of a guest's stay at the bed and breakfast establishment provided such merchandise does not occupy more than five percent of the total heated floor space in the primary structure. 
(b)  Provisions for receptions. Bed and breakfast establishments may utilize its premises for the purpose of hosting receptions. No reception shall be allowed on the premises unless all of the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The owner of the bed and breakfast establishment shall submit an application to and obtain a permit from the city and/or its designee prior to the reception event. The application for a permit shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the establishment; 
b.  The date and time of the reception event; 
c.  Verification that the owner has obtained all applicable certificates of occupancy from the local fire marshal prior to the event; and 
d.  Verification that the owner shall comply with the city's noise ordinance found at Chapter 34, Article IV of this Code. 
(2)  Parking of vehicles shall be in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. The police department may enforce such temporary controls as may be necessary to alleviate congestion; 
(3)  The reception event can only be held between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Cross reference- Noise, §§ 34-121-34-123. 
Sec. 18-473. - License voided upon sale. 
    A bed and breakfast establishment license shall be immediately voided upon the sale or transfer of the subject real estate or the sale of the business. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-474. - Discrimination prohibited. 
    No owner/operator of a bed and breakfast establishment shall discriminate regarding his guests on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, creed or natural origin. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 18-475. - Applicability of hotel/motel tax. 
    All bed and breakfast establishments shall be subject to the hotel/motel tax of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Secs. 18-476-18-489. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - SHORT-TERM RENTALS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, adopted Oct. 8, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as Art. XIII, §§ 18-476-18-492. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. XIII, §§ 18-490-18-506. 

Sec. 18-490. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of individuals and the city at-large; to monitor and provide reasonable means for citizens to mitigate impacts created by occupancy of short-term rental units; and to implement regulations to protect the integrity of the city's neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-491. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Jonesboro. 
    Short-term rental means an accommodation for transient guests where, in exchange for compensation, a residential dwelling unit is provided for lodging for no more than 30 days. Such use may or may not include an on-site manager. A residential dwelling includes all housing types with the exception that the use excludes group or congregate living or lodging uses. No meals are provided to guests. 
    Short-term rental occupants means guests, tourists, lessees, vacationers or any other person who, in exchange for compensation, occupy a dwelling unit for lodging for a period of time not to exceed 30 consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-492. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to hotels, inns, motels, motor lodges, boardinghouses, rooming houses, bed and breakfast inns, or other establishments providing rooms to guests for compensation. None of these establishments shall be permitted in the city except as otherwise allowed by ordinances of the city. No short-term rental establishment shall be operated except as allowed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-493. - Non-profit entity exception. 
    This article shall not apply to short-term rental establishments being operated on a temporary basis for any registered non-profit entity, for no more than four consecutive days and for no more than eight days per calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-494. - License required and regulatory fee. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a short-term rental establishment without having first obtained an occupation tax certificate and a city business license. The annual regulatory fee for operation of a short-term rental establishment in the city shall be set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for the whole or any part of one year, and shall be paid at City Hall not later than December 15 of the preceding year or upon the filing of an application for the license. No license issued under this article may be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued, or at any location other than the one for which it is issued. Licensee shall publish a short-term rental license number in every print, digital, or internet advertisement and any property listing in which the short-term rental is advertised. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-495. - Guest register. 
    The owner shall keep a register of all guests of the short-term rental establishment. Such list shall be available for inspection by the city and/or its designee at all reasonable times and upon reasonable notice. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-496. - Financial records. 
    All license holders shall maintain separate records which show all activities of their short-term rental establishment. All such documents and related papers shall be available to the city's designated agent at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-497. - Stipulations. 
(a)  Advertisements promoting a property as a residential short-term rental shall constitute prima facie evidence of the operation of a residential short-term rental dwelling unit. 
(b)  The property owner must designate an individual to serve as a rental agent to respond to issues associated with short-term rentals. The agent may be the property owner. 
(c)  Within the historic districts and Historic Residential Overlay District, no more than ten percent of homes within each district shall be used as short-term rentals, on a first-come, first-serve basis. 
(d)  Tenants must be a least 25 years of age to enter into a contractual arrangement with the owner/operator of a short-term rental dwelling. 
(e)  Properties containing both a principal residential dwelling and accessory residential dwelling, shall only use one residential structure as a short-term rental, not both. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-498. - Procedure. 
    Applicants for a short-term rental license shall submit, on an annual basis, an application for a short-term rental license to the city. The application shall be furnished under oath on a form specified by the city manager or designee, accompanied by a non-refundable application fee as set by the mayor and city council. Such application must include: 
(a)  A report from a certified home inspector verifying that the rental unit is in compliance with life safety and habitability codes, including an evaluation of the floor plan for the unit, verifying that all rooms meet applicable Code requirements. 
(b)  The name, address, telephone and email address of the owner(s) of record of the dwelling unit for which a license is sought, and the address of the short-term rental dwelling unit. If such owner is not a natural person, the application shall identify all partners, officers and/or directors of any such entity, including personal contact information. 
(c)  Name and phone number of the rental agent who is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, to respond to complaints regarding the operation or occupancy of the short-term rental unit/property. 
(d)  A notarized statement signed by the owner or operator that the short-term rental will be in compliance with these regulations. 
(e)  Proof of ownership. 
(f)  Proof of insurance. 
(g)  Evidence that short-term rental properties are enrolled with City of Jonesboro's sanitation service. 
(h)  Copy of a sample short-term rental agreement used by the owner/operator, which shall include at least the following provisions: 
(1)  The occupant(s)' agreement to abide by all of the requirements of this article, any other applicable city ordinances, state and federal law and acknowledgement that his or her rights under the agreement may not be transferred or assigned to anyone else; 
(2)  The occupant(s)' acknowledgement that it shall be unlawful to allow or make any noise or sound that exceeds the limits set forth in the city's noise ordinance; and 
(3)  The occupant(s)' acknowledgement and agreement that violation of the agreement or this article may result in immediate termination of the agreement and eviction from the short-term rental unit by the owner or agent, as well as the potential liability for payments of fines levied by the city. 
(4)  All trash will be promptly and properly disposed of within 12 hours of the departure of a guest. 
(5)  No on-street parking for guests will be allowed. 
(6)  24-hour contact name and phone number. 
(7)  A statement from the tenant stating that he/she will use their best efforts to assure that the use of the premises by short-term rental occupants will not disrupt the neighborhood, and they will not interfere with the rights of neighboring property owners to the quiet enjoyment of their properties. 
(i)  Affidavit of adjacent property owner notification. The applicant of a short-term rental shall provide, in writing, notice to adjacent property owners within 250 feet of a local telephone number, name and address of a rental agent/property manager who will accept and handle complaints immediately relating to tenant activities. 
(j)  The owner's sworn acknowledgement that he or she has received a copy of this article, has reviewed it and understands its requirements. 
(k)  The number and location of parking spaces allotted to the premises. 
(l)  Any other information that this article requires the owner to provide to the city as part of an application for a short-term rental license. The city manager or designee shall have the authority to obtain additional information from the applicant as necessary to achieve the objectives of this article. 
(m)  A written certification from the short-term rental agent that he or she agrees to perform the duties specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-499. - Rental unit conditions. 
(a)  Each short-term rental must provide sufficient off-street parking for residents and/or guests. 
(b)  Maximum occupancy is limited to four persons per dwelling unit with up to two bedrooms. For dwelling units with three or more bedrooms, the number shall not exceed two persons per bedroom. At least one person over the age of 25 must be a guest of a short-term rental unit at all times during its occupancy. 
(c)  A legible copy of the short-term rental unit license shall be posted within the unit and include all of the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number and email address of the short-term rental agent; 
(2)  The occupation tax certificate number; 
(3)  The maximum occupancy of the unit; 
(4)  The maximum number of vehicles that may be parked at the unit; and 
(d)  Short-term rental units must be properly maintained and regularly inspected by the owner to ensure continued compliance with applicable zoning, building, health and life safety code provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-500. - Complaints. 
    All complaints shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  The complaining party shall first attempt to communicate with the designated contact person/rental agent on the affidavit of adjacent property owner's notification. 
(2)  The designated contact person/rental agent shall respond promptly to the complaint, regardless of the time of day and make reasonable efforts to remedy any situation that is out of compliance with the conditions of the short-term rental uses. 
(3)  If the response is not satisfactory to the complaining party and/or the source of the complaint continues unabated, the complaining party must provide a written complaint to the city's designee responsible for approving short-term rentals. The complaint shall include a description of the informal and formal attempts that have been made to resolve the complaint. A copy of the written complaint will be provided to the rental agent and contact person by the city. 
(4)  The city shall attempt to resolve the complaint. The rental agent shall provide a written response to the city with the anticipated corrective action within ten days from the date of notification by the city. 
(5)  Three violations of this article within a 12-month period are grounds for review by the city to determine if the short-term rental license should be revoked. 
(6)  A license for a short-term rental may also be revoked if the property is engaged in any prohibited activities listed herein. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-501. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No on-street parking is permitted. 
(b)  The short-term rental property may not be utilized as an event center. Existence of advertisement or promotional materials regarding same shall be prima facie evidence of the short-term rental property owner's violation of this provision. 
(c)  No exterior or interior alterations shall be made for the express purpose of adding guest rooms to the short-term rental facility. All significant exterior or interior alterations shall require a permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-502. - Discrimination prohibited. 
    No owner/operator of a short-term rental establishment shall discriminate regarding his or her guests on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, creed or natural origin. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-503. - Short-term rental agent. 
(a)  The property owner may serve as the short-term rental agent. Alternatively, the owner may designate a natural person as his or her agent who is over age 18. 
(b)  The duties of the short-term rental agent are to: 
(1)  Be reasonably available to handle any problems arising from use of the short-term rental unit; 
(2)  Appear on the premises of any short-term rental unit within two hours following notification from the city of issues related to the use or occupancy of the premises. This includes, but is not limited to, notification that occupants of the short-term rental unit have created unreasonable noise or disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct or committed violations of this Code or other applicable law pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct, overcrowding, consumption of alcohol or use of illegal drugs. Failure of the agent to timely appear to two or more complaints regarding violations may be grounds for penalties as set forth in this article. This is not intended to impose a duty to act as a peace officer or otherwise require the agent to place himself or herself in a perilous situation; 
(3)  Receive and accept service of any notice of violation related to the use or occupancy of the premises; and 
(4)  Monitor the short-term rental unit for compliance with this article. 
(c)  An owner may change his or her designation of a short-term rental agent temporarily or permanently; however there shall only be one such agent for a property at any given time. To change the designated agent, the owner shall notify the city in writing of the new agent's identity, together with all information regarding such person as required by the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-504. - Grant or denial of application. 
    All complete applications shall be reviewed within 30 days of filing and shall be granted unless the applicant fails to meet the conditions and requirements of this article, or otherwise fails to demonstrate the ability to comply with local, state or federal law. Any false statements or information provided in the application are grounds for revocation, suspension and/or imposition of penalties, including denial of future applications. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-505. - Short-term rental regulation procedure. 
(a)  To ensure the continued application of the intent and purpose of this article, the city manager or designee shall notify the owner of a short-term rental unit of all instances in which nuisance behavior of the rental guest or the conduct of his or her short-term rental unit agent results in a citation for a code violation or other legal infraction. 
(b)  The city manager or designee shall maintain in each short-term rental location file a record of all code violation charges, founded accusations and convictions occurring at or relating to a short-term rental unit. When a property owner has accumulated three code violations for a particular property within a period of 12 consecutive months, the city may revoke any pending licenses and, subsequently, reject all applications for the subject premises for a period of 12 consecutive months. 
(c)  If a short-term rental unit owner has been cited and found to be in violation of any zoning, building, health or life safety code provision, the owner must demonstrate compliance with the applicable code prior to being eligible to receive a short-term rental license. 
(d)  Violations of this article are subject to the following fines, which may not be waived or reduced and which may be combined with any other legal remedy available to the city: 
(1)  First violation: $500.00. 
(2)  Second violation within the preceding 12 months: $750.00. 
(3)  Third or subsequent violation within the preceding 12 months: $1,000.00. 
(e)  A person aggrieved by the city's decision to revoke, suspend or deny a short-term rental license may appeal the decision to the city manager or designated hearing officer. The appeal must be filed with the city manager's office in writing, within 30 calendar days after the adverse action and it shall contain a concise statement of the reasons for the appeal. Timely filing of an appeal shall stay the revocation, suspension or denial pending a decision by the city manager. 
(f)  The city manager or appointed hearing officer shall consider the appeal within 30 days after receipt by the city manager of a request unless otherwise agreed in writing by the city and aggrieved party. All interested parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony and evidence, and to cross-examine witnesses. The city manager or designated hearing officer shall render a determination in writing within five days of the hearing, which will constitute a final ruling on the application. A party aggrieved by the city manager or designated hearing officer's decision may appeal same by petition for writ of certiorari with the Clayton County Superior Court in accordance with state law. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall limit the city from enforcement of its Code, state or federal law by any other legal remedy available to the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or supplant the power of any city inspector or other duly empowered officer under the city's ordinances, rules and regulations and the authority granted under state law, as amended, to take necessary action, consistent with the law, to protect the public from property which constitutes a public nuisance or to abate a nuisance by any other lawful means of proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 18-506. - Taxes. 
    Short-term rental unit owners are subject to state sales tax and all applicable city taxes, including, but not limited to, the hotel/motel tax, and are liable for payment thereof as established by state law and this Code. The city may seek to enforce payment of all applicable taxes to the extent provided by law, including injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
State Law reference- Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; disposition of unclaimed dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-20 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.; Georgia Cemetery Act of 1983, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Proof of ownership of lot prior to interment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to inter a human body in any city cemetery without first notifying the city and providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of person to be buried; 
(2)  Lot number; 
(3)  Proof of ownership of lot; and 
(4)  Such other information as the city may require. 
(Code 1987, § 5-3-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Fees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to inter or reinter a human body in any city cemetery without first paying to the city a fee as set out in the following schedule: 
(1)  Nonrefundable permit fee for opening grave. 
(2)  The deposit shall be refunded upon satisfactory proof to the city that the grave site has been returned to such a manner as to be in compliance with all health laws enacted by the state, the county, or the city. In addition, such deposit shall be used to offset any damages otherwise caused by the interment. 
(3)  The fees and charges referred to in this section shall be set by the city council from time to time, as they deem appropriate, and the fee schedule will be maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 5-10-1993(1)) 
Sec. 22-3. - Damages to city property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to, either intentionally or recklessly, damage any property or personalty located on any city cemetery. 
(Ord. of 5-10-1993(1)) 
Sec. 22-4. - City cemetery guidelines. 
    The following guidelines shall apply to city cemeteries: 
(1)  Funeral directors are to notify city hall before interment, giving the name of the deceased and the site of burial. A $150.00 refundable deposit and a $25.00 nonrefundable deposit are required. After burial, an inspection will be made by the city to affirm that there has been no damage to adjoining lots (walls, headstones, landscape, etc.), before a refund will be given. 
(2)  If lots are enclosed, the walls should be marble, gray or white granite, brick, or masonry. No loose brick, timbers, etc., shall be permitted. All plans for enclosure or walls should be submitted to city hall for review. 
(3)  Trees or bushes may not be planted on lots. 
(4)  If there are trees presently on the lot which would require raking leaves, such raking would be the responsibility of the owner. These lots have not been and will not be sold with a perpetual maintenance agreement. 
(5)  Cemetery lot owners shall remove all faded, unsightly, or damaged artificial arrangements and all dead flowers. 
(6)  There shall be no admittance to any city cemetery from dusk to dawn. 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

Sec. 26-1. - Emergency management. 
    The city shall perform civil defense and emergency management functions in accordance with the Clayton County Emergency Operations Plan adopted March 20, 2001, and the provisions of the mutual aid agreement entered into between the city and the county on February 13, 2003, as said plan and agreement may be amended or modified from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 04-12, § 2, 5-17-2004) 
Chapter 30 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal court, art. IV. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 26; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Powers of presiding officer in court of a municipal corporation to bind over or commit criminal offenders to jail, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts and magistrate courts to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; agreements between private entities and municipal court judges for probation services, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-102; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I. 

Sec. 30-1. - Creation. 
    There is established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia, which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the charter, laws, and ordinances of the city, and all state laws over which it has been granted jurisdiction, and to punish for a violation of such laws and ordinances. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by state laws, to subpoena witnesses, to punish witnesses for nonattendance, and to try all offenses occurring within the territorial limits of the city, including traffic cases, which, under state laws, are placed within the jurisdiction of city courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all amendatory laws. The presiding officer of such court shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council and shall be known as the judge of the municipal court. the court shall be convened at the office of the police department or such other place within the city as designated by the judge of the municipal court, with the approval of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-2. - Judge. 
(a)  The judge of the municipal court shall be at least 21 years of age and shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. The mayor and city council shall provide for the compensation for the judge. 
(b)  The mayor and city council shall have authority to appoint standby associate judges to serve in the absence of the judge. Any standby associate judge shall possess the qualifications set forth in subsection (a) of this section for the judge of the municipal court and have the same powers granted to the judge of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-3. - Solicitor. 
(a)  A solicitor, and such assistant solicitors as may be deemed appropriate, may be appointed by the mayor and city council. All solicitors shall be at least 21 years of age and shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. All solicitors shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council and may be removed from office by the concurrence of the mayor and a majority of the city council. 
(b)  The duties of the solicitor shall be to: 
(1)  Prosecute all cases on behalf of the city that are tried in the municipal court; 
(2)  Aid and advise the police department and other enforcement officers in preparation of cases for trial; 
(3)  Assist the judge of the municipal court and other officers and personnel of the court in achieving justice in all cases and in the efficient and expeditions performance of their duties; and 
(4)  Perform such other duties as are or may be required by law or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-4. - Clerk of court. 
(a)  There shall be a clerk of court who shall be appointed and removed by the city manager. There shall also be a deputy clerk who shall be appointed, when necessary, by the judge of the municipal court. The judge of the municipal court shall have the authority to sign an order appointing a deputy clerk who shall serve during vacancies in the office of the clerk of court and shall serve until a new clerk of court is appointed or until replaced by the city manager. The deputy clerk shall have all of the powers granted to the clerk of court in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The clerk of court shall: 
(1)  Prepare all subpoenas and warrants and maintain a docket that will show the name of the person for whom the subpoena or warrant was issued, its date, at whose instance it was issued, and to whom it was delivered; 
(2)  Be the custodian of the seal of the court and have authority to certify copies of all official records of the court and to maintain the proper books of accounts, including receipts and disbursements, which the court may maintain; and 
(3)  Perform such other duties as may be imposed upon them by the judge of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-5. - Sessions of court. 
(a)  A regular session of the municipal court shall be held once each week at a fixed hour on a fixed day as may be determined by the judge; provided, that any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court or no cases are ready for trial. 
(b)  The municipal court may hold special sessions of court when, in the judge's opinion, it is necessary or there is urgent cause for the trial of accused persons before the next regularly scheduled session of court. 
Sec. 30-6. - Rules. 
    The municipal court, and all hearings conducted therein, shall be controlled by the rules of the superior courts, so far as such rules are applicable to non-jury cases and to municipal courts, and a sound construction of the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-7. - Practice. 
    The city shall have the opening and conclusion of each case, unless the defendant introduces no evidence; then he shall be entitled to the conclusion. The city shall announce first whether ready for trial and, if not ready, shall be held to as strict a showing for a continuance as the defendant. The rules of evidence shall be the same as in the superior courts, so far as such rules are applicable to non-jury cases and to municipal courts, and a sound construction of the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-8. - Persons charged with offense; summons and trial. 
    Any person who is charged with an offense against any of the provisions of this Code, and any ordinances of the city, shall be informed by summons in writing served on him of the nature and cause of his accusation; shall have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his behalf; shall have a speedy trial; shall be confronted with the witnesses against him and have the privilege of cross examination as in the superior courts of the state. The same rules as to examination of witnesses and the evidence adduced as obtained in such courts, as applicable to non-jury cases, and as far as they are applicable to municipal courts, shall be applicable to cases before the municipal court. The party accused shall have the privilege of defending himself, by counsel or by himself, or both, whichever shall seem proper to him. No one shall be condemned, fined or punished without a chance of being heard in their defense. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-9. - Form and execution of summons. 
    It shall be the duty of the clerk of court in all cases where complaint is made or information given of any violation of this Code or ordinances of the city, whether the party is to be confined in jail or not, to issue a summons directed to the accused requiring such offender to appear in municipal court to answer such charge, which summons shall set forth the offense, and the time and place of trial; bear teste in the name of the judge of the municipal court; be signed officially by the clerk of court or the chief of police; and directed to the chief of police or any police officer of the city to be executed, which police officer shall execute the summons by serving a copy on the accused or leaving it at his place of residence. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-10. - Witness-Subpoena. 
    Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any fact, the clerk of court, deputy clerk, or judge of the municipal court, shall issue a subpoena, directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, and bearing teste in the name of the judge of the municipal court, which subpoena shall be served as other summons by any police officer. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-11. - Same-Defaulting. 
    If any person summoned as a witness shall fail, neglect, or refuse to attend a trial, and not render at the time a sufficient excuse in the judgment of the municipal court, the defaulting witness shall be liable to a fine not to exceed $200.00, and imprisonment not exceeding ten days; and, if the cause shall be continued on account of the witness's absence, the court may issue an attachment against such witness requiring him to show cause on the day appointed for trial why he should not be further dealt with for contempt. Any police officer, by virtue of such attachment, shall arrest and confine the person, so as to have him before the court at such time as may be appointed for further hearing of the original complaint. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-12. - Continuances. 
    Where the ends of justice require it, cases may be continued. All continuances shall be addressed to the sound legal discretion of the municipal court under the rules governing the superior courts, so far as such rules are applicable to non-jury cases and to municipal courts, and a sound construction of the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-13. - Plea of guilty in absence of defendant. 
    Any party against whom any complaint is lodged or information given may file a plea of guilty under such regulations and upon such terms as the municipal court may prescribe; and, if such party cannot attend the trial, the court may pass such order or sentence in the case as if the party were personally present. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-14. - Persons implicated to be tried. 
    If on the trial of any cause before the municipal court it appears that any other person besides the one on trial has violated a provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, he may then and there be tried if present unless the case is continued for legal cause. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-15. - Contempt of court. 
    The judge of the municipal court may punish for contempt a person who disobeys an order of the court or who obstructs or interferes with the proceedings of the court or the enforcement of its orders. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-16. - Docket. 
    A docket shall be kept in the office of the clerk of court on which shall appear the name of every defendant charged with a violation of this Code or any city ordinances, or of any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction; and, at the trial of all cases in the municipal court, the clerk of court shall record opposite the statement of the case the punishment administered and the date; and the clerk of court shall enter, under the municipal court judge's beg sentence, the final disposition of the case, that is, whether the fine, if any, was collected and the date of such collection, and when and to whom such amounts were turned over by the clerk of court. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-17. - Enforcement of penalties against corporations. 
    Whenever a corporation shall violate any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, a warrant shall issue against such corporation for violating such provisions; and the clerk of court shall issue a copy of such warrant, which shall be served by the chief of police or any police officer of the city upon any officer of the corporation in the city; and the police officer serving such copy shall at the time notify such person upon whom such service is made of the time and place of trial, and shall make an entry of such service upon the warrant, showing the time of service and upon whom the service was made, and return the warrant to the municipal court, and docket the case, which case shall stand for trial in the order which other cases against individuals for violation of ordinances of the city are tried. If on the trial the defendant corporation fails to appear, or appearing fails to plead, the judge of the municipal court shall cause to be entered a plea of not guilty, and trial shall proceed as though the defendant has appeared and pleaded. Upon conviction of any corporation, there shall be rendered judgment against it for the fine imposed by the presiding officer, together with all costs of prosecution, upon which judgment the clerk of court shall issue an execution against the defendant, which shall be levied and collected by the chief of police as tax executions in favor of the city are allowed by law to be levied and collected. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-18. - Appearance bond-Security requirement, maximum amount. 
    The chief of police, a member of the police department, the municipal court judge, the sheriff of the county, or his deputy may take bond, with security or without security, at their discretion, in a sum not exceeding $5,000.00 per charge for the appearance of any party accused or suspected of being guilty of a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, or any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, to stand to and abide by their trial before the municipal court, and also of witnesses to testify in any case pending or about to be commenced in such court. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-19. - Same-Failure or refusal to give; subsequent confinement or guard. 
    If either party or witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security as required of them, or either of them, such person so failing or refusing may be confined to the county jail, or other place as may be directed by the municipal court judge, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-20. - Same-Forfeiture for failure to appear; service of rule. 
    All bail taken under this article shall be special bail, and the power of the security over the principal shall be the same as in the special bail. Upon the failure of any principal to appear in any bond or recognizance given by a person charged with a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, or of any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, or by a witness to appear and testify, the judge of the municipal court shall pass a rule requiring the principal and sureties on such bond to show cause on a day named in the rule, not to be less than ten days from the passage of such rule, why they should not be required to pay the amount of such bond. A copy of such rule shall be served upon the principal and security by any officer or member of the police force at least five days before the time set for hearing the rule. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-21. - Additional penalties; jail fund; depositing money in funds. 
(a)  In every case in which any court within the city shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of the state or any ordinance of the city, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(b)  At the time of posting a bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of the state or an ordinance of the city, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted; and in every case in which any court within the city shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be paid over as provided under subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Such sums required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund or O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 concerning the Judges of the Probate Courts Retirement Fund. 
(d)  The sums provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk of court or court officer charged with the duty of collecting moneys arising from fines and forfeited bonds and shall be paid over to the county by the tenth day of the month following the month in which such sums are collected. Such sums paid over to the county shall be placed by the county board of commissioners into a special account to be known as the county jail fund. 
(e)  Moneys collected pursuant to this section and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended by the county solely and exclusively for constructing, operating and staffing county jails, county correctional institutions and detention facilities of the county, or for the purpose of contracting for such facilities with other cities, the state, counties or other political subdivisions as authorized by Ga. Const. Art. IX, § III, ¶ I. The county jail fund and moneys collected pursuant to this section to be placed in the county jail fund may be pledged as security for the payment of bonds issued for the construction of county jails, county correctional institutions and detention facilities of the county. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 30-22. - Technology fee established. 
    The public safety department is hereby authorized and directed to establish a technology fee. The fee shall be set at $10.00 for each citation which is disposed of by: 
(1)  Conviction after trial; 
(2)  Accepted plea of guilty; 
(3)  Accepted plea of nolo contendere; or 
(4)  Any bond forfeiture or voluntary payment of fine. 
    The technology fee shall not be charged for violations of O.C.G.A. § 40-8-76, relating to child restraint violations or O.C.G.A. § 40-8-76.1, relating to safety belt violations. 
(2008-005, §§ 1-4, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2012-001, §§ 1-5, 3-13-2012) 
Chapter 32 - ENTERPRISE ZONE 

Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
    In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this section, those terms defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-3 are incorporated by reference into this section and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001 , § 1, 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 32-2. - Statement of findings. 
    The mayor and council of the city find that: 
(1)  The proposed enterprise zone suffers from widespread pervasive poverty as it is located within portions of Census Tract 0406.12. This block group has at least 15 percent or greater poverty according to the U.S. Census. 
(2)  The proposed enterprise zone suffers from general distress and adverse conditions. The economic conditions from 2009 until 2016 have driven many businesses from the proposed enterprise zone and a considerable portion of the buildings in the proposed enterprise zone are vacant, underutilized, or dilapidated. The abandonment and underutilization of these commercial and industrial properties suppresses property values and detracts from the city's productivity and economic vitality. 
(3)  The proposed enterprise zone shows block groups with poverty rates less than 14 percent, between 15 percent and 29 percent, and greater than 29 percent poverty. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001 , § 1, 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 32-3. - Enterprise zone established; criteria of state met. 
    There is hereby created and established a geographic area known as the Jonesboro Enterprise Zone as herein described in Exhibit A, a copy of which is hereby incorporated by reference, in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 36-88-1, et seq. Exhibit A is maintained in the office of the city manager and is available for inspection during normal business hours. Based on findings of fact in section 32-2 above, the enterprise zone meets the following qualifications of the Enterprise Zone Act: pervasive property, general distress, and general blight. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001 , § 1, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 6, 6-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-4. - Administration. 
(a)  The city shall be the authorized agency to act in all matters pertaining to the enterprise zone and reserves the power to grant incentives to qualifying business or service enterprises in accordance with the authorization granted to local governments in the administration of the enterprise zone under the Enterprise Zone Act. The city shall not be bound by any agency, governmental entity or other authority to grant incentives. Approval shall be at the sole discretion of the mayor and council. 
(b)  The city designates its city manager or his or her designee as the liaison for its communication with the state department of community affairs, the state department of industry, trade, and tourism, the business community, and all others to oversee enterprise zone activities and administration. 
(c)  The city has the power to administer, require, and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter and such administrative rules or regulations adopted hereinafter, including but not limited to, reports requiring data from businesses or service enterprises within the enterprise zone to verify compliance with this chapter and state law. 
(d)  A qualifying business or service enterprise shall enter into a contractual agreement with the city setting forth the incentives offered to such entity and including the guidelines for the recapture, revocation, or reimbursement of the incentives should the terms of the contract be violated by the business or service enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001 , § 1, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 7, 6-12-2017) 
Sec. 32-5. - Incentives available to qualifying business or service enterprises. 
(a)  The city may, on a case-by-case basis, grant the following incentives to qualifying business or service enterprises within the enterprise zone: 
(1)  The city may exempt qualifying business or service enterprises from municipal ad valorem property taxes, excluding taxes imposed by school districts, that would otherwise be levied on the qualifying business or service enterprises in accordance with the following schedule: 
a.  One hundred percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the first five years; 
b.  Eighty percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the next two years; 
c.  Sixty percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the next year; 
d.  Forty percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the next year; and 
e.  Twenty percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the last year. 
(b)  Other incentives that may be granted will be negotiated by the city on a case-by-case basis and could include exemption from any or all of the following: 
(1)  Occupation taxes; 
(2)  Building permit fees; 
(3)  Sign permit fees; 
(4)  Occupation tax administrative fee; 
(5)  Rezoning fees; 
(6)  Engineering fees; 
(7)  Other local fees authorized by the city council, as may be applicable. 
(c)  The city may make determinations of eligibility for each business or service enterprise based on the quality and quantity of such additional economic stimulus as may be created within the city. Criteria for consideration may include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The number of jobs to be created above the state threshold of five jobs. 
(2)  Capital investment or reinvestment by the business or service enterprise equal to or greater than the amount of ad valorem tax abated over the first five years of the tax incentive; 
(3)  Locating in a vacant or historic building; 
(4)  Demolishing an obsolete, abandoned and/or deteriorating pre-existing structure; 
(5)  Enhancing the area by incorporating elements such as significant landscaping, area compatible facade materials and exclusion and removal of billboards on premises; 
(6)  Assembling multiple tracts of land for one project; 
(7)  Creating jobs for residents of the enterprise zone and surrounding area; and 
(8)  The proposed land use is in keeping with the harmony of the area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001 , § 1, 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 32-6. - Duration. 
    The enterprise zone shall be established effective with the date adoption of this chapter and shall continue for a period of ten years. Business and service enterprises nominated for incentives in the enterprise zone during that ten-year period will have ten years from date of approval during which such incentives may be utilized, even though such ten-year period for the particular business or service enterprise may extend beyond the enterprise zone's duration. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001 , § 1, 1-9-2017) 
Chapter 33 - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND AUTHORITIES 
ARTICLE I. - MAIN STREET ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 33-1. - Main Street advisory board created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Main Street advisory board. Until otherwise provided by the governing body, such board shall consist of the appointed members of the downtown development authority for the city. 
(1)  The appointees to the downtown development authority, their terms, and their removal provisions are identical to the Main Street advisory board. 
(2)  All remaining regulation of the Main Street advisory board shall be by bylaws. 
(b)  The board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the mayor and council. The board shall prepare recommendations to the governing body for Main Street revitalization, including goals and objectives, monitor revitalization efforts, coordinate with the state department of community affairs office of downtown development with respect to the Main Street corridor, and assist with long-range planning. 
(c)  All members of the board shall take an oath of office. 
(d)  No member of the board shall take part in deliberations or vote upon any matter in which such member is personally interested. For the purpose of this section, a "personal interest" includes consideration of any item involving property or a business interest which is owned, occupied, or rented by the board member, his or her spouse, parents, children, brothers, sisters, grandparents or grandchildren, provided that such disqualification shall not apply to matters affecting such board member's personal interest in which the entire Main Street corridor is treated identically. 
(e)  Until otherwise provided by the governing body, the city administrator or his/her designee shall serve as the Main Street program director. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 2-13-2017) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 16; historic preservation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 50; signs, ch. 52; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - VACANT BUILDING REGISTRY 

Sec. 34-1. - Registration of vacant buildings. 
(a)  Whenever any building, dwelling or structure is vacant for more than 60 days and is in violation of this article, the owner, shall within ten days of written notice from the city of the existence of a vacant building, dwelling or structure, register, or caused to be registered, such building, dwelling or structure as a vacant building, dwelling or structure. 
(b)  Any building, dwelling or structure designed as a home dwelling that is vacant for a period less than 12 months shall be exempt from registration under this section provided that the building, dwelling or structure is currently and continuously being marketed for sale and is not otherwise in violation of this article. At any time such building, dwelling or structure ceases to be marketed for sale or at such time as the building, dwelling or structure becomes vacant for a period greater than 12 months, then the owner of such building, dwelling or structure, shall within ten days of such event, register, or caused to be registered such building, dwelling or structure as a vacant building, dwelling or structure. 
(c)  The vacant building registration shall be completed though and approved by the code enforcement officer accompanied with a $50.00 filing fee. Registration of a vacant building shall be valid for a period of six months. 
(d)  If the building is vacant at the expiration of any registration period and the requirements of the vacant building plan have not been completed, the owner shall re-register such building and pay another $50.00 filing fee. If the building is vacant at the expiration of any registration period and the requirements of the vacant building have been completed, the owner shall re-register such building, but shall not file a vacant building plan and shall not pay the $50.00 filing fee. 
(e)  The owner registering a vacant building shall supply the following information on an authorized form provided by the City of Jonesboro: 
(1)  Name, address (mailing and street), facsimile number, e-mail address and telephone number of the owner; 
(2)  Name, address (mailing and street), facsimile number, e-mail address and telephone number of any local agent or representative of the owner; 
(3)  The property is a nuisance under the terms of this Chapter 34, Article III; 
(4)  Legal description, street address and tax parcel identification number of the premises on which the building is situated; 
(5)  Transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; 
(6)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; 
(7)  The common address of the building; [and] 
(8)  Date on which the building became vacant. 
(Ord. No. 2013-002, § 1, 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 34-2. - Acquisition of vacant buildings by eminent domain. 
(a)  The city may acquire by eminent domain pursuant to applicable state law, any property determined to be vacant and a persistent nuisance, and shall have the power to hold, clear, manage or dispose of property so acquired for residential, commercial, industrial and related use. 
(b)  The city council shall not institute eminent domain proceedings pursuant to this section unless the code enforcement officer has certified that the property is vacant and a persistent nuisance. A property may only be certified to the city council as vacant and a persistent nuisance after the code enforcement officer has determined that: 
(1)  The owner of the property or designated agent has been sent a notice or order by the appropriate agency of the municipality to eliminate the conditions which are in violation of the local codes or law[;] 
(2)  The property is vacant; 
(3)  The property is a nuisance under the terms of this Chapter 34, Article III; 
(4)  The city has notified the property owner or designated agent that the property has been determined to be blighted or deteriorated and the time period for correction of such condition has expired and the property owner or agent has failed to comply with this notice. 
(c)  The findings required by subsection (b) shall be in writing and included in the report prepared by the code enforcement officer to the city council. 
(d)  Code enforcement officer shall notify the owner of the property or a designated agent that a determination that the property is vacant and a persistent nuisance has been made and that failure to eliminate the conditions causing such condition shall render the property subject to condemnation by the city under this part. Notice shall be mailed to the owner or designated agent by certified mail, return receipt requested. However, if the address of the owner or designated agent is unknown and cannot be ascertained by code enforcement in the exercise of reasonable diligence, copies of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected and notice shall be published in the newspaper which is the official legal organ of the county in which the sheriff's advertisements appear. The written notice sent to the owner or the owner's agent shall describe the conditions that render the property blighted and deteriorated, and shall demand abatement of the conditions within 90 days of the receipt of such notice. 
(e)  An extension of the 90-day time period may be granted by the city if the owner or designated agent demonstrates that such period is insufficient to correct the conditions cited in the notice. 
(f)  No elected official, officer or employee of the city shall acquire and interest in any property declared to be vacant or a persistent nuisance. 
(g)  If any elected official, officer or employee owns or has a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any property certified to be vacant and a persistent nuisance, the officer or employee shall immediately disclose, in writing, such interest to the city council, and such disclosure shall be entered in the minutes of the city council. 
(h)  Failure to so disclose such interest shall constitute misconduct in office. 
(i)  No payment shall be made to any elected official, officer or employee for any property or interest therein acquired by the city from such elected official, officer or employee unless the amount of such payment is fixed by court order in eminent domain proceedings, or unless payment is unanimously approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-002, § 1, 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 34-3. - Enclosure of vacant lots. 
(a)  The code enforcement officer, at his discretion and based upon substantial evidence of the occurrence of criminal activities or offenses affecting the public health, safety and welfare in or on any vacant lot in the city, may order the owner or agent for the owner of such vacant lot to erect or cause to be erected a fence of a height and type permitted by the zoning code along all or any part of the perimeter of such vacant lot. 
(b)  A conviction of any person of failure or refusal to comply with an order of the code enforcement officer issued pursuant to this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 2013-002, § 1, 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 34-4. - Administrative procedure. 
(a)  One who has written notice of violation of any provision in this article, may appeal such violation by requesting a hearing on the same before the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2013-002, § 1, 5-13-2013) 
Secs. 34-5-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-004B , § 1, adopted Mar. 12, 2018, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 34-31-34-40, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-004, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2010; Ord. No. 2012-007, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2012; and Ord. No. 2018-004 , § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2018. 
Cross reference- Stormwater management, § 78-36 et seq. 
State Law reference- Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-14; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17; local land-disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; minimum standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; permits for land-disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-7, 12-7-9. 

Sec. 34-31. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-004B , § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-32. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
    Board means the board of natural resources. 
    Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
    City director means the director of the City of Jonesboro Public Works Department and/or his/her designee. This term shall also include personnel designated by Clayton County, Georgia under an agreement between the county and the city. 
    City of Jonesboro, Georgia means the duly incorporated municipal government acting as issuing authority under this article. Also known as "city" and "Jonesboro." 
    Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
    Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
    CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
    Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
    Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
    Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by CPESC. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable state law governing professional licensure. 
    Director means the director of environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources or an authorized representative. 
    District means the Clayton County Soil and Water Conservation District for Clayton County Land Disturbing Activities. 
    Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources (DNR). 
    Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
    Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections, at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 34-34 of this article. 
    Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
    Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas) or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
    Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    Issuing authority means the City of Jonesboro, Georgia (city) as a governing authority which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
    Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 34-33. 
    Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
    Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as the O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
    Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
    NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
    NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
    One hundred year flood plain means the land in a flood-plain subject to a one percent or greater statistical occurrence probability of flooding in any given year. 
    Operator means the party or parties that have: (a) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (b) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
    Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
    Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
    Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
    Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulders areas, and carrying waters to a release point on the other side. 
    Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code section 12-5-30. 
    Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Clayton County Soil and Water Conservation District for Clayton County Land Disturbing Activities. 
    Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
    Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov . Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
    Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-004B , § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-33. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except the following: 
(a)  (1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and section 34-34 of this article. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 34-34(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRSC) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1) through (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 34-34(b) and (c) of this article; provided further that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the city, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(b)  Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in sections 34-34(b) and (c) of this article, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Ord. No. 2018-004B , § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-34. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of sections 34-34(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in sections 34-34(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the city or by the division or of any state general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15)-(17) below, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation, pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 34-34(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraphs (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral, stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water, and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetative in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetation cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this O.C.G.A., the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph, "maintenance" shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. "Maintenance" does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and "serviceable" shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; and 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in Ga. Reg. § 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 34-34(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-004B , § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-35. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The city shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city director to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city director and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 34-35(c) of this article. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of sections 34-34(b) and (c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of sections 34-34(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  A local fee, in the amount of $50.00 shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in commercial projects, a minimum of $200.00 shall be charged up to a maximum fee of $1,000.00. A residential projects local fee in the amount of $10.00 shall be charged per lot, a minimum of $200.00 shall be charged up to a maximum of $1,000.00 for residential development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection a. of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the city shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the city. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by sections 34-34(c)(15), (16), and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid and bonding, if required as per section 34-35(b)(5)b., have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the city and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The city shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the city to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  The following shall apply to all applicants: 
a.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the city may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The city may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the city with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in sections 34-34(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article and a copy of thereof is kept in the office of the city director or his or her designee. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1st of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the city of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary, and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. Incomplete applications shall be considered denied and the applicant must reapply. No amendments to applications will be allowed. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the city unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the city has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by sections 34-34(b) and (c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 34-35(b)(5)b. are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)  The city may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(6)  Any land-disturbing activities by the city shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-004B , § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-36. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city director or his or her designee will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the city shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The city must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The city director or his or her designee shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. In addition to the authority granted herein the city director's office or his/her designee may seek administrative search warrants. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. The city may also execute administrative search warrants if necessary. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of the city as a municipality which has been certified as city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to the city for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the city erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of the city as a municipality which has been certified as an issuing authority pursuant to O.C.G.A § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of the city's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the city. If such review indicates that the city certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the city in writing. The city so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the city does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the city as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2018-004B , § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-37. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the city shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the city shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or city shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or city shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the city, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the city. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 34-35(b)(5)b. The city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in the city Charter to the contrary, the municipal court shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties, any court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-004B , § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-38. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the city upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city director within 15 days after receipt by the city of written notice of appeal. The written notice of appeal must be presented to the city director within 15 business days of the date provided on the suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal by petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court. 
(Ord. No. 2018-004B , § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-39. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2018-004B , § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-40. - Liability. 
(a)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(b)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2018-004B , § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Secs. 34-41-34-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 04-20, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 9, 2004, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 34-81-34-91, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1987, §§ 11-1-3, 11-1-4, 11-2-1; an ordinance adopted Dec. 13, 1995; § 1 of an ordinance adopted Jan. 8, 1996; § 1(11-2-2) of an ordinance adopted Sept. 27, 1999; Ord. No. 02-06, § 1, adopted Oct. 1, 2002; Ord. No. 02-07, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 14, 2002; Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 2003. 
Cross reference- Unsafe and dilapidated buildings, § 16-71 et seq. 
State Law reference- Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 34-81. - Acts constituting nuisances designated. 
(a)  A "nuisance" is anything that works hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinarily reasonable person. 
(b)  The following conditions, among others, may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, brush, vegetation, or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, or any other objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter upon a premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. For the purpose of this article, "weeds" means any brush, grass, vegetation, or any plant that is not regularly cultivated, that exceeds a height of ten inches; provided, however, that weeds shall not include plants in a maintained wildflower garden. Any plant that is not regularly cultivated exceeding ten inches in height shall be presumed to be a weed. "Regularly cultivated" means any plant which is routinely cared for by any person to foster its growth, including ornamental grasses, bushes, and trees; 
(3)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(4)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(5)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(6)  Loud or unnecessary noises as defined in section 34-121 et seq.; 
(7)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(8)  Any unsafe or unhealthful premises as defined in section 16-72 et seq.; 
(9)  Unused or inoperable appliances of any size or type, including, but not limited to, iceboxes, refrigerators, washers, dryers, water heaters, televisions, stereos, or any parts thereof; 
(10)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; 
(11)  Junked or abandoned motor vehicles as defined in section 34-150 et seq.; 
(12)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(13)  Toilets or sanitary facilities, plumbing, or sewers in bad repair; and 
(14)  Violation of the Jonesboro Social Hosting Ordinance, as set forth in section 6-211 et seq. 
(15)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 2, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2015-002, § 1, 4-13-2015) 
Sec. 34-82. - Abatement of nuisances-Municipal court authority. 
    The city municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health, safety or welfare. Any person who pleads guilty, nolo contendere, or is convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 34-86 or such other general law as may be enacted in the future to provide for punishment and penalties that may be imposed by the municipal courts of the state. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-83. - Complaints of nuisance-Investigation and abatement order. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the code enforcement officer who shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal court, after a ten-day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and, upon finding that a nuisance does exist, shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the court shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)  Animal control officers, license and building inspectors, the city police department, and the Clayton County Sheriff may also receive complaints, investigate the same, and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-84. - Abatement by city-Billing for costs. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the court, that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the appropriate officials directing the nuisance to be abated. In such case, the appropriate officials shall keep a record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues, and these shall become a lien against the property and the same shall be filed of record with the office of the clerk of superior court. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the police department as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-85. - Summary abatement authorized when. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the mayor and city council from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-86. - Penalties for violation. 
    Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. Anyone committing a nuisance shall be guilty of a petty offense and, upon conviction, punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment for no more than six months, or a combination thereof. In addition to the fine and/or jail sentence, the judge may impose community service and require that the defendant abate or cure the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 2, 8-9-2004) 
Secs. 34-87-34-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

Sec. 34-121. - Loud and unnecessary noises; enumeration; applicability of section provisions. 
(a)  The creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the city is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity and duration, as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in the disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is prohibited. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises, and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  The blowing of locomotive whistles within the corporate limits of the city after 10:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m. and the ringing of locomotive bells while the engines are standing still, except in case of giving necessary warning signals in conformity with all laws of the state or ordinances of the city, and then only to the extent necessary. When necessary to give communication signals, such signals shall be by lights or ringing of the bell only, or by such means as will not disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(2)  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(3)  The playing of any radio, television, phonograph or any musical instrument in such manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or any other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(6)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair or so loaded in such manner as to cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(7)  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city officials. 
(8)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(c)  None of the terms of prohibition of this section shall be applied to or enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the city, county or the state during the night, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-18) 
Sec. 34-122. - Sound trucks and sound-amplifying devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated in the city any sound-amplifying devices or equipment, the sound of which may be heard outside an enclosed building for any purpose whatever, whether the devices or equipment are stationary or operated from a vehicle, unless a permit has been obtained from the city council to do so. 
(b)  If any person should be granted a permit, in accordance with this section and shall violate the terms and conditions of such permit, the mayor is hereby authorized to revoke the permit, and the person shall be guilty of violation of the provisions of this section, and subject to the penalties provided by section 1-12. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-19) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
Sec. 34-123. - Noisy outdoor amusements; hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of or any person employed at any place where an outdoor amusement is operated, to operate or conduct such business between the hours from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of each day, whereby noise emitting therefrom shall disturb the peace and quiet of inhabitants or occupants of any occupied building. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-20) 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10. 
Secs. 34-124-34-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV.5. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 

Sec. 34-140. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of this article to control and reduce the mosquito population in the City of Jonesboro by removing, draining, treating, altering, or otherwise eliminating all breeding sources for mosquitoes. The city shall establish an effective program of mosquito control including, but not limited to, elimination of or treatment of breeding sources for mosquitoes, elimination of identified mosquito populations, and alleviation of all other such conditions found to be conducive to the reproduction or continued existence of mosquitoes. This shall be accomplished through the processes of education and public information, conference, conciliation, persuasion, and these having failed, by administrative and judicial proceedings for the explicit purpose of controlling the breeding of mosquitoes, the presence of which constitute a danger to the public health, impair the comfort and convenience of the residents, and jeopardize the enjoyment of life and property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-19, § 1, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-141. - Definitions. 
    [As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings:] 
    Artificial container means any bucket, barrel, tire, bottle, tub, tank, gutter, bird bath, swimming pool, ornamental pond, flower pot, jar, retention pond, or any other such manmade items capable of collecting water. 
    Breeding source means any area capable of sustaining the reproduction of mosquitoes. 
    City council means the Jonesboro City Council. 
    Director means the person designated by the city council to administer and enforce this article or his/her authorized designee. 
    Evidence of mosquito breeding means the natural presence of mosquito larva, pupa, or their remains. 
    Insecticide means a chemical agent which kills or prevents the reproduction of insects. 
    Larva means the immature, fully aquatic stage of mosquito development in which the insect appears as a small, wingless, worm-like form. 
    Larvicide means a chemical agent which kills or prevents the reproduction of mosquito larvae. 
    Mosquito means a small, long-legged, two-winged insect of the family Culicidae, in which the female of the species is distinguished by a long proboscis for sucking blood. 
    Occupant means the person who has the use of or occupies any building or any part thereof, or who has the use or possession, actual or constructive, of the premises whether the owner or tenant. In the case of vacant buildings or vacant portions of a building, or in case of occupancy in whole or in part by the owner, the owner shall be deemed to be and shall have the responsibilities of an occupant of such building. 
    Owner means the person owning the building or premises. 
    Person means individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, public or private institutions, municipalities, political subdivisions of the state, governmental agencies, or public or private corporations. 
    Premises means a parcel of real property, including all buildings and structures located thereon. 
    Pupa means the immature, fully aquatic stage of mosquito development immediately following the larval stage and preceding the adult form in which the insect appears as a small, wingless, worm-like shape with a greatly enlarged head. 
(Ord. No. 04-19, § 1, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-142. - General provisions. 
    All premises within the city shall be maintained in such a manner as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes on the premises. Artificial containers, ditches, streams, flooded areas, retention ponds, and all other such sources of standing water or other liquid where mosquitoes are breeding, must be removed, drained, treated, altered, maintained, or otherwise eliminated by the person occupying the premises or, in the absence of an occupant, by the owner, in such a manner as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes. Where there is evidence of mosquito breeding, effective methods of eliminating and treating mosquito breeding sources shall be instigated by the person occupying the premises, or in the absence of an occupant, by the owner, within 48 hours after discovering or being informed of the evidence of mosquito breeding on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 04-19, § 1, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-143. - Methods of eliminating and treating mosquito breeding sources. 
    Breeding sources for mosquitoes shall be eliminated or treated by one or more of the following methods as shall be approved by the director. 
(1)  Draining, removing, or otherwise eliminating the breeding source. 
(2)  Completely emptying the breeding source of all water at least every seven days, or as approved by the director. Where an artificial container is a water basin (e.g. swimming pool) designed to hold water, such containers shall be maintained or altered to prevent mosquito breeding. 
(3)  Treating the breeding source with an effective insecticide and/or larvicide approved by the director. 
(4)  Completely emptying artificial containers of all liquid and storing in an enclosed structure which is constructed in such a manner as to prevent the permanent collection of liquid in said containers. 
(5)  Maintain all natural or manmade storm or surface water drain ways in a manner as to prevent the ponding of water sufficient to provide breeding for mosquitoes. 
(6)  Other methods proven to be effective in controlling mosquitoes and as approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 04-19, § 1, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-144. - Right of entry-Inspection. 
    The director shall have the right of entry upon any premises where entry is necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-19, § 1, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-145. - Penalties and remedies. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, punished by a fine not to exceed ($1,000.00). 
(b)  The city may bring a civil proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article in accordance with the general nuisance law of the state. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this article and is convicted shall be liable to the city of all costs and fees incurred by it in the enforcement of this article including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees. The city shall be entitled to a lien against the property of the violator that was the subject of the enforcement proceedings for its costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 04-19, § 1, 8-9-2004) 
Secs. 34-146-34-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 2014, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 34-200-34-228, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 04-06, § 2, adopted Mar. 8, 2004. 

DIVISION 1. - TITLE, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 34-200. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the City of Jonesboro's "Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-201. - Findings of fact. 
    It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Jonesboro are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(3)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: (1) Protect human life and health; (2) Minimize damage to private property; (3) Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and (4) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-1 to -8, have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Jonesboro does ordain this ordinance and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction provisions for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. 
    It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-201.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-202. - Applicability. 
    This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Jonesboro. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. - 34-203. Designation of Ordinance Administrator. 
    The community development director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-204. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-Conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics-Flood area maps and studies. 
    For the purposes of defining and determining "areas of special flood hazard," "areas of future-conditions flood hazard," "areas of shallow flooding," "base flood elevations," "floodplains," "floodways," "future-conditions flood elevations," "future-conditions floodplains," potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this article, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated May 1983, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for the City of Jonesboro are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City of Jonesboro; and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology and approved by the City of Jonesboro. 
(3)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City of Jonesboro; and 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology approved by the City of Jonesboro. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the City Hall of the City of Jonesboro. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-205. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
    This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-206. - Severability. 
    If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-207. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Jonesboro or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 34-208. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the City of Jonesboro's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
    Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as Zones A, Al-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    Accessory structure or facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
    Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
    Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
    Building has the same meaning as structure. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before June 2, 1987. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of this article. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
    Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
    Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
    Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this ordinance. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate Map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
    New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or the effective date of this article and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of this article. 
    Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the City of Jonesboro to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Repetitive loss means flood related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank), that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes Repetitive Loss. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official. The term does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this article. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 34-209. - Permit application requirements. 
    No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
    Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city clerk a permit application on a form provided by the city clerk for that purpose. 
    No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-210. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
    An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building comers and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 34-220(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in subsection 34-219(5); and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including but not limited to permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article. 
    The approved floodplain management I flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-211. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
    For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the community development director a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
    Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The community development director shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-212. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
    Duties of the community development director shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the community development director shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions in divisions 4 and 5 of this ordinance; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the community development director shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA; 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g. where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the community development director shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this ordinance. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the community development director and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the council of the City of Jonesboro. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
DIVISION 4. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 34-213. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the community development director. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the community development director, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-214. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
    The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the community development director. If floodway data is not available from the community development director, it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-215. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under Section 34-215(a) shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 34-216; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City of Jonesboro using the FEMA community concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-216. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
    An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the community development director prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the community development director. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating PIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-217. - Floodway encroachments. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the City of Jonesboro until an affirmative Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-218. - Maintenance requirements. 
    The property owner shall be responsible tor continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The City of Jonesboro may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
DIVISION 5. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 34-219. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 34-215, 34-216, and 34-217 have been met; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City of Jonesboro to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(9)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(10)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(11)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding; 
(12)  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding; 
(13)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
(14)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
(15)  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this ordinance; and 
(16)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-220. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
    In addition to the requirements in section 34-219, the follow provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 34-215, 34-216, and 34-217 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 34-215, 34-216, and 34-217 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-219(5)a. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-219(5)a. 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal non-residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 34-215, 34-216, and 34-217 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 34-215, 34-216, and 34-217 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-219(5)a. New construction that has met all of the requirements of subsections 34-215, 34-216, and 34-217 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the community development director using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the community development director to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-219(5)a. Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the community development director using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of sections 34-215, 34-216, and 34-217 and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with subsection 34-219(5)a. and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for residential buildings-substantial improvements (subsection 34-220(1)(b)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 34-215, 34-216, and 34-217 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 34-215, 34-216, and 34-217 have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-219(5)a. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height abovgrade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 34-219(7). 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-221. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
    For purposes of this article, the term "adjacent to the future conditions floodplain" includes: all structures and buildings on a property that contains (partially or entirely) an area of special flood hazard and all structures and buildings on a property that shares a common property line with another parcel that contains (partially or entirely) an area of special flood hazard. Buildings and structures adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain shall meet the following: 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-219(5)a. 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-219(5)a. Nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-222. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-Zones). 
    For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the community development director shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
    If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood prone enclosures in accordance with subsection 34-219(5)a. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-223. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-Zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-219(5)a; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the community development director using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-224. - Standards for subdivisions of land. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; and 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with subsection 34-210(2). 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
DIVISION 6. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 34-225. - Variance procedures. 
    The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the community development director. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the community development director. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the community development director shall have the right to appeal such decision to the council of the City of Jonesboro with procedures to be published in writing by the city. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the council of the City of Jonesboro rendered under subsection (2) may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Clayton County by writ of certiorari as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the council of the City of Jonesboro shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(i)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage provided. 
d.  The community development director shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the Council of the City of Jonesboro shall deem necessary for the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the council of the City of Jonesboro may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
DIVISION 7. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT and PENALTIES 

Sec. 34-226. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-227. - Notice of violation. 
    If the City of Jonesboro determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
    The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 34-228. - Penalties. 
    In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Jonesboro shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court of the City of Jonesboro to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-011, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Secs. 34-229-34-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 34-251. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city's separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city's separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city's separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city's separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the municipal boundaries of the city and to all discharges entering the city's storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Responsibility for administration. The authorized enforcement agency shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employment of the agency. 
Sec. 34-252. - Definitions. 
    Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
    Authorized enforcement agency means employees or designees of the city manager designated to enforce this article. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    City's separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city's separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 34-253 of this article. 
    Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city's separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, organization, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; oil and other automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from construction of a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
    Storm drainage system means publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
    Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
    Waters of the United States or waters of the U.S. means: 
(1)  All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; 
(2)  All interstate waters, including interstate "wetlands"; 
(3)  All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, "wetlands", sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters: 
a.  Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes; 
b.  From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or 
c.  Which are used or cold be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce; 
(4)  All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; 
(5)  Tributaries of waters identified in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition; 
(6)  The territorial sea; and 
(7)  Wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in subsections (1) through (6) of this definition. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-253. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city's separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing when performed by a governmental agency or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test; and 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city's separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city's separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the Jonesboro Sanitation Department. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the authorized enforcement agency requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the authorized enforcement agency. 
Sec. 34-254. - Suspension of access to the city's separate storm sewer system 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend the city's separate storm sewer system discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the city's separate storm sewer system or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the city's separate storm sewer system, state waters or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the city's separate storm sewer system in violation of this article may have their city's separate storm sewer system access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its city's separate storm sewer system access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency, city's separate storm sewer system access to premises terminated pursuant to this section. 
Sec. 34-255. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with the provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized enforcement agency prior to allowing discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 34-256. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilities. 
(1)  The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities at reasonable times subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(2)  Facility owners or operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photographing, videotaping, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary and make the monitoring data available to the authorized enforcement agency at the owner or operator's own expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(7)  If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 34-257. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city's separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
    Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within three business days of the phone call or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
    In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
    Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 34-258. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    The authorized enforcement agency will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, state waters or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the city's separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 34-259. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 34-260. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
    In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the authorized enforcement agency is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The authorized enforcement agency is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address, when available, or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator; 
f.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
g.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the authorized enforcement agency by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement of measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the authorized enforcement agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. After abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 15 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Failure to remedy. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the authorized enforcement agency shall deem appropriate, after the authorized enforcement agency has taken one or more of the actions described above, the authorized enforcement agency may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(2)  Injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated, or continues to violate, the provisions of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(3)  Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and authorized by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the appropriate municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 34-261. - Ultimate responsibility. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-2004) 
Secs. 34-262-34-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 34-301. - General provisions. 
(a)  Findings of fact. It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(4)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or "credits". The Georgia Greenspace Program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas which provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; 
(5)  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution; and 
(6)  Therefore, the City of Jonesboro has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-302. - Definitions. 
    [As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings:] 
    Accelerated erosion means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action. 
    Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    City means the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the city and/or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
    Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
    Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
    Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
    Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
    Development means a land development or land development project. 
    Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
    Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
    Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
    Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
    Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
    Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
    Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
    Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
    Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
    Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
    infiltration facility means any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade. 
    Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
    Land development means any land change which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of the vegetation, or any activity which bears soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
    Land owner means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
    Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
    New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
    Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
    Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
    Offset fee means a monetary compensation paid to a local government for failure to meet pollutant load reduction targets. 
    Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
    On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
    Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
    Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the city and/or its designee to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
    Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
    Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
    Project means a land development project. 
    Recharge means the replenishment of underground water reserves. 
    Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
    Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
    Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
    Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
    Stop work order means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
    Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
    Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
    Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
    Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
    Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
    Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
    Stormwater treatment practices (STPs) means measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies. 
    Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
    Water quality volume (WQ v ) means the storage needed to capture and treat 90 percent of the average annual stormwater runoff volume. Numerically (WQ v ) will vary as a function of long term rainfall statistical data. 
    Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-303. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the city and/or its designee. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city and/or its designee to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items (a) and (b) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; 
(4)  Developments that do not disturb more than 1,000 square feet of land, provided they are not part of a larger common development plan; and 
(5)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city and/or its designee. 
When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project as defined in section 34-302, decisions on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current stormwater design manual which is defined in section 34-305 below. This criteria is dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the city and/or its designee. 
Sec. 34-304. - Designation of administrator. 
    The public works director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-305. - Stormwater design manual. 
(a)  The city does hereby adopt and incorporate herein by reference the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volumes 1 and 2, First Edition, 2001, and any amendments thereto. The city and/or its designee will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(b)  The city and/or its designee may furnish additional policy, criteria and information, including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article and may provide such information in the form of a local stormwater design manual. 
(c)  This manual will include a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including the specific design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the city and/or its designee, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-306. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit required. No land owner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Permit application requirements. Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city and/or its designee a permit application on a form provided by the city and/or its designee for that purpose. Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 34-307; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 34-308; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 34-309, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 34-310, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and application review fees in accordance with subsections (c) and (d). 
(c)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city and/or its designee. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection (b) above (two copies of the stormwater management plan and two copies of the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable), and any required review fees. 
(3)  The city and/or its designee shall inform the applicant within 60 business days of receipt of a complete permit application, whether the application, the stormwater management plan and the inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If either the permit application, the stormwater management plan or the inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city and/or its designee shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (3) above and this subsection shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the city and/or its designee that the permit application, the stormwater management plan and the inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city and/or its designee may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The city and/or its designee shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city and/or its designee; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by subsection 34-313(b). 
(d)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any land development application shall be based on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee structure shall be established by the city and/or its designee. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to support local plan review, inspection and program administration, and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(e)  Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the city and/or its designee notifies the permit holder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under permit condition. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-307. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
    Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the land owner or developer shall meet with the city and/or its designee for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
Local watershed plans, local greenspace protection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-308. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 34-311. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(b)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post development stormwater management performance criteria in section 34-311; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 34-311 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 34-311; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the city's ordinance on soil erosion and sedimentation control found at sections 34-31 through 34-80 or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the city and/or its designee, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article. The easement agreement shall be recorded by the city and/or its designee in the land records. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city and/or its designee as provided in section 34-309 below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and nonlocal permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city and/or its designee that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-309. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city and/or its designee requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city and/or its designee, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city and/or its designee prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(c)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include: removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the city and/or its designee, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. 
(e)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city and/or its designee may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 34-314. 
(f)  The city and/or its designee, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-310. - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
    The city and/or its designee may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to insure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus 25 percent. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of "as built plans" and written certification by a registered professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this article. The city and/or its designee will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this article. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development stages can be done at the discretion of the city and/or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-311. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
    The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city and/or its designee are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection. 
a.  Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
1.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
2.  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; and 
3.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
b.  This requirement is waived for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a man-made channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream streambank or channel integrity. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection. 
a.  Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection (2) is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
b.  This requirement is waived for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. 
a.  Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
b.  This requirement may be adjusted or waived for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city and/or its designee before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city and/or its designee may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (1) herein. The applicant may, if approved by the city and/or its designee, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public rights-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land-disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-312. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city and/or its designee which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city and/or its designee that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-313. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. The applicant must notify the city and/or its designee in advance before the commencement of construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city and/or certified by a professional engineer or their designee who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No added work shall proceed until all violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the city and/or its designee. 
(b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city and/or its designee is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-314. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city and/or its designee shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city and/or its designee, may correct the violation as provided in subsection (d). 
Inspection programs by the city and/or its designee may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city and/or its designee to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least 15 years. These records shall be made available to the city and/or its designee during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city and/or its designee, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city and/or its designee may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Sec. 34-315. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city and/or its designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city council and/or its designee by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city and/or its designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city and/or its designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
a.  Stop work order. The city and/or its designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city and/or its designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city and/or its designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city and/or its designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city and/or its designee shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city and/or its designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city and/or its designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city and/or its designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a period of up to 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  Holds on occupation permits. Occupation permits will not be granted until corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the city and/or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2004) 
Secs. 34-316-34-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2, adopted Sept. 19, 2006, set out provisions intended for use as Art. VIII, §§ 34-316-34-331. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. VIII, §§ 34-331-34-346. 

Sec. 34-331. - Findings. 
    Whereas, the City Council of Jonesboro finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-316), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-332. - Purposes. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of Jonesboro for the protection of water resources; and, 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-317), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-333. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by section 34-337 below), lying adjacent to the stream. 
    Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
    Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
    Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the City of Jonesboro required for undertaking any land development activity. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Protection area, or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
    Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
    Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 34-337 extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
    Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city clerk may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
    Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
    Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
    Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-318), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-334. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 34-333 herein. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-319), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-335. - Grandfather provisions. 
    This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. 
(2)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-320), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-336. - Exemptions 
    The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (1), above. 
(3)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
(4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city clerk on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city clerk to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land-disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
After the effective date of this article, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to subsection 34-338(2) below. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-321), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-337. - Buffer and setback requirements. 
    All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-322), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-338. - Variance procedures. 
    Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this article, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the city clerk finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the City Council of the City of Jonesboro may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the City Council of the City of Jonesboro shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the city council. The City of Jonesboro shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within City of Jonesboro. The City of Jonesboro shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and, 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and, 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-323), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-339. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
    This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-324), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-340. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
    Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and, 
(3)  Any other documentation that the city clerk may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-325), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-341. - Responsibility. 
    Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the City of Jonesboro, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-326), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-342. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city clerk may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city clerk in making such inspections. The city clerk shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-327), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-343. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-328), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-344. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the City of Jonesboro determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-329), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-345. - Penalties. 
    In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city clerk shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city clerk may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city clerk may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city clerk may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city clerk may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city clerk may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the city clerk shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city clerk has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city clerk may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city clerk may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in The municipal court of Jonesboro to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-330), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-346. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of city clerk may appeal in writing within ten days after the issuance of such decision or order to the independent hearing officer of the City of Jonesboro and shall be entitled to a hearing before the independent hearing officer of the City of Jonesboro within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city clerk, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Clayton County. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2(34-331), 9-19-2006) 
Secs. 34-347-34-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-02, adopted March 13, 2006, set out provisions intended for use as Art. V, §§ 34-250-34-261. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, these provisions have been redesignated as Art. IX, §§ 34-361-34-372, at the direction of the city. 

Sec. 34-361. - Findings. 
    The Jonesboro City Council makes the following findings: 
(1)  Stormwater management is needed throughout the City of Jonesboro. While specific service and system demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the City of Jonesboro is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(2)  Addressing the stormwater management needs in the City of Jonesboro is essential to protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. Provision of stormwater management programs and systems results in both service and benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of the City of Jonesboro in a variety of ways. 
(3)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater runoff can result in flooding, streambank and ditch erosion, property damage and degradation of water quality, aquatic habitat and biological communities. Failure to manage these impacts can put the City of Jonesboro's ability to receive state and federal grants and permits at risk. 
(4)  The volume and quantity of stormwater generated by a development has been proven to be most closely associated with the amount of impervious surface on the property, therefore, the square footage of impervious surface is the most appropriate factor for calculating stormwater utility fees. 
(5)  Clayton County, Forest Park, Jonesboro, Lake City, Lovejoy, Morrow, and Riverdale, presently own and operate stormwater management systems which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by these entities, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the entities to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems in the City of Jonesboro in concert with the management of other water resources in the county. In order to do so, there must be adequate and stable funding for the City of Jonesboro's stormwater management program's operating needs and capital. 
(6)  The feasibility report submitted to the county, cities, and Clayton County Water Authority (CCWA) properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the stormwater utility. 
(7)  As a result, the county's governing authority finds that a utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering storm water management services and the county's governing authority finds that a utility fee provides the most practical and appropriate means of funding storm water management services in the City of Jonesboro. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 34-250, 3-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-362. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this article. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in this Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
    Credit shall mean a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. The basis of such credits, if granted, will be defined by a specific written agreement at the determination of the stormwater official in accordance with the stormwater utility. 
    Customer shall mean all persons or entities to whom the stormwater service charge is billed. 
    Detached dwelling unit shall mean developed land containing one structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, or small storage buildings, or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional impervious areas such as parking spaces, playgrounds, or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar non-residential uses. Detached dwelling unit shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for non-residential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple dwelling unit residential properties. 
    Developed land means real property which has been altered from its "natural" state by addition of any improvements, such as grading, paving, compaction, construction of structures or impervious surfaces greater than 200 square feet, or drainage works so that hydrologic response of the property is changed from that which would occur in the natural undeveloped conditions. For new construction, property shall be considered developed pursuant to this article upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued. 
    Hydrologic response of a property is the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area; the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property; antecedent moisture conditions; and groundwater conditions on a property. 
    Impervious surfaces shall mean those areas, which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. The following types of surfaces will be considered "impervious surfaces" for purposes of the stormwater utility: the projected area of buildings; asphalt-, concrete-, brick-, or stone-paved areas; improved vehicular drives and parking areas; compacted gravel and soil surfaces; fabric or plastic coverings; and other surfaces that prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff or that change the hydrologic response of the property that existed prior to development. 
    Multi-family residential shall mean developed land where more than one attached or detached residential dwelling units are located, including, but not limited to apartment houses, condominiums, townhomes, attached single-family homes, boarding houses, group homes, hotels and motels, retirement centers, and other structures in which more than one family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside. 
    Service charges shall mean the stormwater management service charges applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by CCWA stormwater utility. The charge shall be used to fund the City of Jonesboro stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and systems. Service charges are based on measurable parameters that influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to the owners of particular properties for services or facilities uniquely related to stormwater management of that property, including but not limited to charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced level of stormwater services above those normally provided by CCWA. 
    Single family residential shall mean a developed lot containing one dwelling structure with its principal use being residential. 
    Stormwater development guidelines are those guidelines established by CCWA which specify approved design criteria, construction materials and construction methods for components of the stormwater management system. 
    Stormwater management system means any one or more of the various devices used in the collection, treatment, or conveyance of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including all manmade structures or natural watercourse for the conveyance or transportation of runoff, such as: detention areas, lakes, berms, swales, improved watercourses, open channels, streams, culverts, pipes, catch basins inlets; collection, or drainage. 
    Stormwater official is the CCWA General Manager or his/her appointee that has direct responsibility for the management of the CCWA stormwater utility. 
    Stormwater unit (SU) shall mean the unit of measure which provides the basis for comparing the runoff generated by customer's developed land with that generated by another's. A SU shall be the average impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of single-family residential lots in the City of Jonesboro. A stormwater unit has been determined through engineering and analysis to be 2,950 square feet of impervious surface. This unit will be used to determine and compute the service charge for all developed land served by the CCWA stormwater utility. 
    Stormwater utility guidebook shall mean the document that defines the basis for the stormwater utility, policies and procedures for operating the utility, and other necessary information determined to help document how the utility was developed and how it is operated. 
    Undeveloped land is land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures in excess of 200 square feet which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 34-251, 3-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-363. - Establishment of a utility. 
(a)  The City of Jonesboro hereby consents to the establishment of a county-wide stormwater utility (the "stormwater utility") by the CCWA which shall be responsible for stormwater management county-wide, and shall provide for, the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management systems. Specific areas of regulation and maintenance are established in the Stormwater Utility Guidebook so long as they are not in conflict with the terms of this article or that certain intergovernmental agreement dated, as amended from time to time, between CCWA and the City of Jonesboro. 
(b)  Pursuant to the terms of this article and that certain intergovernmental agreement, as amended from time to time, between CCWA and the City of Jonesboro, the CCWA shall carry out and perform on behalf of the City of Jonesboro, all of the City of Jonesboro's duties and responsibilities with respect to stormwater management services, enforcement, and systems heretofore owned and operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 34-252, 3-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-364. - Scope of responsibility for the stormwater utility. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall monitor the design, operation, maintenance, inspection, construction, and use of all stormwater management systems in the county. The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the design and construction of public stormwater facilities owned by the county and shall inspect, operate, and maintain them as prescribed herein. The stormwater utility shall provide services which relate to the: 
  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the City of Jonesboro; 
  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing city- or county-owned stormwater management systems; 
  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
  Maintenance and/or improvement of water quality in waterways throughout the City of Jonesboro. 
  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems; and 
  Complying with the federal and state regulations related to stormwater management including the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District (MNGWPD) watershed management requirements. 
  Education of the public regarding stormwater issues. 
The stormwater utility shall not provide stormwater services related to Erosion and Sedimentation Control (E&SC). 
(b)  The stormwater utility shall be responsible for plan approval and construction inspection of both private stormwater systems and public stormwater systems not owned by the county. Design and construction of public or private stormwater management facilities will be governed by the CCWA's Stormwater Development Guidelines which specify design criteria, construction materials and construction methods. The CCWA Stormwater Development Guidelines will supersede any previously adopted stormwater design or construction guidelines. Additionally, the stormwater utility may accept the responsibility for the operation and maintenance of private stormwater systems only when such services have been agreed to, contracted for, and approved by the governing authority of the utility. 
(c)  The stormwater utility shall provide for inspection of private stormwater systems to ascertain that the stormwater systems are functioning as designed and approved. The MNGWPD post-development stormwater ordinance has been adopted by Clayton County, Forest Park, Jonesboro, Morrow, Lake City, Lovejoy, and Riverdale. Property owners who fail to maintain their stormwater systems will be notified of the violation. If within 30 days (or 24 hours if there is an immediate danger to public safety), no actions are taken, the CCWA may enter the property and correct the failure. The cost for the repair work may be a charge on the customer's water, sewer and stormwater bill or a lien on the property that may be placed on the tax bill. 
(d)  The CCWA owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  Within public road rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)  On public land which is owned by the county, cities, or other governmental entity, and to which CCWA has agreements for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system; 
(3)  Operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of stormwater management systems which are located on private or public property not owned by the county or cities, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to CCWA for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management systems, shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the laws of the state and the United States; and 
(4)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the county or cities. CCWA has expressly reserved the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the CCWA, its directors, and employees arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(e)  The stormwater utility shall provide for effective management of a uniform stormwater plan and program throughout the City of Jonesboro and provide compliance with the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer NPDES Permit issued to each jurisdiction including but not limited to the following components: 
  Public education and outreach on stormwater issues; 
  Public involvement and participation; 
  Illicit discharge detection and elimination; 
  Post-construction stormwater management; 
  Pollution prevention; 
  Floodplain management; 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 34-253, 3-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-365. - Stormwater service charges authorized. 
    The CCWA is authorized to impose a service charge on each customer of the stormwater system, provided that such charge is closely associated with the amount of impervious surface associated with a particular property for which the service charge is imposed. The stormwater utility guidebook shall provide for the rate structure which shall determine overall charges for properties served by the stormwater utility, based in part on the number of stormwater units each property is determined to consist of. The stormwater service charge and rate structure may be amended from time to time by official action of the CCWA Board of Directors. The CCWA shall review the stormwater service charge and rate structure on an annual basis and any rate changes will be approved by the CCWA Board of Directors. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 34-254, 3-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-366. - Effective date of stormwater service charges. 
    The CCWA may begin collecting the stormwater service charge on or after September 1, 2006 and but shall bill more frequently than monthly thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 34-255, 3-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-367. - Exemptions. 
    The following properties are exempt from stormwater utility fees: 
(1)  Undeveloped land; 
(2)  All public road rights of way; and 
(3)  Railroad rights of way (tracks). However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 34-256, 3-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-368. - Credits. 
(a)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to CCWAs standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities or to private stormwater management systems which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems. 
(b)  Property owners of developed land may receive a stormwater service charge credit. The specific credits will be determined based on the guidelines in the stormwater utility guidebook. Credits for structural controls will be based on best management practices performance as defined by the design criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, First Edition, August 2001. 
(c)  Credits may be partial or full credits and property owners can receive a maximum 40 percent credit. 
(d)  Property owners seeking stormwater service charge credits must apply for stormwater service charge credits through completion and submittal to the CCWA of a stormwater service charge credit application. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the CCWA shall review the application and make a determination as to whether the applicable criteria for a credit have been met. All decisions regarding the approval or disapproval of a stormwater credit shall be made within 45 days of the date the completed application was received by CCWA. 
(f)  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on (1) continuing compliance with the CCWAs design and performance standards as may be updated or amended from time to time; and (2) upon continuing provision of the systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. The CCWA may revoke any credit at any time for non-compliance with this article. 
(g)  Stormwater utility fees may be adjusted retroactively to the date that CCWA received the completed application. 
(h)  Applicants receiving credit for a structural control as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual must have an approved maintenance plan on file with CCWA and the applicant's property must have on-site stormwater management and treatment facilities. 
(i)  A customer shall reapply every five years for the credit granted, however, CCWA may terminate the credit if CCWA finds the facility does not comply with the original approved credit application. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 34-257, 3-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-369. - Inspection of private facilities. 
    Continuing compliance with the CCWA's design and performance standards may be verified by CCWA inspection of the systems or facilities upon which the credit is based. No credit shall be given under this article unless the property owner agrees in writing in its application that the CCWA shall have the right for its designated officers, representatives, agents, and employees to enter upon private and public property, upon reasonable notice to the owner of such property, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering testing, on such property in order to assure compliance with the design and performance standards and the applicant's credit application. On-site systems or facilities determined to no longer comply with the county's design and performance standards or the applicant's original credit application shall subject the property owner to revocation of all, or a portion of, stormwater service charge credits based on the CCWA inspectors' estimate of capacity reduction for a period of not less than one year. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 34-258, 3-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-370. - Stormwater service charge, billing, delinquencies and collections. 
    The CCWA is authorized to establish and/or utilize its own policies with respect to the billing and collection of the stormwater utility service charge and the treatment of delinquent accounts. The stormwater utility service charge may be billed separately, or on a customer statement and collected along with other utility services provided by CCWA, at the CCWA's sole discretion. The CCWA is authorized to apply partial payments proportionately among the water, sewer, and stormwater fees charged by the CCWA. The CCWA is authorized to use existing CCWA procedures for shutting off water with respect to non-payment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 34-259, 3-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-371. - Stormwater utility enforcement. 
(a)  Every owner of developed real property located in the City of Jonesboro, and every person who serves as a contractor or developer for the purpose of developing real property located in the City of Jonesboro shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, treat, control and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all City of Jonesboro ordinances and development regulations, and the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. 
(b)  When the stormwater official determines that a public nuisance exists, the stormwater official shall send a notice of violation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or owners of the property described, as their name and address are shown on the latest ad valorem tax records of the county property appraiser. This notice shall be deemed complete and sufficient when so addressed and deposited in the United States mail with proper postage prepaid. The notice of violation shall inform the property owner that a violation of this article exists on the identified property with the description of the public nuisance, that the property owner is responsible for maintaining the identified private storm water system, that the property owner may allow the city access to the property to abate the nuisance at the expense of the property owner, and that formal enforcement action will be taken if the violation is not corrected within the time period indicated on the notice. The stormwater official shall determine a reasonable period of time for correction of the nuisance. In determining a reasonable period of time, the stormwater official shall consider the following: practicality and ease of correction; the owner's ability to correct the violation; the severity of the violation; the nature, extent, and probability of danger to the public, and other relevant factors. 
Notice, as required under this provision, shall not be required: (a) when the stormwater official determines that the public nuisance presents an imminent endangerment to persons or property; (b) when a notice of violation has been sent to the same property owner or owners for the same violation within the previous three months; or (c) when notice by certified mail cannot be effected on the owners of record. 
The notice of violation shall contain substantially the following information and may be in the following form or other appropriate form: notice of violation: name of owner; address of owner; description of property; inspection date; determination made by the stormwater official that the condition on the property is creating adverse conditions so as to constitute a violation of the this article; describe the conditions that caused the property to be in violation and any recommended actions that may be necessary to remedy the nuisance; specify a reasonable time period to proceed and remedy the nuisance; or provide written permission to the city to enter the site and abate the nuisance at owner's expense. Within the reasonable period of time for compliance specified in the notice of violation, the property owner shall either abate the nuisance or file a written request with CCWA for a hearing before the stormwater official to show that the condition alleged in the notice does not exist or that such condition does not constitute a public nuisance in violation of the ordinance. 
(c)  Any failure to meet the obligation set forth in this section shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by any damaged party or the City of Jonesboro in any court of competent jurisdiction. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the CCWA may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner or developer, if any, on a joint and several basis. From the date of the filing of such action, the CCWA shall have lien rights, which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the superior court or city court. CCWA shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the City of Jonesboro, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 34-260, 3-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-372. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the stormwater official within 30 days of the decision that is appealed. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the, total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  The CCWA shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal the CCWA may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(4)  All decisions by the CCWA shall be final. 
(b)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the stormwater official may be appealed by application for writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Clayton County or City Court, filed within 30 days of the date of service of the decision of the chief executive officer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 34-261, 3-13-2006) 
Secs. 34-373-34-375. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL 

Sec. 34-376. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Abandoned or junked motor vehicle is defined as one that is in such a state of disrepair as to be incapable of operating under its own power or to operate safely upon public roads or streets as required by the laws of Georgia, or which does not have a current license plate or tag, or does not meet the requirements of O.C.G.A. Title 40 for operation on public roads. 
(Ord. No. 2007-005, Art. I, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 34-377. - Abandonment of wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative motor vehicle. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, or person in possession of any lot or parcel of land in the city to keep or permit to be kept or stored on said land any wrecked, dismantled, inoperative abandoned or junked motor vehicle, which is not completely enclosed in a building or a carport. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to an automobile stored under car cover made for the vehicle's make and model. Such car cover shall not be transparent. Abandoned or junked vehicles shall be stored behind the front corner of a residence or inside a privacy fence. This exception is limited to two vehicles. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to vehicles stored on premises that are zoned for the operation of an automobile or other repair service, or storage, lawfully zoned and permitted, and shall have been issued a business license for such operation by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-005, Art. I, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 34-378. - Cleanliness of property; generally. 
    Every owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, or person in possession of any lot or parcel of land in the city is required to keep all land, within 100 feet of all improved structures, cleared of any grass, weed, brush, or any vegetation exceeding ten inches that is normally planted for land cover or erosion control. 
(Ord. No. 2007-005, Art. I, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 34-379. - Notice. 
(a)  In the event of a violation of this article, a warning may be issued in the form of mail, tacked to the property, or by phone stating that the owner, tenant, owner's agent or property manager of the property has five days to be in compliance or a citation will be issued with a mandatory court appearance. 
(b)  If property is not brought into compliance within five days of the warning, a citation shall be issued. 
(c)  A second violation of section 34-377 within a 12-month period shall result in an automatic citation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-005, Art. I, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 34-380. - Penalties for violation. 
    Upon a conviction of violation of this article, the owner, tenant, owner's agent or property manager may be fined a maximum of $1,000.00 per violation; for continuous violation, each day of the violation shall constitute shall constitute a separate and distinct punishable violation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-005, Art. I, 12-10-2007) 
Secs. 34-381-34-400. - Reserved. 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-006, § 1, adopted June 14, 2010, repealed Ch. 38, Arts. I, II, §§ 38-1, 38-36-38-39, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 38 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 16; civil emergencies, ch. 26; turning on fire hydrants, § 46-1. 
State Law reference- Impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; false fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Sprinkler Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-11-1 et seq.; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; local fire safety standards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; following fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1). 

Sec. 38-1. - Adoption of Clayton County Fire Ordinance. 
    Chapter 42, Fire Prevention and Protection, of the Code of Ordinances of Clayton County, as may be amended from time to time by the Clayton County Board of Commissioners, is hereby adopted by reference thereto and incorporated herein, as the official fire prevention and protection code of the city. A copy of Chapter 42 of the Code of Ordinances of Clayton County shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Jonesboro. 
(Ord. No. 2010-006, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Chapter 42 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 16; environment, ch. 34; planning, ch. 50; signs, ch. 52; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 86; HD historic district, § 86-164. 
State Law reference- Georgia Register of Historic Places, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-50.2; fire safety requirements for historic buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13; grants to municipal corporations for repairs on facilities of historical value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1; Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.; historic preservation commissions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24; historic landmark or district designation procedure, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26; certificates of appropriateness, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28; certification as rehabilitated historic property for purposes of preferential assessment, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.2; landmark historic property for purposes of ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.3; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 42-26. - Purpose and intent. 
    The mayor and council of the city intend for this article to protect the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city and believe the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people. 
    The mayor and council intend for this article to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business, as well as to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law. 
    Further, the mayor and council intend for the article to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and enable the city to participate in federal or state programs to do the same. 
    The mayor and council believe this article to be a reasonable method of regulation for the purpose of satisfying the legitimate purposes stated above. Therefore, the mayor and council hereby adopt this article to establish a uniform procedure for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the article. 
(Ord. No. 04-01, §§ 3, 4, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 42-27. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.] 
    Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
    Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the forgoing. 
    Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
    Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the city council and county board of commissioners as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 42-29(b) herein. 
    Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 42-29(c) herein. 
    Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
    Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
    Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
    Structure means a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. No. 04-01, §§ 3, 4, 1-12-2004) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-28. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "historic preservation commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within city government. The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(c)  Commission members; number, appointment, terms and compensation. 
(1)  The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of the city, and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
(2)  To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions. 
(3)  Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. 
(4)  Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(5)  Members are authorized to serve on more than one board, commission or authority. 
(6)  The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
a.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
b.  Recommend to the city council, specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
c.  Review application for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
d.  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
e.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
f.  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10.1 through 44-10.5); 
g.  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located with the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
h.  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, the city council or commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
i.  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
j.  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties of historic districts designated; 
k.  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city's historic preservation program; 
l.  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
m.  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate county/city without prior consent; 
n.  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
o.  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consents of the city council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(d)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(e)  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statutes and in the City Charter. 
(f)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(g)  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission resolution, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. No. 04-01, §§ 3, 4, 1-12-2004; Ord. No. 2017-002 , § 1, 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 42-29. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation. The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, noncontributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character of special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Non-contributing (does not contribute to the district as provided for in B.1.) 
(c)  Designation of a historic property. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, county or the city, or the State of Georgia for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to county, city, State of Georgia, or the region; or 
d.  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts of property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts, a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties, a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district and describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Required that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning maps of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Require public hearings. The commission and the city council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. 
Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principle newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention to the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
a.  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report required in subsection (a)(3) herein, to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
b.  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
c.  City council actions on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
d.  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the commission/city council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States mail shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
e.  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
f.  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to suspend the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. No. 04-01, §§ 3, 4, 1-12-2004; Ord. No. 2017-002 , § 2, 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 42-30. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  Commission action. The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(2)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features, and to the secretary of interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings. 
b.  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, trees judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree or object. 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse. 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the receipt of a complete and conforming application filed by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he/she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and stoppage order of all work. 
(2)  The commission and the city council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(l)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(m)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city manager/city planning director within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection (h)(1) herein or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action under subsection (h)(2) herein. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the city of ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 04-01, §§ 3, 4, 1-12-2004; Ord. No. 2017-002 , § 3, 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 42-31. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Certificate of appropriateness not required for ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect. 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a buildings structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which needs to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 42-32 herein. At the direction of the city council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning costs. Nothing in this article shall be constructed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city/county building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 04-01, §§ 3, 4, 1-12-2004; Ord. No. 2017-002 , § 4, 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 42-32. - Penalty provisions. 
    Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-01, §§ 3, 4, 1-12-2004) 
Chapter 44 - LAND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; signs, ch. 52; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Jonesboro Land Development Regulations". 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-3.1, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-2. - Jurisdiction. 
    Unless this chapter clearly indicates otherwise, these regulations shall apply within the city limits of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-3.2, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-3. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Whenever the regulations of this chapter require or impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other ordinance, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any state or federal statute requires more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-3.3, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-4. - Validity and severability. 
    Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-3.4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-5. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed to the extent necessary to give the regulations in this chapter full force and effect, except that any ordinances or resolutions repealed by this provision shall not limit or impair the city's authority to enforce such ordinances or resolutions to the extent that violations thereof occurred prior to repeal. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-3.5, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-6. - Codification. 
    It is the intention of the mayor and council, and it is hereby resolved that the provisions of these regulations shall become and be made a part of this Code of Ordinances of the City of Jonesboro, and the sections of these regulations may be renumbered or reorganized to accomplish such intention. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-3.6, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 44-7-44-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION, APPEALS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 44-21. - Administration and interpretation. 
    It shall be the duty of the duly appointed city manager to administer and interpret these regulations. To this end, the city manager is authorized to prepare administrative procedures, guidelines, application forms, to tend to other administrative details not inconsistent with the provisions of these regulations, and to implement the provisions of these regulations. The city manager may delegate administrative functions, powers and duties assigned by these regulations to other staff as may be appropriate, without the need to reflect such delegation by formal action. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-4.1, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-22. - Appeal of an administrative decision or interpretation. 
    Any person who alleges that there has been an error by the city manager in administration or interpretation of these regulations shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city manager to the mayor and council. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-4.2, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-23. - Land use permit required. 
    Unless specifically exempted or otherwise provided by these regulations, no building, sign, or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a land use permit issued by the city manager. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building, structure, land, water, or premises, without a land use permit for such use or occupancy. Unless specifically exempted or otherwise provided by these regulations, no land use activity including land disturbance shall be initiated without a land use permit issued by the city manager, and except in conformity with said land use permit. It shall be unlawful to erect, move, add to, structurally alter any building or structure, use or occupy or permit the use of any occupancy of any building, structure, land, water, or premises, or initiate any land use activity that is in violation of an approved land use permit. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-4.3, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-24. - Plans prepared by licensed professional. 
    Unless specifically exempted or otherwise provided by these regulations, all plans submitted to the City of Jonesboro must be prepared and sealed by the appropriate licensed professional in the State of Georgia. Therefore, all surveys must be sealed by a licensed surveyor, all engineering plans such as site, grading and drainage, erosion control, utility, as well as hydrologic studies must be sealed by a licensed professional engineer, all landscape plans must be sealed by a licensed landscape architect, and all building plans for buildings greater than 3,000 square feet or if the use is daycare, educational, institutional, or as determined by the city manager must be sealed by a licensed architect. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-4.4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-25. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the duly appointed city manager to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the city attorney any violations or lack of compliance therewith. The city manager may delegate enforcement functions, powers, and duties assigned by these regulations to other staff as may be appropriate, without the need to reflect such delegation by formal action. 
(1)  Refusal of permits or permissions. The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to deny and withhold permits or permissions on any new project or application pursuant to these regulations or other ordinances of the city where the applicant, applicant's business, or agent has failed or refused to comply with these regulations. 
(2)  Stop work order. The city manager is hereby authorized to issue written "stop work" and "cease and desist" orders for any activity that fails to comply with the provisions of these regulations. Such "stop work" or "cease and desist" orders may be lifted at such time as the city manager is satisfied that a good faith effort is being made to comply with applicable provisions of these regulations. Nothing shall prevent the city manager from reissuing "stop work" and "cease and desist" orders where warranted. 
(3)  Injunction. If any land is used, or building, structure, or other activity is established or maintained in violation of these regulations, the city manager is authorized to and may institute, in addition to other remedies, an injunction or undertake other appropriate action to cause the violation to cease or to be corrected. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-4.5, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-26. - Complaints. 
    Whenever a violation of these regulations occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall state clearly and fully the causes and bases of the complaint and shall be filed with the city manager. The city manager shall record properly such complaint, investigate, and take action thereon as may be appropriate to enforce these regulations. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-4.6, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-27. - Penalties for violation of regulations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of the land development regulations shall have all current permits and certificates of occupancy revoked and will not be granted any additional permits or certificates of occupancy on any other project until all violations are remedied. In addition, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation may be levied by the city. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-0-4.7, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 44-28-44-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-41. - Erosion and sedimentation control. 
    Erosion control shall be as referenced in § 34-31 et seq., the erosion and sedimentation control ordinance as most recently amended and adopted. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-2.1, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 44-42-44-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WETLANDS 

Sec. 44-51. - Title. 
    These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Wetlands Protection Regulations." 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-1.1, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-52. - Purpose and intent. 
    Wetlands are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the well being of communities in the State of Georgia. Nationally, a considerable number of wetlands have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other activities. Without additional regulation, piecemeal or cumulative losses of wetlands will continue to occur over time. Therefore, it is in the interest of public safety and general welfare to avoid damage or destruction to wetlands. The purpose of these regulations is to promote wetlands protection by adopting a generalized wetlands map; provide for the withholding of land use and building permits in areas designated as wetlands until a jurisdictional wetland determination is completed; and establish permitted and prohibited land uses within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map, current edition. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-1.2, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-53. - Definitions. 
    Generalized wetlands map: A map of wetlands provided in any U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) map showing wetlands within the local jurisdiction, current edition. 
    Jurisdictional wetland: An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
    Jurisdictional wetland determination: A delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1344, as amended. 
    Regulated activity: Any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
    Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-1.3, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-54. - Adoption of generalized wetlands map by reference. 
    The generalized wetlands map, as defined by these regulations, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference, and hereby made a part of these regulations as if fully set forth herein. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-1.4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-55. - Applicability. 
    These regulations shall apply to all lands within the City of Jonesboro that are shown on the generalized wetlands map, as defined by these regulations, as wetlands. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-1.5, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-56. - Permit required. 
    No land use permit or building permit shall be issued by the city manager for a land use, building, structure, or manufactured home, nor shall any regulated activity as defined by these regulations commence, unless the land use, building, structure, manufactured home or regulated activity conforms to the requirements of these regulations. Prior to a land use permit or building permit being issued, the city manager shall require a site plan or subdivision plat in sufficient detail to review the proposed development for compliance with the provisions of these regulations. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-1.6, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-57. - Jurisdictional wetland determination required. 
    If an area proposed for development is located within 25 feet of a wetland as shown on the generalized wetlands map, as determined by the city manager, no local land use permit or building permit on said wetland shall be issued until a jurisdictional wetland determination has been completed and either of the following occur: 
(1)  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that there are jurisdictional wetlands present on the proposed development site, a Section 404 permit is required, and either a Section 404 permit or a letter of permission is issued by the Corps for the proposed development; or, 
(2)  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that jurisdictional wetlands are not present on the proposed development site, and no Section 404 permit or letter of permission is required. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-1.7, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-58. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be allowed as of right within an area shown as a wetland on the generalized wetlands map, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual Section 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural Best Management Practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-1.8, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-59. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses are prohibited within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-1.9, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 44-60-44-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GRADING 

Sec. 44-81. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of these regulations are to limit grading to the minimum amount necessary; establish minimum requirements for grading work; guard against land instability; prevent the unnecessary removal of vegetation; protect the quality of wetlands and watercourses from increased sedimentation; and, to preserve the aesthetic quality of the natural terrain. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-3.1, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-82. - Definitions. 
    Cut: The removal of naturally occurring earth materials by mechanical means. 
    Development: Any project involving construction of streets, utilities, buildings or other improvements made to property to accommodate specific uses such as dwellings, office buildings, warehouses, an apartment complex, a store or shopping center; also any alteration to improved or unimproved property, including, but not limited to, construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, dredging, excavation, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, permanent storage of materials or other land disturbance; and any use or extension of a use of land; also the act of constructing or implementing a land development project, including the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
    Elevation: The vertical height or heights above a datum plane which for purposes of these regulations shall be the mean sea level datum of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey of 1929 or other customarily accepted source. 
    Existing grade: The elevation of the ground surface at any given point prior to cutting or filling. 
    Fill: The deposit of soil, rock or other material by man. 
    Finished grade: The elevation of the ground surface at any given point after cutting or filling. 
    Grading: Any cutting, or filling or combination thereof and includes the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Natural drainage: Channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes. 
    Slope: An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-3.2, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-83. - Grading permit required. 
    A grading permit shall be required for all grading activities for any site if the combined volume of excavation, fill, dredging, or other movement of earth materials is more than 50 cubic yards unless specifically exempted by these regulations. No grading as specified in this section shall take place until grading plans have been submitted to, approved by, and a grading permit issued by the city manager. At the applicant's option, where there will be construction or placement of a building following grading activities, the grading approval and permit may be a component of any required land use permit or building permit. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-3.3, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-84. - Exemptions. 
    The following grading activities shall be exempt from the requirement to file grading plans and received a grading permit. 
(1)  Excavations and filling of cemetery graves. 
(2)  Excavations for exploratory investigations by soil scientists, engineering geologists, and the like. 
(3)  Grading or filling performed exclusively for agricultural activities in fields such as the planting of crops or the raising of livestock, but not including the construction of any building or structure. 
(4)  Operation of surface mines and other activities involving the extraction of mineral and earth materials subject to the regulations and under a permit of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(5)  Sanitary landfills or other landfills subject to the regulations and under a permit of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(6)  Stockpiling and handling of earth material when the earth material is consumed or produced in a process which is the principal use of the site. 
(7)  On-site work required for construction, repair, repaving, replacement or reconstruction of an existing road, street or utility installation in a public right-of-way. 
(8)  Trenching and backfilling for the installation, reconstruction or repair of utilities on property other than a public right-of-way. 
(9)  Underground storage tank removal and replacement that is subject to regulation by a state or federal agency. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-3.4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-85. - Specifications for grading plans. 
    An application for a grading permit or approval shall be made to the city manager. The grading plans shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered civil engineer for all applications where the total amount of materials graded is more than 2,500 cubic yards. Grading plans shall show existing and proposed contour lines at an interval of no more than two feet. Grading plans shall outline the areas which are required to remain undisturbed (i.e., tree protection areas, buffers, etc.) and shall indicate all protective measures such as fencing or staking to be placed surrounding such areas. The city manager may require additional information pertaining to the specific site and any other relevant information needed in order to assess potential hazards associated with the proposed grading activities and to determine whether a grading permit or approval should be issued. Grading plans shall be processed in accordance with procedures for land development permits or, when not submitted simultaneously with a building permit application, shall be processed and a final decision made by the city manager within 30 days of receiving a completed application. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-3.5, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-86. - Site grading regulations. 
(a)  Final graded slopes shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. The maximum slopes for cut or fill shall be 2:1 (two feet of horizontal run for each foot of rise or fall), except as approved by the city manager. 
(b)  When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, the slope may be steeper if presplitting is employed and upon submission of a geotechnical report which substantiates the integrity of the rock in the steeper condition, subject to the review and approval of the city manager. No blasting shall occur without a valid permit issued by the fire marshal. 
(c)  Grading shall not create or contribute to flooding, erosion, or increased turbidity, siltation or other forms of pollution in a watercourse. 
(d)  All grading shall occur entirely within the site, unless encroachment on adjoining property is shown on grading plans and the applicant provides; proof of ownership, an easement authorizing the encroachment, or a letter signed by the owner of the adjoining property which authorizes such temporary encroachments during construction on the adjoining property. 
(e)  Any grading shall be performed in such a manner that final contours appear to be consistent with the existing terrain, both on and adjacent to the site. 
(f)  Construction and development plans calling for excessive cutting and filling may be refused a grading permit by the city manager if it is determined that the proposed land use can be supported with less alteration of the natural terrain. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-3.6, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-87. - Erosion control. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control measures, as required by Section 1-1-4 of this code, shall be coordinated with the sequence of grading, development, and construction operations. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-3.7, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-88. - Requirements for fill material. 
    Materials used in fills shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Material used in filling shall be appropriate to the site and the intended use of that portion of the site. 
(2)  Fill shall be composed of earth materials. Any rock or other similar irreducible material used in a fill shall be of a maximum diameter of 12 inches and shall compose not more than 20 percent of the total fill material. 
(3)  Topsoil shall not be used as a fill material except that the upper 12 inches of a fill site may be covered with topsoil. 
(4)  No frozen or thawing material shall be used in a fill. 
(5)  No solid waste, hazardous waste or hazardous material may be used in a fill. 
(6)  No organic material shall be used in a fill unless approved by the city manager. 
(7)  Fill must be compacted to 95 percent unless the city manager specifies another standard. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-3.8, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-89. - Temporary stockpiling during construction or grading. 
    Temporary stockpiles of earth materials during construction or grading shall not exceed ten feet in height. Stockpiles shall have slopes no greater than one horizontal to one vertical. Stockpiles shall not be placed in locations that would cause suffocation of root systems of trees to be preserved. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-3.9, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-90. - Compliance. 
    Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades shown on the approved grading plan. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-1-3.10, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 44-91-44-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISIONS AND LAND DEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-111. - Title. 
    These regulations shall be known and may be referred to as the Land Development Regulations of the City of Jonesboro. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-1, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-112. - Purposes. 
    These regulations are adopted for the following purposes. 
(1)  To promote the orderly, planned, efficient, and economic development of the city and to guide future growth in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  To ensure that lands subdivided are of such character that they can be used for building purposes without danger to the health or safety of residents, and to secure safety from fire, flood, or other menace. 
(3)  To prevent the pollution of air, land, streams, and ponds, as well as encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city, and preserve the topography and beauty of the community and the value of land. 
(4)  To ensure the proper provision of improvements such as drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, and transportation facilities. 
(5)  To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land. 
(6)  To establish procedures for the subdivision and re-subdivision of land in order to further the orderly development of land. 
(7)  To provide for the proper monumenting of subdivided land and proper legal descriptions. 
(8)  To help eliminate the costly maintenance problems that develop when streets and lots are established without proper consideration given to various public purposes. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-2, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-113. - Definitions. 
    Alley: A strip of land dedicated to public use providing vehicular and pedestrian access to the rear of properties which abut and are served by a public road or street. 
    Block: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely surrounded by public streets, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, or other well defined and fixed boundaries. 
    City manager: The city manager, or his/her designee, or his/her staff. 
    Conservation easement: A legally enforceable agreement between a property owner and the holder of the easement, in a form acceptable to the city attorney and recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Clayton County. A conservation easement restricts the existing and future use of the defined tract or lot to conservation use, agriculture, passive recreation, or other use approved by the mayor and city council and prohibits further subdivision or development. Such agreement also provides for the maintenance of open spaces and any improvements on the tract or lot. Such agreement cannot be altered except with the express written permission of the easement holder and any other co-signers. A conservation easement may also establish other provisions and contain standards that safeguard the tract or lot's special resources from negative changes. 
    Contiguous common parcels: Parcels adjoining or touching other land at a common point and having a common owner, regardless of whether or not portions of the parcels have separate tax lot numbers, or were purchased in different land lots, or were purchased at different times. 
    Cul-de-sac: A dead-end street of limited length having a primary function of serving adjoining land, and constructed with a turnaround at its end. 
    Cul-de-sac, temporary: A nonpermanent vehicular turn around located at the termination of a street or alley. Reference subsection 44-158(d) of these regulations for requirements concerning temporary cul-de-sacs. 
    Deceleration lane: An added roadway lane, of a specified distance and which may include a taper, as approved by the city manager, that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
    Dedication: The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use or purpose, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. 
    Dedication plat: A plat that indicates property to be dedicated for public right-of-way or land for public use. 
    Development: Any project involving construction of streets, utilities, buildings or other improvements made to property to accommodate specific uses such as dwellings, office buildings, warehouses, an apartment complex, a store or shopping center; also any alteration to improved or unimproved property, including, but not limited to, construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, dredging, excavation, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, permanent storage of materials or other land disturbance; and any use or extension of a use of land; also the act of constructing or implementing a land development project, including the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
    Easement: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
    Escrow account: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee where the subdivider deposits either cash, a note, a bond, or some other instrument readily convertible to cash for specific face value specified by the city manager to cover the costs of required improvements and to guarantee performance of said improvements. 
    Final plat: The final drawing of a subdivision and, as applicable, dedication, prepared for filing for record with the Clerk of the Clayton County Superior Court, and containing all elements and requirements set forth in these regulations. 
    Half street: A portion of the ultimate width of a road or street where the remaining portion of the road or street shall be provided at a future date. 
    Home owners association: An organization formed for the maintenance and operation of the common areas of a development, where membership in the association is automatic with the purchase of a dwelling unit or lot within the development, with the ability to legally assess each owner of a dwelling unit or lot and which has authority to place a lien against all dwelling units and lots within the development. 
    Letter of credit: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee whereby a subdivider secures an instrument from a bank or other institution or from a person with resources sufficient to cover the cost of improvements required by the city. The instrument pledges the creditor to pay the cost of improvements in case of default by the subdivider. 
    Lot: A portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description (such as on a subdivision plat of record or a survey map or plat) or described by metes and bounds, and intended for use, transfer of ownership, or for building development. The word "lot" shall not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
    Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, depth: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage: A lot other than a corner lot that has frontage upon two or more streets that do not interest at a point abutting the property. 
    Lot, flag: A lot or tract of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a street is less than the required minimum width required for construction of a building or structure on that lot. 
    Lot, through: See "lot, double frontage." 
    Lot frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any street. 
    Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision approved in accordance with land subdivision requirements, a plat of which has been lawfully recorded in the records of the Clerk of the Clayton County Superior Court. 
    Lot width: The shortest distance between side lot lines measured at the required front building line, or in the absence of a front building line regulation, the distance between side lot lines measured at the front line of the building located or intended to be located on the lot. 
    Natural conditions: The flora, fauna, soil and water conditions that would develop on a specific tract of land if all human interference were to be removed. The tract of land must have been undisturbed for a sufficient period of time for natural processes to dominate the tract. This period of time will vary among environments. 
    Off-site: Beyond the boundaries of the property in question. 
    On-site: Within the boundaries of the property in question. 
    Original tract: A unit of land which the owner holds under single or unified ownership, or which the owner holds controlling interest on the effective date of these regulations; where all land abutting said tract is separately owned by others, not related to or associated by business partnership with the owner. 
    Pedestrian way: A public right-of-way or private easement across a block or within a block to provide access for pedestrians and which may, in addition to providing pedestrian access, be used for the installation of utility lines. 
    Performance bond: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee in the form of a bond, secured by the subdivider from a bonding company, in an amount specified by the city manager to cover the costs of required improvements, and payable to the city. The city may call in the performance bond in the event the subdivider defaults on required improvements. 
    Person: A natural human being, estate, association, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity. 
    Preliminary plat: A tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision. A preliminary plat is the basis for the approval of the general layout of a land subdivision. 
    Professional engineer: An engineer duly registered or otherwise authorized by the State of Georgia to practice in the field of civil engineering. 
    Professional surveyor: A surveyor duly registered or otherwise authorized by the State of Georgia to practice in the field of land surveying. 
    Protective covenants: Contracts made between private parties as to the manner in which land may be used, with the view toward protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
    Recreation, active: Leisure activities that are facility oriented, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and ball fields. 
    Recreation, passive: Leisure activities that are natural resource oriented, such as hiking trails, conservation areas, and nature preserves. 
    Reservation: A method of holding land for future public use by showing proposed public areas on a subdivision plat. 
    Reserve strip: A strip of land across the end of, or along the edge of, a street, alley, or lot for the purpose of controlling access which is reserved or held until future street extension or widening. 
    Right-of-way: 
(1)  A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar use. 
(2)  Generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another. 
    Scenic views and sites: Those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the comprehensive plan, or by other reasonable means. 
    Sensitive natural areas: Any area, as identified now or hereafter by the department of natural resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
(1)  Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
(2)  Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
(3)  Significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; and/or 
(4)  Other areas so designated by the department of natural resources that are sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
    Sidewalk: A hard-surfaced pedestrian access area adjacent to or within the right-of-way of a public road. 
    Site plan: A scaled, neat, and approximate drawing of a residential, institutional, office, commercial, or industrial development, showing the general layout of a proposed development including among other features the location of buildings, parking areas, and buffers and landscaping. The site plan is the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a development in the case of a multiple-family residential, institutional, office, commercial, or industrial development. 
    Slope: Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree; the ratio of the difference in elevation between two points on the ground, and the horizontal distance between these two points. For purposes of determining steep slopes, slopes shall be measured between two points on the ground separated by 500 feet or more. 
    Street: Any vehicular way, other than an alley, that is: 
(1)  An existing federal, state, or municipal roadway; 
(2)  Constructed as shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law and is open to vehicle travel; 
(3)  Constructed and open to vehicle travel as approved by other official action of the mayor and city council; or 
(4)  Constructed and open to vehicle travel and shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the Clerk's Office, Clayton County Superior Court prior to the effective date of adoption of these regulations. Land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, shall be considered part of the street. 
    Street, collector: Unless otherwise defined in the thoroughfare plan, a collector streets is a public street whose function is to collect traffic from neighborhoods and local streets and which connects to another public street of equal of greater classification. A collector street also may provide direct access to adjacent properties. 
    Street, local: Unless otherwise defined in the thoroughfare plan, a local street is a public street, except an alley, collector, or arterial, which has a primary function to provide direct access to adjoining properties and which serves a limited area only, usually a single land subdivision. 
    Street, major arterial: Unless otherwise defined in the thoroughfare plan, a major arterial is a public street connecting two or more towns or communities, connecting two highways of equal or greater capacity, or serving as the primary access to a large land area. A major arterial may also serve a large traffic generator and perform a secondary function of providing local access. 
    Street, marginal access: Unless otherwise defined in the thoroughfare plan, a marginal access street is a residential street parallel and adjacent to a major thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through-traffic. 
    Street, private: A road or street that has not been accepted for maintenance by the city and that is not owned and maintained by a state, county, city, or another public entity. 
    Subdivider: Any person, as defined by these regulations, who undertakes the subdivision of land, and any person having such a proprietary interest in land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under these regulations, or the authorized agent of such person. 
    Subdivision: A division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building development, whether immediate or future, including all division of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets. The word "subdivision" includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to the actual land or area which is subdivided. 
    Subdivision, minor: A subdivision of three or fewer lots, which does not involve the construction of a new public or private street. 
    Subdivision, major: The division of a tract or parcel of land into greater than three lots which may or may not involve the construction of a new public or private street; or any subdivision that involves the construction of a new public or private street. 
    Utility: Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel or gas pipelines, telephone lines, roads, cable telephone line, fiber optic cable, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems and drainage ways, and railroads or other utilities identified by the city. As appropriate to the context, the term "utility" may also include all persons, companies, or governmental agencies supplying the same. 
    Variance: A minimal variation of the terms of these regulations where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. A variance may be authorized for height, area, size of a structure, yards and opens spaces, and for other requirements of these regulations that prohibit construction; establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in adjoining zoning districts. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-3, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-114. - Authority and delegation. 
(a)  Authority. These regulations are adopted pursuant to powers vested in cities by the State of Georgia Constitution, home rule powers, state administrative rules for the adoption and implementation of comprehensive plans, and the protection of vital areas of the state. 
(b)  Delegation of powers to mayor and city council. The mayor and city council is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, and deny preliminary plats of major subdivisions, and to grant variances from the requirements of these regulations. 
(c)  Delegation of powers to city manager. The city manager is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve or disapprove final plats of minor subdivisions and minor re-subdivisions, lot combination plats, lot line adjustments, dedication plats, construction plans and final plats of major subdivisions when preliminary plat approval has been obtained from the mayor and city council. The city manager shall also be authorized to review major subdivisions and major re-subdivisions for conformity to the requirements of these regulations, and to make reports and recommendations to the mayor and city council on major subdivisions and major re-subdivisions, and to administer, interpret, and enforce the provisions of these regulations. The city manager shall also be vested with the authority to require and approve land development improvements and to require improvement guarantees for public improvements as specified in these regulations. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-115. - Applicability and general provisions. 
(a)  Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all real property within the corporate limits of the City of Jonesboro. 
(b)  Land is one tract until subdivided. Until property proposed for subdivision has received final plat approval and a final plat has been properly recorded, the land involving the subdivision shall be considered as one tract, or as otherwise legally recorded. 
(c)  All land subdivisions to comply. No person shall sell, advertise, or offer to sell, by deed, map, plat or other instrument, any parcel of land not subdivided under the requirements of these regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer or sell land by reference to, or by exhibition of, or by other use of, a plat of a land subdivision that has not been approved and recorded in accordance with the requirements of these regulations. The description of such land by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer shall not exempt the transaction. No plat of land subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clayton County, and it shall be unlawful to record such a plat of land subdivision, unless and until it shall have been approved in accordance with the requirements of these regulations. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued prior to final plat approval. The city manager may choose to issue a certificate of occupancy for up to two model homes in a residential subdivision. 
Exceptions. At the discretion of the city manager a certificate of occupancy may be granted for up to two model homes in a residential subdivision prior to final plat approval for the entire subdivision. 
(d)  Preliminary plat and plans required prior to construction. No person shall commence construction of any improvements on any lot, prior to the approval of a preliminary plat if required by these regulations, nor prior to approval of construction plans and engineering plans for said improvements are approved as required by these regulations and article IV of this code. 
(e)  Building and other permits. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building, structure, or use, nor shall any excavation, grading, or land disturbance applications be approved, on any parcel of land regulated by these regulations that has not been approved in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
(f)  Public streets and lands. No land dedicated as a public street or for other public purpose shall be opened, extended, or accepted as a public street or for other public land unless such improvements are constructed in accordance with the specifications of these regulations and said land and/or improvements are formally approved and accepted as public improvements by the mayor and city council in accordance with procedures established in these regulations. 
(g)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an interpretation or decision of the city manager or other official responsible for the administration of these regulations may file an appeal to the mayor and city council. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-5, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-116. - Exemptions from plat approval. 
    The following types of land subdivisions, transfers, and sales are specifically exempted from the plat approval requirements of these regulations; provided, however, that such exemptions shall not apply to land development requirements and improvement requirements of article IV of these regulations. 
(1)  The creation and sale of cemetery plots. 
(2)  The sale of lots consistent with previously approved and recorded plats or deeds. 
(3)  The creation of leaseholds for space within a multiple-occupancy building or the division of property into leaseholds for commercial, industrial, or institutional use. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-6, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-117. - Lot combinations. 
    An existing lot line forming the boundary between two conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that have merged to form one building lot may be removed or eliminated through a final plat revision process which conforms to the requirements of these regulations. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination shall be required to be approved by the city manager and recorded as a final plat. Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the replat is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-7, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-118. - Boundary line adjustments. 
    One or more existing lot lines forming boundaries between conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision and having the same zoning classification, or one or more lot lines between abutting lots or parcels, may be adjusted through a final plat revision process if the resulting lots meet all setback and lot size requirements established by the zoning district in which they are located. Proposed adjustments require the approval of the city manager and recording of a plat meeting the specifications of a final plat. In the case where no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat of the entire lots involved in the boundary line adjustment shall be required to be approved by the city manager and recorded. Such plat showing said boundary line adjustment shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision and shall include thereon that the replat is for the purpose of adjusting the lot lines between specific lots. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-8, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-119. - Design requirements for blocks. 
(a)  Block length. Intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals so as to provide adequate cross traffic. Blocks in residential subdivisions should not exceed 600 feet nor be less than 300 feet in length, except where topography or other conditions justify a departure from these standards. 
(b)  Block width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and deliveries. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-9, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-120. - Design requirements for lots. 
(a)  Natural features and assets. In the subdividing of land, due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic sites or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness to the proposed development and ensure safety from hazards. 
(b)  Access and minimum lot frontage. Each lot shall have access to a public street and a minimum of 50 feet of lot frontage on a public street; provided, however, that the local governing body may permit one or more lots to be accessed by private streets, as more fully specified in article IV of these regulations; provided further, that in the case of a lot accessed by a circular cul-de-sac, the minimum lot frontage may be reduced to 30 feet. 
(c)  Adequate buildable area required. Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, or that is unsuitable for residential or other use for topographical or other reasons, shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or of property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements or building setback lines required by the local governing body. 
(d)  Lot remnants not permitted. All remands of lots below any required minimum lot size that may be remaining upon subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. The city manager may permit a lot remnant for a specific purpose such as open space or a detention pond, provided that access and design are in accordance with city standards and the lot remnant is restricted to specific non-building use. 
(e)  Service areas. Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to provide service areas and off-street parking suitable to the use intended. 
(f)  Lot area. The minimum lot area shall not be less than that established by the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(g)  Lot width. No portion of a lot shall be narrower than 45 feet, with the exception of cul-de-sac lots) nor shall any lot have a lot width less than that established by the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(h)  Flag lots. No lot shall be approved which constitutes a flag lot. 
(i)  Side lot lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
(j)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have adequate width to meet the front building setback requirements from all rights-of-way. One of the street frontages shall be designated as the front yard, the yard opposite the designated front yard shall become the rear yard, and the yard opposite the remaining street frontage shall become the side yard. The resulting setbacks (two front, one rear, one side) shall meet the applicable setback requirements. 
(k)  Double frontage lots. Double frontage or "through" lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from arterials or overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. Double frontage lots with frontage on a major arterial street shall have additional depth in order to allow space for a minimum 25 feet screen planting along the lot line abutting the major arterial street. Only one frontage may provide access; secondary access is prohibited. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-10, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-008a, § 2, 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 44-121. - Easements. 
    Where a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream traverses a subdivision, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage easement measuring a minimum of 20 feet in width. However, a larger easement may be required as determined by the city manager. Easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities as approved by the city manager. Where easements are needed for utility locations, the subdivider shall provide them to the appropriate utility provider. Where easements are needed for public water and/or sanitary sewer lines, they shall be provided as determined appropriate by the city manager and in accordance with the Clayton County Water Authority specifications. All easements required pursuant to this section shall be shown on the preliminary plat, if required, and final plat. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-11, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-122. - Survey monuments for all lots required. 
    For all subdivisions, a Georgia registered land surveyor shall install permanent survey monuments at all property corners and land lot lines, prior to final plat approval. Lot corners shall be marked with metal rods not less than one-half-inch in diameter and 18 inches in length and driven so as to be stabilized in the ground. Permanent survey monuments shall also be installed in accordance with the most recent edition of Section 180-7-.05 Monument of the Rules of State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors and the Georgia Plat Act (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67). 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-12, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-123. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure compliance with the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of subdivisions and land developments through the submittal of a preliminary plat of all major subdivisions for review and approval by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  When required. All major subdivisions, and any subdivision involving the dedication of a public street, shall require the submission of a preliminary plat to the city manager for review and approval by the mayor and city council. Prior to the issuance of any permit for land disturbance, or the installation of any improvements, the mayor and city council must approve the preliminary plat, if required. 
(c)  Preliminary plat application and specifications. Preliminary plat applications shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 1 of section 44-125, and preliminary plats shall meet the minimum plat specifications shown in Table 2 of section 44-125. 
(d)  Procedures. Upon receipt of a completed preliminary plat application, the city manager shall schedule the application for the next public meeting before the mayor and city council and forward a staff report and all pertinent materials in the application to the mayor and city council for review. An application for preliminary plat approval must be submitted at least 60 days before the regular meeting date of the mayor and city council to be considered on that agenda. The mayor and city council shall have 60 days from the date the public meeting is held to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the preliminary plat application. The basis of the mayor and city council's review of and action on a preliminary plat shall be whether the preliminary plat meets the purposes and requirements of these regulations, and all other ordinances that relate to the proposed development. 
(e)  Disposition. Approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of one year, within which time a complete construction plans application must be submitted. If a completed application for construction plans is not submitted during that time, preliminary plat approval shall expire and be null and void. 
(f)  Appeal. Denial of preliminary plat approval may be appealed to the mayor and council. 
(g)  Amendments to approved preliminary plats. The city manager is authorized to approve minor amendments to preliminary plats. A minor amendment is defined as a change to the preliminary plat that does not significantly alter the overall development scheme, causes the plat to not be in compliance with the zoning ordinance or land development regulations, and does not adversely affect the public interest. Examples include changes of less than ten percent to density, lot size, percentage of open space reserved, or street access provisions. Any proposed amendment to a preliminary plat that is determined by the city manager to constitute a matter of public interest shall be deemed a major amendment. For all amendments to preliminary plats determined to be major amendments, mayor and city council approval shall be required. The mayor and city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed major amendment to a preliminary plat. Procedures for considering a major amendment to a preliminary plat shall be the same as required for an initial application for preliminary plat approval. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-13, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-124. - Construction plans. 
(a)  Application. Upon approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider or land developer may apply for construction plan approval. In the case of a minor subdivision, or in cases where a preliminary plat is not required by this article, the subdivider or land developer may apply for approval of construction plans; provided, however, that in the case of a minor subdivision or land development the applicant for construction plan approval should hold a pre-application conference with the city manager to ensure that plans meet the intent and specific provisions of these regulations and other applicable regulations. The construction plan approval process is administrative. Applications for construction plan approval shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in the Tables 1 and 2 of section 44-125 below. No application for construction plans shall be accepted for processing nor approved by the city manager until a preliminary plat, if required, has been approved by the mayor and city council and the proposed construction plans are found by the city manager to be in substantial conformity with said approval and any conditions of such approval. 
(b)  City manager's decision criteria. The sole basis upon which the city manager may deny a construction plan is the failure of the application to meet the requirements of these regulations or any other applicable local regulations or the failure of the construction plans and application to meet the requirements of preliminary plat approval specified by the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Certificate of approval. All copies of the construction plans shall be noted by inscription on the plans noting such approval by the city manager. Construction plan approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one year following approval, unless activity toward improvements on the land has been initiated as deemed by the city manager, or unless the city manager approves an extension of time. If at any time after the extension is approved the site is inactive for a period of one month, the extension may be revoked by the city manager and a new submittal shall be required. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-14, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-125. - Final plat. 
(a)  When required. All major subdivisions, minor subdivisions, and dedications shall require final plat approval. The final plat approval process is administrative. Applications shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in the Table 1 below. 
Table 1. Application Requirements 
Requirement Minor Subdivision (three lots or less) Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat Construction Plans Final Plat Pre-development review with staff Required Required Required Application form completed Required Required Required Required Letter of intent Required Number of copies of plat 3 3 3 3 Filing fee (current rates are on file with City Hall) Required Required Required Required Description of type of water supply and sewerage system and utilities to be provided Required Required Required Required Data on existing conditions Required Hydrological or other engineering study Per city 
manager Required Subdivision entrance monument and landscaping elevation/plan (prepared by registered landscape architect) Per city manager Required Required Warranty deed for the dedication of streets and other public places Required Required Written approval from electric utility company regarding installation of service points and street lights Required As-built drawings of public improvements Required Subdivision improvement guarantee Required Title Required Required Plat Certificates Required Required  
All plans must be submitted in a format that is legible and easy to read. Plans may be rejected if they are not in the appropriate format as determined by the city manager. Unless specifically exempted or otherwise provided by these regulations, all plans submitted to the City of Jonesboro must be prepared and sealed by the appropriate licensed professional in the State of Georgia. Therefore, all surveys must be sealed by a licensed surveyor, all engineering plans such as site, grading and drainage, erosion control, utility, as well as hydrologic studies must be sealed by a licensed professional engineer, all landscape plans must be sealed by a licensed landscape architect, and all building plans for building greater than 3,000 square feet, or if the use is daycare, educational, or institutional or if determined to be required by the city manager must be sealed by a licensed architect. 
(b)  Criteria for approval. The city manager may grant final plat approval if the following conditions, as applicable, are met. 
(1)  The mayor and city council has previously approved a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, if required (not required for minor subdivision). 
(2)  Where new improvements are involved in the subdivision, construction plans have been approved by the city manager, and all improvements have been installed and inspected by the city manager's designee, and subdivision improvement guarantees as required by these regulations have been submitted. 
(3)  The final plat meets all applicable requirements of these regulations. 
(4)  A complete final plat application has been submitted, including all supporting materials required by this chapter for final plats. 
The city manager shall consider final plats and applications that meet the above-referenced conditions a ministerial action of approval. Denial of a final plat shall be permitted only upon specific findings that one or more of the above-referenced conditions have not been met. 
Table 2. Plat and Plan Requirements 
Required Information (Required to be on the plat or construction plans) Preliminary Plat Construction Plans Final Plat Scale (minimum) 1"=100 feet 1"=100 feet 1"=100 feet Sheet size (maximum) 24" × 36" 24" × 36" 18" × 22" North arrow and graphic engineering scale Required Required Required Reference to north point (magnetic, true north, or grid north) Required Required Required Proposed name of subdivision or project and phases, if any Required Required Required Site Location Map Required Required Required Site Information Site Plan Required Required Required Grading plan Required Required Existing conditions, features (existing/proposed) Required Required Required Use by acreage Required Required Required Lot size in acreage and square feet Required Required Required Lot coverage by structures Required Required Required Sidewalks (improvements/existing) Required Required Required Location of ground sign(s), equipments, dumpster Required Required Detention facilities Required Required Required Impervious surface Required Required Required Fencing Type Required Drainage Required Required Required Construction staging/storage/disposal Required Hydrology Report Preliminary 
Calculations Required Required (as-built Hydrology) All site features labeled Required Required Required Utilities (overhead/underground) Required Required Required Property lines/right of way/adjacent streets Required Required Required Setbacks Required Required Required Structures Building Footprints(s) Recommended Required Required No. of structures Required Required Required No. of floors and units/floor Per city manager Per city manager Required Density/acre (residential) Required Required Required Exterior building lighting Required Required Building materials Required Required Required Gross leaseable space Required Required Building height Required Required Total Units Required Required Required Floor plans/uses Required Required Required Equipment placement Required Required Exterior colors, architecture Required Required Required Building elevations Required Required Required Traffic Flow/Parking Parking Spaces Required Required Required Dimensions of parking Required Required Required Traffic flow, ingress/egress, fire lanes Required Required Required Curb cuts/ROW improvements Required Required Required Interior parking lot landscaping Required Required Required Decel lane Required Required Required Parking calculations on plans Required Required Required Driveway dimensions Required Required Required Loading zones Required Required Required DOT Permit Approved (If required) Required Parking lot lighting Required Required Landscaping/Buffers Buffer/landscape/tree protection areas labeled Required Required Required Proposed structures, vehicle use areas, sidewalks, wheel stops or curbs, walls and fences Required Required Required Plant material list (common and botanical names) Required Required Required Plant quantities Required Required Required Plant size and condition Required Required Required Plant spacing Required Required Required Notation to ensure proper plant selection upon installation Required Required Required Existing and finish grade topographic lines at an interval no greater than two feet (within areas with or adjacent to land form changes) Required Required Required Other Drawing sealed by a licensed professional Required Required Required Preliminary D.O.T. comments incorporated in Plan Required Required Acknowledgement that a copy of the executed NPDES NOI form is required prior to issuance of a development permit Required Required Land to be dedicated Required Submission of a digital electronic copy in PDF format Required Required  
Unless specifically exempted or otherwise provided by these regulations, all plans submitted to the City of Jonesboro must be prepared and sealed by the appropriate licensed professional in the State of Georgia. Therefore, all surveys must be sealed by a licensed surveyor, all engineering plans such as site, grading and drainage, erosion control, utility, as well as hydrologic studies must be sealed by a licensed professional engineer, all landscape plans must be sealed by a licensed landscape architect, and all building plans for building greater than 3,000 square feet, or if the use is daycare, educational, or institutional or if determined to be required by the city manager must be sealed by a licensed architect. 
(c)  Approval certificate. Upon approval of the final plat, a certificate, stamped directly on the plat, shall state: 
Pursuant to the Development Regulations of the City of Jonesboro Georgia, and all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was given preliminary approval by the Mayor and City Council on _______, 20___, and final approval by the City Manager and it is entitled to recordation in the Clerk's Office, Clayton County Superior Court. 
By: 
/s/   
      Mayor, City of Jonesboro   By: 
/s/   
      City Manager, City of Jonesboro   (d)  Additional plat certificates. In addition to information required by Table 2 in subsection (b)(4) above to be supplied on a final plat, each final plat shall contain the following certificates. 
Surveyor's certificate. A certificate by a surveyor directly on the final plat as follows: 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or persons under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future," and that their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Development Regulations of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia, have been fully complied with. 
By:______________________ 
Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No.:_______ 
Owner's certificate. A certificate by the owner directly on the final plat, signed in an appropriate manner as follows: 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, and that all State, City and County taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid. Said owner donates and dedicates to the public for use forever the street right-of-way and improvements have been installed therein as shown on this plat. 
      Owner   Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 
      Witness         Notary Public   Health Department Approval Certificate. 
"This final plat has been approved by the Clayton County Health Department as being consistent with applicable state and local environmental health requirements. 
      Manager, Clayton County Health Department"   (Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-15, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-126. - Dedications of streets and public lands. 
    Subdivision streets and right-of-ways and other lands to be dedicated to the public shall be accepted and dedicated by the city only upon the delivery to the mayor and city council of the general warranty deed conveying fee simple title of such right-of-ways and lands. The warranty deed shall be accompanied by an attorney's certificate of title and a tax transfer form addressed to the mayor and city council certifying that the grantor in such deed is vested with marketable fee simple title to the property conveyed thereby, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, and further that the individual executing such deed has full authority to do so. Acceptance of such dedication shall be accomplished by resolution of the mayor and city council, a certified copy of which shall be attached to both the deed of dedication and the final plat. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-16, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-127. - Subdivision improvement guarantees. 
    In order to protect the city and prospective purchasers of and residents in a subdivision, the subdivider/developer shall provide the financial security to guarantee the installation of public improvements. The subdivider or developer's financial guarantee may be any of the following: 
(1)  An escrow of funds with the city; 
(2)  An escrow with a bank or savings and loan association upon which the city can draw; 
(3)  An irrevocable letter of commitment or credit upon which the city can draw; 
(4)  A performance bond for the benefit of the city upon which the city can collect, or a certificate of deposit with assignment letter; and 
(5)  Any other form of guarantee approved by the mayor and city council that will satisfy the objectives of this section. The guarantee shall be in an amount to secure the full costs, as determined by the city, of constructing or installing the improvements and utilities required. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-17, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-128. - Limitations on minor subdivisions. 
(a)  Purpose. Minor subdivisions provide certain advantages to the applicant, such as a shorter application process and less public scrutiny, that tend to favor their use over the filing of major subdivision applications. Given these advantages, the prospect exists that subdividers may seek to divide a parcel via consecutive and/or contiguous minor subdivisions instead of filing for a major subdivision. It is the intent of the mayor and city council to prohibit the practice of such "chain" subdivisions where the same land owner subdivides land and then files minor subdivision applications on common contiguous parcels, which collectively total more than three lots. It is also the intent of the mayor and city council to prohibit adjacent minor subdivisions within a three-year time period, in cases where part of an original tract of land is now owned by another person or entity and was transferred or sold to another owner with the apparent intent to circumvent the major subdivision process. 
(b)  Common contiguous parcels shown on minor subdivision plats. Contiguous common parcels, as defined by these regulations, shall be referenced on all applications for minor subdivisions, and contiguous common parcels shall be considered part of any application for minor subdivision, for purposes of determining whether or not the division of land proposed is a major subdivision or a minor subdivision. 
(c)  Limitations. Land within a minor subdivision, including all contiguous parcels owned by the subdivider, shall not be further divided for a period of three years unless a preliminary plat application is filed and approved as a major subdivision pursuant to the requirements of these regulations. If property proposed to be subdivided was part of an original tract, and if the property proposed to be subdivided abuts land that has been divided as a minor subdivision in the last three years, then minor subdivision of said property shall be prohibited. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the approval of two contiguous minor subdivisions under separate ownership; however, this provision is intended to be construed liberally so that one property owner does not develop a minor subdivision on part of an original tract and transfer or sell another part of the original tract for the purposes of minor subdivision within a three-year period. It is the intent that land abutting a minor subdivision that was owned by the subdivider of the abutting minor subdivision shall not be subdivided as a minor subdivision for a period of three years, regardless of ownership. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-18, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-129. - Private streets. 
(a)  Private streets permitted. Private streets may, upon application, be permitted by the mayor and city council within major subdivisions, subject to the requirements of this section. Applications for approval of private streets shall be considered by the mayor and city council at the time of preliminary plat approval by the mayor and city council. Following consideration by the mayor and city council to authorize private streets in a major subdivision, the mayor and city council shall consider the application and may impose conditions on the approval of private streets to achieve various public purposes and to avoid potential problems with private streets. No final plat involving a private street shall be approved unless said final plat conforms to the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Engineering plans required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct a new private street or alter an existing private street or to cause the same to be done without first obtaining approval of engineering and construction plans from the city manager in accordance with the requirements of these regulations and article IV of this code. 
(c)  Standards. All private streets shall be constructed to all standards for public streets as required by article IV of this code, applicable construction specifications of the City, Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) standards and as approved by the city manager. 
(d)  Street names and signs. Private streets shall be named, subject to the approval of the city manager. The subdivider of land involving a private street shall install street signs with content containing the street name and the designation "private," as approved by the city manager. The sign signifying the private street may be required by the city manager to be a different color than that of street signs provided for public streets, in order to distinguish maintenance responsibilities in the field. 
(e)  Easements. Easements for private streets shall be designated on final plats as general-purpose public access and utility easements, along with the name of said private street. Said easement shall at minimum be of the same width as that required for the right-of-way of a public street by the comprehensive plan or city manager for the type of public street (local, collector, etc.) most closely resembling the proposed private street. Easements for private streets shall not be included in any calculation of minimum lot size or limitations established by local zoning districts. In the cases of private streets, the general-purpose public access and utility easement for the private street shall either; 
(1)  Be shown in a manner on the final plat such that each lot fronting the private street extends to the centerline of the private street. No lot shall be permitted to be divided by the general purpose public access and utility easement required and established for a private street; or 
(2)  Shall be drawn as its own discrete parcel to be dedicated to a private homeowners association (i.e., not shown to be a part of any lot). 
(f)  Maintenance. The city shall not maintain, repair, resurface, rebuild, or otherwise improve streets, signs, drainage improvements or any other appurtenances within general purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. A private maintenance covenant recorded with the County Clerk of the Superior Court shall be required for any private street and other improvements within general-purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. The covenant shall set out the distribution of expenses, remedies for non-compliance with the terms of the agreement, rights to the use of easements, and other pertinent considerations. The covenant shall specifically include the following terms. 
(1)  The covenant shall establish minimum annual assessments in an amount adequate to defray costs of ordinary maintenance and procedures for approval of additional needed assessments. The covenant shall also specify that the funds from such assessments will be held by a homeowners or property owners association in cases of a subdivision of seven or more lots fronting on a private street. 
(2)  The covenant shall require the formation of a homeowner's association that will be responsible for maintenance and upkeep of all common areas of the development. 
(3)  The covenant shall include a periodic maintenance schedule. 
(4)  The covenant for maintenance shall be enforceable by any property owner served by the private street. 
(5)  The covenant shall establish a formula for assessing maintenance and repair costs equitably to property owners served by the private street. 
(6)  The covenant shall run with the land. 
(7)  The mayor and city council may, at its discretion, as a condition of approving private streets, require a performance bond and/or maintenance bond be submitted by the subdivider and held by a homeowners or property owners association, or the council may require that the subdivider pay an amount of money as recommended by the city manager into an escrow account or other suitable account for the maintenance and repair of private streets and stormwater management improvements, to be drawn from by the homeowners or property owners association as maintenance and repair needs may arise. 
(g)  Specifications for final plats involving private streets. The city manager shall not approve for recording any final plat involving a private street unless and until it shall contain the following on the face of the plat: 
(1)  Deed book and page reference to the recorded covenant required by this section; 
(2)  "WARNING, City of Jonesboro has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or otherwise service the private streets, drainage improvements, or other appurtenances contained within the general public purpose access or utility easement or easements for private streets shown on this plat."; 
(3)  "Grant of Easement. The general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) is hereby granted and said grant of rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the City, and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable television lines, and fiber optic cables, together with the right to trim interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and egress for installation, maintenance, and replacement of such improvements. 
      Signature of Property Owner"; and,   (4)  (The following certificate of dedication shall be required, unless the mayor and city council waives the dedication requirement.) 
"Certificate of Dedication. All water and sewer lines installed within the general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) are hereby dedicated to the City of Jonesboro. 
      Notarized Signature of Property Owner."   (h)  Requirement for purchaser's acknowledgement of private responsibilities. Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private street in the city, the subdivider or seller of said lot shall execute a notarized purchaser's acknowledgement of private street construction and drainage maintenance responsibilities as set forth below. A copy of the purchaser's acknowledgement shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a condition of a building permit for a principal building on said lot: 
"Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Street and Drainage Maintenance Responsibility 
(I)/(We) have read the Declaration of Covenant which pertains to the lot that is the subject of this real estate transaction _______ (insert address or attach legal description). (I)/(We) understand that the Declaration of Covenant applies to the lot that (I am)/(we are) purchasing and requires (me)/(us) to provide a specified percentage or amount of the financing for the construction and maintenance of any private street and drainage facilities serving the lot which (I am)/(we are) purchasing, and that owners of other lots on this plat may sue for and recover those costs which this covenant requires (me)/(us) to pay, plus their damages resulting from (my)/(our) refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorneys fees. (I)/(We) further understand that the City has no obligation to assist with the maintenance and improvement of the private street, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances within the general purpose public access and utility easement for the private road serving the above lot in question. (I)/(We) understand that a copy of this purchaser's acknowledgement shall be required as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for a principal building on the lot (I am)/(we are) purchasing. 
______________________ 
Purchaser 
______________________ 
Purchaser 
______________________ 
Notary 
______________________ 
Date" 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-2-19, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 44-130-44-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED 

Sec. 44-151. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these regulations is to establish minimum design requirements, standards, and specifications for improvements within subdivisions and land developments. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-1, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-152. - Definitions. 
    Definitions pertaining to these regulations shall be as provided in article III of this code. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-2, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-153. - Authority of city manager. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to review and approve plans for subdivisions and land developments to ensure compliance with the requirements of this code. The city manager is further authorized to prepare and promulgate standards, standard drawings, and specifications to more specifically implement the intent of the improvement requirements of this code. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-3, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-154. - Applicability. 
    No person to which this code section applies shall commence construction of any improvements on any land, prior to the approval of construction plans and engineering plans for said improvements, as required by article III of this code, according to the improvement standards specified in this code section and as adopted by the City of Jonesboro. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building, structure, or use, nor shall any excavation, grading, or land disturbance applications be approved, on any parcel of land that does not meet the improvement requirements specified in this section and as adopted by the City of Jonesboro pursuant to this section. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-155. - Engineered drawings. 
    Engineering drawings for public streets, including cross sections and centerline profiles, and public and private water, sewer, drainage, and utility systems, certified by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia shall be required to be submitted for review and approval, and such plans must meet the requirements of this code section and the specifications of the city manager. Prior to approval and recording of a final plat, or prior to the approval of any certificate of occupancy, a registered engineer for the subdivider/developer shall submit one copy of all finished, as-built plans of improvements, demonstrating that said improvements, as installed, meet the requirements of this code section and certifying that the plans accurately reflect actual construction and installation. Once the as-built plans have been approved, an electronic copy of the plans shall be submitted in PDF format. The city manager shall maintain all as-built street and utility plans for future use by the city. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-5, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-156. - Permits for construction in public right-of-way. 
    Permits from the city manager shall be required for construction in any public right-of-way. Permits will not be issued until such time that plans have been submitted and approved by the city manager. Permit fees shall be approved by resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-6, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-157. - Improvements to abutting land. 
    For subdivisions and land developments that abut and access a public street, the subdivider or land developer shall install curb and gutter, sidewalk, other road improvements, and, if required, a deceleration lane and/or acceleration lane, according to standards and specifications of the city manager, along all abutting public streets. When a subdivision or land development uses an unpaved public right-of-way for access, the subdivider or land developer shall improve that right-of-way to a pavement width consistent with city road design standards. Said improvements shall be from the subdivision or land development entrance to the paved public road which the city manager determines will be the primary direction of travel for residents of the subdivision or occupants of the land development. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-7, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-158. - Standards for configuring new streets. 
(a)  Street alignment, intersections and jogs. Streets shall be aligned to join with planned or existing streets. Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles (90 degrees), but in no case shall such a street intersection be less than 75 degrees. Where street offsets or jogs cannot be avoided, offset "T" intersections shall be separated by a minimum centerline offset of 150 feet. 
(b)  Continuation of existing streets and connections. Existing streets, and their rights-of-way, shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. The mayor and city council may require that a major subdivision provide one or more future street connections to adjoining subdivisions or unsubdivided tracts. 
(c)  Street plans for future phases of the tract. Where the plat or site plan proposed to be subdivided or developed includes only part of the tract owned or intended for subdivision or development by the subdivider or land developer, a tentative plan of a future street system for the portion not slated for immediate subdivision consideration may be required by the city manager and if required shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider or land developer. 
(d)  Dead-end streets and culs-de-sac. Streets that dead-end shall terminate in a cul-de-sac. The maximum length of such streets shall be 600 feet. Streets that are planned to continue at some future date shall provide a temporary cul-de-sac as required by the city manager. 
(e)  Marginal access streets. Whenever a major subdivision or non-residential development is proposed abutting the right-of-way of a U.S. or state highway, a marginal access street approximately parallel and adjacent to such right-of-way may be required by the mayor and city council at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of land between such marginal access street and highway right-of-way. A 20-foot no-access easement and planting strip along the major arterial street will be required to ensure that lots fronting on said street do not have access thereto. 
(f)  Alleys and service access. Alleys may be provided in non-residential developments. If they are provided, they must be paved. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible; but if unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities. Service access shall be provided to commercial and industrial developments for off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-8, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-159. - Requirements for streets. 
(a)  Bridges. Bridges on public rights-of-way shall meet current American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials standards and Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) standards, as determined by the city manager. 
(b)  Grading and stabilization of street rights-of-ways. When a new public street is proposed, all trees, brush, stumps, rocks, or other debris shall be cleared from the street right-of-way, except in cases where specimen trees or other features are required to be preserved by the city manager. All streets shall be graded to lines, grades and cross sections approved on plans. All unsurfaced disturbed portions of street rights-of-way shall be stabilized by seeding, fertilizing, and mulching or by another equally effective method. 
(c)  Radius at street intersections. The right-of-way radius at street intersections shall be a minimum of 15 feet, with larger radii for streets serving nonresidential development, as approved by the city manager. The minimum pavement (curb) radius at street intersections shall be 25 feet. 
(d)  Street grades. No street grade shall be less than one percent. No street grade for an arterial or collector street shall exceed eight percent. No other local street grade shall exceed 12 percent, unless the city manager finds that due to topographic conditions, a steeper grade is necessary, in which case the street grade shall not exceed 15 percent. Grades between 12 percent and 15 percent shall not exceed a length of 150 feet. 
(e)  Minimum street right-of-way and pavement widths. Street right-of-way and pavement widths shall at minimum meet the following: 
Street Type Minimum Right-Of-Way 
Width (feet) Minimum Pavement 
Width (feet) Major arterial street Per thoroughfare plan Per thoroughfare plan Collector street 60 36 Local street with curb and gutter 45 22 (back of curb to back of curb) Cul-de-sac turn around radius 50 40 (back of curb) Alley (one-way) 20 16 Alley (two-way) 28 24  
(f)  Street horizontal alignment and reverse curves. Street horizontal alignments and reverse curves shall at minimum meet the following: 
Street Type Minimum Horizontal Radii Of Center Line Curvature (feet) Minimum Tangents Between Reverse Curves (feet) Major arterial street 1,250 250 Collector street 500 100 Local street with curb and gutter 100 50 Dead-end street 100 50  
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-9, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-008a, § 1, 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 44-160. - Curb cuts and access specifications. 
(a)  Entrance improvement specifications. Roadway entrances and improvements, including necessary acceleration and/or deceleration lane(s) and right/left turn lanes, shall be designed, installed, and maintained as approved by the state department of transportation, as applicable, or the city manager, in accordance with Georgia Department of Transportation specifications. All entrances or exits of any street or driveway, public or private, from or to any state highway shall be approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation and the city manager prior to the construction of such entrances or exits and prior to the issuance of any land use permit or building permit for any improvement to be served by such entrances or exits. All entrances or exits of any street or driveway, public or private, from or to any city street shall be approved by the city manager prior to the construction of such entrances or exits and prior to the issuance of any land use permit or building permit for any improvement to be served by such entrances or exits. 
(b)  Curb cut specifications. No curb cut shall be permitted to be located closer than 100 feet to the nearest existing or proposed right-of-way of an intersecting roadway or closer than 40 feet to a side property line unless the adjacent property owner is in agreement with the encroachment of the curb cut and approval is obtained from the city manager. Curb cuts shall be no narrower than 24 feet from back of curb to back of curb. Strict adherence to these requirements may not be practical in all instances as determined by the city manager. The city manager may limit the maximum width of a curb cut and/or the number of curb cuts to a parcel as necessary when it is deemed to be of benefit to the safety and welfare of the public. 
The following factors may be considered during the review and approval of a specific location of an entrance: the location of existing or planned median breaks; separation requirements between the entrance and major intersections; separation requirements between other entrances; the need to provide shared access with other sites; the need to align with previously approved or constructed access points on the opposite side of the street; and the minimum number of entrances needed to move traffic onto and off the site safely and efficiently. 
(c)  Access along and near divided highways. Where a divided highway exists or is planned, the following access standards shall be met: 
Minimum Access Separation Requirements Distance (feet) Curb cut of driveway from street intersection with divided highway 600 Parallel frontage road from right-of-way of divided highway 450 Curb cut or driveway on a local road from right-of-way of divided highway 200 Curb cut or driveway on a local road from state highway 200 Curb cut or driveway on parallel frontage road from local road 150  
(d)  Interparcel connections. New development that contains or is intended to contain more than one building or use on site shall provide connections so that automobile trips between and among such buildings or uses can be accomplished without using the highway or major street. New developments and substantial improvements to existing developments shall provide for pedestrian and automobile access connections between adjacent properties under different ownership when the uses of the properties are of such compatibility that patrons may frequent both buildings or uses in the same vehicle trip, unless the city manager otherwise. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-10, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-161. - Street lighting. 
    Street lights shall be provided by the owner/developer in new subdivisions and developments which propose the construction of a new street to be dedicated to the city or along existing streets abutting the subdivision or land development. All fees, materials, labor, poles, fixtures and any other associated items shall be furnished, paid for and installed by the developer. The following standards shall apply: 
(1)  In a residential development, street lights shall be installed and operating prior to approval of the final plat. In a non-residential development, street lights are to be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (C.O.) for the building(s). 
(2)  Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal foot-candle illumination level by roadway classification shall be: 
Roadway 
Classification Maximum Spacing 
Between 
Lights Commercial Area Intermediate Area Residential Area Downtown Area Major Arterial 200 feet 1.2 0.9 0.6 Reference 
Adopted 
Streetscape 
Standards Collector (16-18' high pole) 150 feet 0.8 0.6 0.4 Local or 
Residential (12-14' high pole) 100 feet 0.6 0.5 0.3  
The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal foot-candle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may not be less than one-sixth of this average. 
(3)  Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the city manager for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards. No lighting shall be installed or operated without the approval of the city manager. Should the city manager disapprove a request to install lighting fixtures within any public right-of-way, he shall communicate disapproval in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include specific reasons for disapproval. Any disapproval of a light or lighting system may be appealed to the city council. The city council may reserve or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, and decision of determination appealed. 
(4)  Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as "security lights" or for the purpose of lighting area other than the public streets shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from the street, and shall be oriented in such a manner to insure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. The approval of the city manager shall be obtained prior to installation of these lights. 
(5)  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner so as to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
(6)  The use of full cut-off luminaires is required in all areas. 
(7)  Shields must be used in residential areas to minimize light trespass. 
(8)  The use of photocells for automatic turn-on and shut-off is recommended in order to reduce light levels during inactive periods while maintaining sufficient lighting for safety and security. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-11, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-162. - Street signs. 
    Signs for street names, directions of travel, traffic control, and hazards shall be provided as directed by the city manager. Street signs on exterior/boundary streets shall be installed by the city with the developer paying a proportionate share determined by the city. Street signs for interior streets of a subdivision or land development shall be installed at the subdivider or developer's expense by the subdivider or developer, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
    Unless otherwise provided in standards and specifications adopted by the city manager, street signs shall meet the following specifications. Signs shall be constructed of aluminum sheets with reflective backgrounds. Information on the street name signs shall be readable from both sides of the sign. Signs shall be installed on a steel post. The vertical distance from the road elevation to the bottom of the sign face shall be seven feet with a minimum burial depth of three feet. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-12, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-163. - Curbs and gutters. 
    Curbs and gutters shall be installed in accordance with standards and specifications of the city manager. All residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions and land developments must have curbs and gutters, regardless of the size of the lots. When property fronting on an existing. City street is subdivided or developed, and the subdivision or land development uses said existing street for access, then curb and gutter shall be required along said street along the entire property frontage of said street. 
    Curbs shall be concrete which shall be class A 3,000 psi strength at 28 days. The typical curb minimum section shall be six inches by 24 inches by 12 inches 
    In instances where standards are not provided in the City Guidelines, Georgia Department of Transportation standards and specifications should be used. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-13, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-164. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  When required. Sidewalks shall be required within residential, commercial, industrial, and or/office developments/subdivisions on both sides of all streets. Sidewalks shall also be required along the entire perimeter of a development where such perimeters/parcel boundaries run or front a long a public street, or along the entire extent of the parcel boundaries where access to adjacent lots may or are possible as a part of existing or future developments. 
(b)  Location. Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nonpavement right-of-way of roads and shall parallel the street pavement as much as possible; provided, however, the city manager may permit sidewalks to be designed and constructed so that they meander around permanent obstructions or deviate from a linear pattern for design purposes. 
(c)  Specifications. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet wide. A median strip of grassed or landscaped areas at least five feet wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs in residential areas. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with current Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) specifications. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-14, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-008a, § 3, 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 44-165. - Drainage and stormwater management. 
(a)  General requirements. An adequate drainage system, separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and including any necessary ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water for all subdivisions and land developments. Sizing and location of all drainage structures shall be the responsibility of a registered professional engineer. The city manager may require the use of on-site control methods such as retention or detention to mitigate the stormwater and drainage impacts of the proposed subdivisions and land developments. The mayor and city council shall not approve any preliminary plat of subdivision that does not make adequate provision for storm and flood water runoff channels or basins as determined by the city manager. No building permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or for the development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or to the land development an adequate system of drainage and stormwater management. 
(b)  Method of design and capacity. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed in accordance with the State of Georgia Stormwater Manual. In addition, all systems must be designed to reduce the stormwater runoff to ten percent less than the stormwater runoff of the pre-developed conditions of the site. For redevelopments, a pre-developed runoff coefficient of three-tenths will be required. A copy of design computations shall be submitted along with required plans. Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area within the site and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding. Capacity for a 25-year storm or rain shall be provided for all street drainage structures such as catch basin, inlets cross drains, etc. Capacity for a 100-year frequency storm event shall be provided for all main drainage structures such as retention/detention basins, principal storm sewers, and all types of flood protection works. 
(c)  Location. Drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, and shall be constructed in accordance with standards and specifications of the city manager. Catch basins shall be located at low points of streets. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual, unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road right-of-way and with satisfactory access to the road. 
(d)  Discharge. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot or land development site to adjacent lots, land development sites, or vacant properties. Storm water shall not be discharged directly to perennial streams. It shall be directed toward natural drainages. If water must be discharged to a stream, the water quality flowing into the stream must meet or exceed the water quality in the receiving waters. The water quantity flowing into the stream must be evaluated to ensure the stream channel can accommodate the increased flows and not disrupt or degrade the ecology of the water body. 
(e)  Grading and site drainage. Lots or land development sites shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and drainage for individual lots or land development sites shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Buildings and parking lots shall be appropriately drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets. All disturbed or graded ground areas of a building site not used for buildings or open storage areas shall be appropriately stabilized and grassed or covered with plants or landscaping materials. 
(f)  Cross-drainpipes. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure, the design of which shall be approved by the city manager. Cross-drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural waterflow, and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width roadways and the required slopes. Cross drainpipes shall have head walls of an approved type on inlet and outlet ends of the pipe. Pipe installed within the right-of-way shall be reinforced concrete pipe. All storm drainpipes shall be minimum 18 inches in diameter. Storm sewer slopes shall be equal to or greater than one percent. 
(g)  Drop inlets. Drop inlets, at a minimum, shall be generally three-foot by three-foot boxes with two-foot by three-foot grates unless otherwise specified by the city manager. 
(h)  Easements. Where an irrigation ditch or channel, natural creek, stream or other drainage way crosses a subdivision or land development, the subdivider or developer shall provide an easement sufficient for drainage and maintenance. Easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities as approved by the city manager. When a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or intermittent stream, a stormwater or drainage easement of at least 25 feet shall be provided. 
(i)  Maintenance of detention facilities. Stormwater detention facilities are required to be maintained in a proper and appropriate manner to provide the water quality and detention as they were designed. Maintenance must be provided at least on an annual basis or due to a major stormwater event as outlined in the state stormwater management manual, latest edition. Failure to maintain a detention facility can result in the city assessing the cost of the maintenance and placing a lien against the property or homeowner's association. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-15, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-166. - Water. 
(a)  Generally. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a water system capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. No building permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or for the development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or to the land development an adequate water supply. 
(b)  Water main requirements. When a public water main is accessible, the developer shall install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, according to specifications of the Clayton County Water Authority or as required by the city manager. All water mains shall normally be at least six inches in diameter except that pipe of lesser size may be used if properly looped and adequate water pressure is maintained in accordance with standards established by the Southeastern Fire Underwriters Association. Pipe of less than four inches shall not be used except in unusual cases. Water lines shall be installed at least 30 inches below grade. Water mains within subdivisions and land developments must be provided with connections to each lot in the subdivision and each land development, except as otherwise specifically provided. 
(c)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all nonresidential land developments and all subdivisions except those permitted to be served by individual on-site wells. Fire hydrants with appropriate water pressure at appropriate intervals throughout the subdivision or land development shall be provided by the subdivider or land developer as required by the county fire department. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1,000 feet apart and within 500 feet of any principal dwelling. Hydrants, fittings, valves and fire department connections shall be approved by the fire department. Fire department connections shall be not less than 18 inches or more than 36 inches above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The thread of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the fire department. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street within the right-of-way shared by such underground utilities. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-16, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-167. - Sewer. 
(a)  Generally. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. Each subdivision and land development shall be served by adequate sewage disposal facilities. No building permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or for the development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or to the land development an adequate system of wastewater collection and treatment. 
(b)  Connection to public sewerage system. The subdivider or land developer shall connect with a public sanitary sewerage system and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision or to each land development. It shall be unlawful for any to maintain upon any such property an individual sewage disposal system. Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. No public sewer shall be less than eight inches in diameter. Manholes shall be installed in sanitary sewers with a maximum distance between two manholes of 400 feet, unless otherwise specified by standards of the city manager. Sanitary sewer slopes shall be equal to or greater than seven-tenths percent for eight-inch lines. All sewer lines shall be designed with slopes to obtain a minimum velocity of two feet per second. Minimum 20-foot wide easements shall be provided for all sanitary sewer lines. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-17, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-168. - Utilities. 
    All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electric power, telephone, and cable television, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision or land development. Whenever existing utility facilities are located above ground, except when existing on public roads and rights-of-way, they shall be removed and placed underground. Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities, private and public, and such easements shall be at least ten feet wide. When topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities along the rear lot lines of a subdivision, lot, or land development site, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided along side lot lines with satisfactory access. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-18, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-169. - Oversizing of improvements and utilities. 
    The subdivider or land developer shall construct such oversized improvements and utilities that the city manager determines are necessary, provided that the subdivider or land developer shall not be obligated for the additional cost of improvements and utilities that are not uniquely required for that development, and provided the subdivider agrees to a proposal by the city manager to share in the cost arrangements for over-sizing improvements and utilities. A formula may be developed by the city to provide for a sharing of the cost of other improvements needed to serve the subdivision or land development when certain of the improvements are necessary to serve future subdivisions or developments in the vicinity. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-19, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 44-170. - Procedure for administrative inspection and acceptance of public improvements. 
    Upon completion of public improvement construction, the subdivider or land developer shall notify the city manager and request an inspection. The city manager shall inspect all public improvements and shall notify the subdivider or land developer by mail of nonacceptance or preliminary acceptance. If the public improvements are not acceptable, the reason for non-acceptance shall be stated and corrective measures shall be outlined in a letter of notification. Upon notification, the subdivider or land developer shall correct all deficiencies identified in the non-acceptance letter within the time limit established by the city manager. Once deficiencies are corrected, the subdivider or land developer shall again request inspection in writing. Acceptance of public improvements required by article III of this code to be approved by the local governing body shall be forwarded to the governing body by the city manager following receipt of written approval of the city manager. 
(Res. No. 2005-10, § 1-3-20, 8-15-05) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Courts, ch. 30; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

Sec. 46-1. - Turning on fire hydrant. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized city officer or employee, to turn on a fire hydrant. 
(Code 1987, § 4-2-2) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
Sec. 46-2. - Obstructing drainage. 
    No person shall obstruct any ditch, sewer, drain, course of a stream, or course of surface water, where it has a natural and defined and accustomed channel. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-7) 
Cross reference- Stormwater management, § 78-36 et seq. 
Sec. 46-3. - Discharging sewage and other polluted waste into natural outlets. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet, creek, stream or body of water within the city or into any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-8) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 78. 
Sec. 46-4. - Posting bills; defacing property. 
    Section 46-4 of this Code posting bills, advertisements or other practices constituting signage shall be regulated by section 86-278 et seq. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-9; Ord. No. 02-04, § 5, 6-10-2002) 
Sec. 46-5. - Excavations. 
    No person shall leave any well, hole or pit in the ground uncovered or insecurely covered on any unenclosed premises in the city, or leave such well, pit or hole in the ground in such condition as to be dangerous to any persons or domestic animals. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-10) 
Sec. 46-6. - Discharge of firearms; hunting. 
    No person shall discharge firearms or hunt anywhere in the city; provided, however, that this section shall not prevent the discharge of firearms in honor guards at funerals or the discharge of firearms by authorized city employees in the discharge of their duties. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-12) 
Sec. 46-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 2006, repealed § 46-7, which pertained to fortunetelling and similar practices and derived from Code 1987, § 11-1-14; Ord. No. 04-13, § 1, adopted May 17, 2004. 
Sec. 46-8. - Possession of marijuana. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6, the municipal court is hereby clothed with jurisdiction to try cases involving the violation of state law in the possession of one ounce or less of marijuana as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended. 
(b)  Upon the request of the defendant or upon motion of the court, such charges shall be transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county. 
(c)  Upon conviction of such charges the defendant shall be punished as provided in section 1-12, or otherwise as may be provided by law. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-15) 
Sec. 46-9. - Minors; curfew. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to be in, on or upon the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city, either on foot or in a vehicle, after the hour of 11:30 p.m.; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the custody and care of the minor, or to a minor who by reason of an emergency remains in or upon the public streets, sidewalks or alleys, or to a minor who is in or upon those places upon lawful business directed by his parent, guardian or other person having the care and custody of the minor. 
(b)  The word "minor" as used in this section, shall mean any person under the age of 16 years. 
(c)  The case against any minor accused of violating this section shall be transferred to the juvenile court of the county, for disposition as provided by law. 
(d)  Upon proof that a violation of this section was committed with the knowledge of the parent or guardian, the penalty provided in section 1-12 shall apply to the parent or guardian. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-16) 
Sec. 46-10. - Permitting minors to participate in games or to loiter about premises of poolrooms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person keeping or carrying on, either himself or in connection with another or for another, any poolroom or billiard parlor for the general public, to allow a minor to engage in any game therein or to loiter in such place; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to minors accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-17) 
Sec. 46-11. - Vehicle repair, maintenance and other work. 
    Any maintenance, repair or other work on any vehicle shall be prohibited in the front yard or front driveway or street as these terms are defined by zoning, chapter 86 of this Code. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-21) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
Sec. 46-12. - Loitering for prostitution. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in loitering for prostitution within the corporate limits of the city. A person commits the offense of loitering for prostitution when such person in public loiters, lingers, sits or stands idly about, moves slowly about, slowly drives or rides in an automobile or other vehicle past the same location repeatedly or otherwise delays or lingers in public for the purpose of soliciting or procuring another to engage in any sexual act for hire, whether the loitering person expects to be the payor or the payee in such transaction. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether a person acts with the purpose of soliciting or procuring another to engage in any sexual act for hire are the following: 
(1)  Whether the activity takes place in an area known to be used for assignations to solicit or procure sexual acts for hire; 
(2)  Whether the person asks, offers, entices, requests, urges, incites or otherwise solicits performance of or participation in a sexual act for hire; 
(3)  Whether the person asks for, offers, entices, requests, urges, incites or otherwise solicits payment for performance of or participation in a sexual act; and 
(4)  Whether the person engages in conduct or speech or wears attire that is lewd, vulgar, obscene, overtly sexually suggestive or might reasonably be interpreted to be intended to excite the prurient interest of others. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1997, § 11-1-25.2) 
Sec. 46-13. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in loitering or prowling within the corporate limits of the city. A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when such person is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with such procedure, or it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and should have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1997, § 1(11-1-24.1), (11-1-24.2)) 
Sec. 46-14. - Public drinking or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages while on or in any public property, upon any private property to which the public has a general right of access, including private parking areas open to the general public, or upon any private property, open to the general public, but not licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. The prohibition of this section shall not apply to the consumption of alcoholic beverages authorized by the city council in connection with fundraising events sponsored by nonprofit corporations. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1994, § 11-1-24) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 46-15. - Open containers of alcoholic beverages in vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
    Container means any bottle, can, box or other glass, metal, plastic or paper receptacle or device which is either designed for or capable of holding liquid. 
    Open container means when the alcoholic beverage is placed in a container other than the original package in which the alcoholic beverage was sold, or where the alcoholic beverage remains in its original container but the seal of the container has been broken. 
(b)  Possession by driver. No person shall possess an open container of alcoholic beverages while operating a motor vehicle in the city. 
(c)  Possession by passengers. No passenger shall possess an open container of alcoholic beverages in or on a motor vehicle being operated in the city. 
(d)  Possession defined. An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger and is not located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk, or other locked nonpassenger area of the vehicle. An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of a passenger of a vehicle if the container is in the physical control of the passenger. An open container which is equally accessible to the driver and passenger of a motor vehicle shall be presumed to be in the possession of the operator of the vehicle. 
(e)  Application of section provisions. This section shall not apply to a passenger in a bus, taxicab or other vehicle for hire, the driver of which is operating the bus, taxicab or vehicle for hire as an employee of a business licensed for operation by either the state or the city or under a state or city license or permit and pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers. 
(f)  Penalty for violation of section. Any person convicted of or entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any charge in violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1989(2), § 1(11-1-24)) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 46-16. - Littering. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this section are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and, 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    As used in this section, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, organic or inorganic waste material, tin cans, refuse garbage, trash, paper, dead animals, cardboard, debris, glass, hulls, peelings, grass, weeds, ashes, metal, plastic, or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
    Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road, alley, street or highway; any body of water or watercourse thereof; any park, playground, building refuge or conservation or recreation area; and any residential, commercial, industrial or farm properties, timberlands, or forest. 
(c)  Receptacles to be provided. The chief of police is authorized, empowered and instructed to establish and maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where public property is frequented by the public, and to post signs directing persons to such receptacles and serving notice of the provisions of this section, and to otherwise publicize the availability of litter receptacles and requirements of this section. 
(d)  Acts constituting littering designated; prohibited when. It is unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave, or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city, or any waters in this city, unless: 
(1)  Such property is designated by the city for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of said owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(e)  Vehicle loads causing litter. No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(f)  Violation; prima facie evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of such conveyance shall have violated this section. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (a), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this section is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this section. 
(g)  Violations; penalty. 
(1)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (d) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine to be set by the presiding judge, of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00, and/or in the sound discretion of the court, any such person may be directed by the judge of said court to pick up and remove from any public street, alley, highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or in the sound discretion of the judge of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public park or, with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it has been established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(2)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1997, § 11-1-26; Ord. No. 04-07, § 1, 3-8-2004) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 54. 
Sec. 46-17. - Handbills. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, scatter, toss or throw any handbill, circular, advertising pamphlet or similar matter on any yard, lawn, driveway or porch, or into the vestibule of any building or in any doorway where they may reasonably be expected to be blown by the wind or scattered in such a manner as to litter the streets and sidewalks, clog catch basins and sewers, create fire hazards, obstruct passage or create an unclean or filthy condition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place in or on any unoccupied or unattended automobile, or other vehicle in the city, any handbill, circular, advertising pamphlet or similar matter; provided, however, that distribution of such materials may be permitted directly to any occupancy of a vehicle willing to accept such materials. 
(c)  Handbills as regulated in under subsections (a) and (b) shall be considered signs for purposes of further regulation in accordance with section 86-278 et seq. of the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Penalties for violating this section may include those, as applicable to littering under section 46-16 and/or section 86-278 et seq. of the zoning ordinance relating to signage. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-5; Ord. No. 02-04, § 6, 6-10-2002) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 46-18. - Insanitary deposits of excrement, garbage and other objectionable waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an insanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1-6) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 78. 
Sec. 46-19. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  [ Generally. ] The following acts shall be deemed disorderly conduct, and it is unlawful for any person to do or engage in any of said acts within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of or in fear of his safety, life, limb or health; 
(2)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of another person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Any person who shall endanger or interfere with the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm; 
(4)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property; 
(5)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and cause, provoke or engage in any fight or brawl; 
(6)  Any person who shall collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities; 
(7)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and engage or attempt to engage in gaming; 
(8)  Any person who shall frequent any public place and obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice, or device or attempt to do so; 
(9)  Any person who assembles with another or others and engages in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain or attempts to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person; 
(10)  Any person who utters, in a public place or any place open to the public, any obscene words or epithets; 
(11)  Any person who frequents any place or vehicle where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed, or tolerated; 
(12)  Any person who shall use "fighting words" directed towards any person, causing the person to become outraged and thus create turmoil; 
(13)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and do bodily harm to another or property of another or public property; 
(14)  Any person who shall, by acts of violence or threats thereof, interfere with another's pursuit of lawful occupations; 
(15)  Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority; 
(16)  Any person who damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition; 
(17)  Any person who appears in public in an intoxicated state or condition, whether the intoxification is by alcohol and/or drugs; 
(18)  Any person who exposes any part of his or her body in an indecent or rude manner; 
(19)  Any person, who by and in any manner, creates loud noises which disrupt, disturb or otherwise interfere with the peace and tranquility of the public; 
(20)  Any person who attempts to hinder, delay, obstruct or prevent any law enforcement officer from performing his or her duty; which includes the giving of a false name, address, or date of birth to a law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his or her official duties with the intent of misleading the officer as to his identity or birth date; 
(21)  Any person who keeps a disorderly house or house of ill-fame and all adults residing in the house shall be considered a keeper; 
(22)  Any person who lingers or loiters along public sidewalks, streets, or public ways of the city; 
(23)  Any person who fails or refuses to remove himself from the private property of another when requested to do so by the owner or occupant(s) thereof; 
(24)  Any person who alone or in concert with others, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or the value thereof in whole or in part by concealing or taking possession of the goods or merchandise from a retail establishment, alters the price tag or other price making of the goods or merchandise or any store or retail establishment wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchants stated price for the merchandise or property of value thereof of $300.00 or less. 
(25)  Appears in a public place or in view of the public wearing pants, shorts, or a skirt more than three inches below the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing the skin, undergarments, or underwear. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "underwear" shall include any article of clothing worn under the outer garments and next to the skin. At the discretion of the officer, any person violating this subsection may be warned to pull up their pants, and if they comply, said warning shall be the penalty for violation of this subsection. 
(b)  Shoplifting. Any person who alone or in concert with others, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, when the value is $300.00 or less, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment. 
(2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; 
(4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item or merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or 
(5)  Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
(c)  Driving through parking area located on privately owned property. No person shall after having been requested not to do so by signs affixed to the property or by a law enforcement officer or an authorized agent of the owner, park or stand an occupied or unoccupied motor vehicle in or repeatedly drive a motor vehicle through or within a parking area located on privately owned property and provided by a merchant, group or merchants, or shopping center or other facility for customers if: 
(1)  A letter is on file with the city public safety department requesting enforcement of this section of disorderly conduct; 
(2)  The motor vehicle is parked, is standing, or is being operated other than for the purpose of; 
a.  Transporting some person to or from the interior of the place of business. 
b.  Making use of a telephone, vending machine, automatic teller machine, or other similar facility located in the parking area. 
c.  Meeting the requirements of a situation in which it has unexpectedly become impossible or impractical for the motor vehicle to continue to travel on the public roads, or 
d.  Carrying out an activity for which express permission has been given by the owner of the parking area or an authorized representative of the owner. 
(d)  Continued conduct. Continuation of the disorderly conduct constitutes additional offenses. Each day that the disorderly conduct continues or each action as defined in this section, shall constitute a new and separate offense and the judge of the municipal court may impose such sentences as the circumstances may require. 
(e)  Punishment. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall pay a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or 12 months imprisonment, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1997, § 1; Ord. No. 2007-091, § 1, 2-12-2007; Ord. No. 2011-002, § 1, 8-8-2011) 
Sec. 46-20. - Public drunkenness. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in an intoxicated condition to appear in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own, other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which intoxicated condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1997, § 1) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 46-21. - Operation of motorized vehicle race tracks. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate within the city limits, for commercial purposes, a go-cart track or other race track facility for the racing or recreational operation of motorized vehicles. 
(Ord. of 11-9-1992, § 1) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
Sec. 46-22. - Alarm systems. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this chapter: 
    Alarm signal means a detectible signal, either audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to which the City of Jonesboro Police Department is expected to respond. 
    Alarm system means any device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other event requiring immediate attention and to which the City of Jonesboro Police Department is expected to respond, but does not include alarms installed in motor vehicles or fire alarms. 
    Alarm systems coordinator means an employee of the Jonesboro Police Department designated by the Chief of Police of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia to administer this chapter. 
    Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning or leasing an alarm system or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
    Automatic dial protection device means an automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the Clayton County "911" emergency communications center a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for emergency response. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electrical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence or improper activation by the alarm user, his employees or agents, and false signals activated to summon law enforcement or emergency personnel unless response was canceled by the alarm user or his agent before personnel are dispatched to the alarm location. A false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated for the first time by unusual conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to the control of the alarm user. In addition, an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the alarm systems coordinator to test the system. An alarm is false within the meaning of this chapter when, upon investigation or inspection by city employees, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, burglary, robbery, or such other crime was committed or attempted and no fire or other emergency existed in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. 
(b)  Alarm installations. The installation and alteration of alarm systems shall be in accordance with Article 760 "Fire Protective Signaling Systems" of the National Electrical Code, NFPA Number 70-1975 and the following NFPA standards: 
(1)  Standard 71-Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of central station signaling systems; 
(2)  Standard 72-B-Standard for the installation, maintenance and use of auxiliary protective signaling systems for fire alarm service; 
(3)  Standard 72-C-Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of remote station protective signaling system; 
(4)  Standards 72-D-Standard for the installation, maintenance, and use of remote station protective signaling systems for watchman, fire alarm and supervisory service; 
(5)  Standards 72-E-Standard on automatic fire detectors; and 
(6)  Standard 74-Standard for the installation, maintenance and use of household fire warning equipment. 
(c)  False alarm determinations. 
(1)  Response. Whenever an alarm is activated in the incorporated area of the city and the City of Jonesboro police respond, a city police officer on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area and determine whether the response was in fact necessary as indicated by the alarm system or whether the alarm was a false alarm. 
(2)  Notification. If the city police officer at the scene of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to be false, he shall make a report of the false alarm. The alarm systems coordinator shall be supplied with a copy of each false alarm determination report. The alarm systems coordinator shall in turn, notify the alarm user of the false alarm, and any such civil penalties if appropriate. 
(d)  Review of false alarm determinations. 
(1)  Request for review. The alarm systems coordinator shall, when requested by an alarm user, review the determination that an alarm was false. Such review shall be conducted by the alarm systems coordinator only if the alarm user requests in writing such a review within ten days of the date the alarm user was notified of the false alarm determination. The written request for review of a false alarm determination by the alarm systems coordinator shall include the following information: 
a.  Alarm user name; 
b.  Address at which alarm is installed; 
c.  Date of false alarm that is being contested; and 
d.  Facts upon which the request for review of the false alarm determination is made. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  Excessive false alarms. It is found and determined that six or more false alarms within any fiscal year of the city are excessive and constitute a public nuisance. 
(2)  Civil penalties. 
a.  The seventh false alarm within a fiscal year will result in the alarm user being assessed a $50.00 civil penalty. Each such penalty shall be paid within 30 days from date of receipt of the assessment notice. 
b.  The eighth false alarm within a fiscal year shall result in the alarm user being assessed a $100.00 civil penalty, which shall be paid within 30 days from receipt of the assessment notice. 
c.  The ninth false alarm within a fiscal year and all future alarms thereafter within the fiscal year or within 30 days of the previous alarm shall result in the alarm user cited to appear before the municipal court of the city to be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed $500.00. 
(3)  Remedy for refusal to pay assessments or to take remedial action. If an alarm user is assessed civil penalties for excessive false alarms and refuses either: (1) to pay the same; or (2) to make immediate remedial action so that excessive false alarms cease, then the city shall be authorized to bring an action in the municipal court of the city to abate the nuisance pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 41-2-5 and collect the fees. 
(f)  Preexisting alarm systems. Alarm systems upon which substantial installation work has already begun on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be required to comply with the construction standards required by section 46-22(b), yet such systems shall in all respects be subject to the false alarm, penalty, and other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, 11-12-01; Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Chapter 48 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 48-1-48-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 48-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the city department of public works, a department under the jurisdiction of the city council. 
    Facility means any building, structure, device, or property of the city used in any way for public purposes. 
    Park means all parks and all facilities located thereon, owned and/or controlled by the city, operated under the jurisdiction of the city. 
    Person means any individual, citizen, group, association, firm, corporation, or other legal entity who is authorized to use and enjoy the city's parks and any structure or facility located therein. 
    Playground means any facility owned, operated, or controlled by the city used for recreational activity. 
    Recreation center means any public facility used for amusement, play, recreational activity, or pleasure. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2000, § 1(7-1-1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 48-27. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be barred or suspended by the department from using any or all parks, if, in the department's sole discretion, such action is necessary to protect a park, the facilities located therein, or the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2000, § 1(7-1-3(e))) 
Sec. 48-28. - Penalties. 
    Violations of this article shall be punishable as misdemeanor ordinance violations under the laws of the state in a court of appropriate jurisdiction. Violation of this article may be punished by 60 days in jail, a fine of $1,000.00, 40 hours of community service, or a combination of such penalties. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2000, § 1(7-1-4)) 
Sec. 48-29. - Hours of operation. 
    All parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities shall be open daily to the general public between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. unless the venue has posted hours otherwise. It shall be unlawful for any person other than city personnel conducting city business therein to come onto or be present in a park during any other hours. A park or section of a park may be closed to the public by the department at any time and for any length of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2000, § 1(7-1-2(c))) 
Sec. 48-30. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person using parks, playgrounds, or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Violate any of the laws or regulations of the state or the United States of America. 
(2)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act as further described under sections 48-33-48-37. 
(3)  Prevent any person from using a park, recreation center, or playground, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in contravention of the provisions of this article and rules applicable thereto. 
(4)  Tease or entice any wild animal or disturb or damage any wild animal's nest or lair. 
(5)  Dress or undress in a park, playground, or recreation center, or in any vehicle, toilet, or other place located within a park, playground or recreation center except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for such purposes. 
(6)  Apply any chemical or fertilizer to any lawn, athletic field, soil, structure, or facility of a park, playground, or recreation center. 
(7)  Introduce any plant material, seed, sod, tree, or shrub to any lawn, athletic field, forest or soil of a park, playground, or recreation center. 
(8)  Bring a dangerous animal into a park, including any dangerous dog as designated by section 14-31 et seq., and under section 34-81 et seq.; permit a dog to be in a park unless such dog is on a leash of not more than six feet in length as set out here and in accordance with section 11-3-3 of the 1987 Code; bring any animal onto an athletic or sports field within a park; ride, graze, or walk a horse or other type of hoofed animal within a park without obtaining written authorization from the department, unless the park is specifically designated for such use; fail to immediately remove from the park and dispose in a sanitary manner excrement deposited by an animal in a person's possession and/or control while in a park. 
(9)  Violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the department relative to the use of a park, playground, or recreation center. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2000, § 1(7-1-2(b))) 
Sec. 48-31. - Use of grounds and facilities. 
    Every person using a park, playground, or recreational center shall clean up all debris, extinguish all permitted fires, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities located thereon in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2000, § 1(7-1-2(a))) 
Sec. 48-32. - Group activity. 
    Whenever more than 15 members of any group desire to use a park for a particular purpose, such as a picnic, party, sports event or theatrical or other entertainment performance, a representative of such group shall first obtain a permit from city hall for such purpose, unless, the group is sponsored by the department as one of the department's scheduled programs. City hall shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members of the public, and if the group meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the department in this article, and in department regulations not contrary to this article. A fee schedule for use of city parks is available at city hall. Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond, and/or on-site security to protect the city from liability of any kind or character and to protect city property from damage. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2000, § 1(7-1-2(d))) 
Sec. 48-33. - Games. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to endanger the general public in a park by taking part in or abetting the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball, and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts, or other facilities provided therefor. Park areas other than those designated as golf clubs or driving ranges may not be used for golf practice, driving ranges, or putting greens. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2000, § 1(7-1-3(a))) 
Sec. 48-34. - Picnic areas and use. 
    No person shall use any picnic area or any facility located in a park for the purpose of holding picnics or other activities to the exclusion of other persons unless such person has a city permit specifically granting such prescheduled use, nor shall any person use such area or facility for more than three hours of time if the area has more than 15 people. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2000, § 1(7-1-2(e))) 
Sec. 48-35. - Camping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to set up a tent, shack, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of an overnight stay, or to leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or vehicle to be used or that could be used for an overnight stay, such as a house-trailer, camp-trailer, wagon, or the like, unless authorized by the department by permit. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2000, § 1(7-1-3(b))) 
Sec. 48-36. - Swimming. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to a park except in such waters and at such locations as are designated therefor. Such swimming activity shall be in compliance with regulations pertaining thereto as set forth in this article or regulations adopted by the department which are not inconsistent with this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2000, § 1(7-1-3(c))) 
Sec. 48-37. - Boats and rafts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use a boat or raft or other flotation device on any waterway, stream, lake, or pond in a park unless written authorization allowing the activity is received by the department. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2000, § 1(7-1-3(d))) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-21.1, the city has adopted and is included in the solid waste management plan of Clayton County. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 16; environment, ch. 34; weeds and rubbish as nuisances, § 34-89; littering, § 46-16; insanitary deposits of excrement, garbage and other objectionable waste, § 46-18; utilities, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the words below shall have the following meanings: 
    Ashes means residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings. 
    Bulk waste means stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture and other waste materials excluding construction debris. 
    Cart means the receptacle, which size, shape, color and material upon which it is constructed is approved by the city manager of the city, designed or used for the depositing of garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials as specified by the city and provided by the city contractor. 
    City means the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    City contractor means the waste management organization with whom the city has entered into a contract to provide waste removal services or its successors or assigns. 
    Commercial establishment means all retail commercial, office, industrial and institutional establishments. 
    Commercial and industrial refuse means all garbage and rubbish generated by a resident at a commercial or industrial unit, but in all cases to exclude hazardous waste, such as but not limited to tires, motor oil and batteries, paint and paint thinner, gasoline, and batteries, etc. 
    Commercial and industrial unit means all premises, locations or entities, public or private requiring refuse collection within the service area for which refuse collection using carts or dumpsters is deemed to be appropriate, other than a residential unit. 
    Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
    Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
    Construction debris means waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations by a contractor, not a private resident owning the property. 
    Container means the receptacle designated or used for depositing of garbage refuse, trash or recyclable materials as specified by the city and includes but is not limited to carts, dumpsters, and bins. 
    Dead animals means animals or any portions thereof, weighing ten pounds or more, which have expired from any cause. 
    Dumpster means a metal receptacle designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for use primarily at commercial and industrial units. 
    Dumpster, recyclable means a receptacle, designed for the depositing of recyclable material, made of any material and having a capacity of two cubic yards or more. 
    Dumpster, refuse means a receptacle designed for the depositing of garbage, refuse, trash, or reusable materials, made of any material and having a capacity of two cubic yards or more. 
    Garbage means every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains, or other animal or vegetable matter (including, but not limited to, used metal cans and other food containers and all putrescible or easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents); except any matter included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste or rubbish, wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Hazardous waste means any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is designated as "hazardous" by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the state environmental protection division or the appropriate state, county or city agency by or pursuant to federal or state law. For purposes of this chapter, the term hazardous waste shall also include tires, batteries, paint thinner, motor oil, gasoline, paint or paint cans (excluding empty paint cans or paint cans filled with absorbents to dry out the paint) and bulky waste containing chlorofluorocarbon refrigerants or Freon. 
    Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
    Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
    Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
    Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
    Recyclable material means material that is capable of being reused or returned to use in the form of a raw material. 
    Recyclable material(s) means newspaper, glass, plastic, aluminum and cardboard. 
    Refuse means garbage and rubbish generated at a residential, commercial, church, park, medical, or industrial unit and includes combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture, bedding; noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, other mineral waste; street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catchbasin dirt, contents of litter receptacles. Provided, refuse shall not include earth and wastes from building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations. 
    Residential refuse means all garbage and rubbish generated by a resident at a residential unit, in all cases to exclude hazardous waste or location. 
    Residential unit means: 
(1)  A free-standing structure constructed for use as a residence by a person or group of persons; or 
(2)  A residential unit within a multifamily structure (including only duplex, triplex, and quadriplex residential units) for which refuse collection using carts is deemed to be appropriate. 
    Reusable material means items or materials that can be reused with little or no value added. 
    Rubbish means all used and discarded printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, mattresses, clothing, shoes and booths, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping for crockery and glass, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials not included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, garbage, hazardous waste or yard trimmings. 
    Service area means the entire geographic area within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Yard trimmings means wood, wood products, tree trimmings, dead plants, weeds, trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust resulting from homeowner landscaping maintenance, leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005; Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 10-13-2014) 
Sec. 54-2. - Public works director-General duties. 
    The public works director shall discharge the duties imposed upon him in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-3. - Scope of provisions. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to all public and private markets, as well as all places of business, hotels, restaurants, and all other premises, whether used for business or residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-4. - Administrative regulation. 
    The city clerk shall not issue a business license or certificate of occupancy to any person, firm, or corporation which has not complied with the requirements of this chapter. The violation, noncompliance, or other violation of an administrative order issued by the public works director or the city's code enforcement officer, under this chapter, will be grounds for suspension or revocation of occupation tax certificates. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-5. - Uncovered garbage. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city any garbage or other material subject to decay, other than yard trimmings, leaves or grass, excepting in a tightly covered container. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-6. - Wind-blown refuse. 
    It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, or refuse of such a material capable of being blown away by the wind anywhere in the city, other than yard trimmings, leaves or grass, except in a covered container. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-7. - Depositing garbage on the street. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any garbage, refuse or on any public street, parking area, or alley in the city; provided, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit temporarily placing garbage, refuse, trash or recyclable materials in a container at an approved collection point complying with the provisions of this chapter preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-8. - Collection of garbage. 
    The public works director shall have charge of the collection of administration of this chapter. The collection shall be made from all premises at lease once each week, provided that the material is properly stored for collection in a container complying with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-9. - Containers-Generally. 
(a)  All garbage shall be placed in closed containers. 
(b)  Containers shall be kept tightly covered at all times except when momentarily open to receive garbage or to have the contents removed. No container shall be so overloaded with garbage or waste matter that its cover will not fit securely. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-10. - Same-In commercial and multiple-dwelling units. 
(a)  Any apartment house, development, condominium development or town house development constructed after November 20, 1978, and any hotel, motel containing four or more units, roominghouse, business, industry, public or semiprivate establishment of any nature or kind other than a single-family, duplex or triplex residential unit shall install a garbage container meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  All containers must be steel, continuous welded and property reinforced. 
(2)  All lids will be flanged and reinforced for strength. 
(3)  Bottoms must be reinforced with a 11/2-inch drain plug installed flush to bottom. 
(4)  All containers must be primed and finished with enamel or epoxy paint. 
(5)  Body dimensions as to length and height of container can vary with the size of container; however, all container widths will be 72 inches. Minimum gauges of steel shall be as follows: 
a.  Twelve-gauge throughout. 
b.  Sixteen-gauge boxed lid. 
c.  One and five-sixteenths-inch CRS trunion bar. 
d.  One-inch × two-inch channel bracing around top. 
e.  One-inch × two-inch channel bracing from trunion to rear corner. 
f.  Four-inch × six-inch × ten-inch gauge pads on bottom four corners. 
(6)  The preparation and storage of commercial and multiple-dwelling refuse for collection shall be as follows: 
a.  Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a commercial establishment, condominium or multiple dwelling, arrangements for a storage of refuse and location of containers must be approved by the superintendent of sanitation. 
b.  Commercial containers at existing commercial establishments and multiple dwellings serviced by city collection vehicles shall be placed at locations approved by the superintendent of sanitation for collection by the sanitation department. The city will not collect refuse from commercial establishments or multiple dwellings unless it is placed in commercial containers, properly located, except where space or other limitations dictate other arrangements, which shall be specifically approved by the superintendent of sanitation. 
c.  Where the occupants of two or more commercial establishments share the use of a refuse can or commercial containers, it shall be the joint responsibility of the users to maintain the area surrounding such cans or containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
d.  The occupant or occupants of commercial establishments and the management of multiple dwellings serviced by commercial containers shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding such commercial containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
e.  All garbage and rubbish shall be free from liquid and placed in watertight paper or plastic bags with the tops secured prior to placing in commercial containers. 
f.  Cardboard boxes shall be flattened before placed in containers. 
(7)  Commercial containers containing the following items will not be emptied until they are removed therefrom: 
a.  Large household or industrial appliances. 
b.  Furniture. 
c.  Tires. 
d.  Wooden crates. 
e.  Logs or limbs over four feet in length or four inches in diameter. 
f.  Bed springs and mattresses. 
g.  Rock, dirt, concrete blocks, sheetrock, roofing, lumber or other building materials. 
h.  Uncontainerized garbage, yard debris and household trash. 
(8)  Normal household appliances must be arranged to be picked up with the city contractor. 
(9)  The user of commercial containers shall be responsible for the appearance, maintenance and serviceability of containers procured by them or placed for their use. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-11. - Garbage collection fees; billing; penalties for late payment. 
(a)  For the year calendar 2014 and each succeeding calendar year, a garbage collection fee in an amount set by a fee schedule, as modified from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council, shall be assessed against each residential unit and to the real property owner. The garbage collection fee schedule shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The city finance officer, when collecting the city's ad valorem taxes, shall prepare and mail to each owner of residential property in the city an annual billing for garbage collection fees. Owners of residential units shall be assessed a garbage collection fee for each residential unit on the property. 
(c)  The garbage collection fee will appear as a separate line item on the property owner's annual ad valorem tax bill and shall become due and payable in one annual payment at the same time that ad valorem taxes are due and payable. Each year's payment entitles the property owner to garbage collection and disposal service for each residential unit so assessed. 
(d)  If the garbage collection fees remain unpaid, the city clerk or an authorized designee shall have the authority to issue a writ of fieri facias (fi. fa.) or execution against the residential unit served. The writ of fieri facias or execution shall have the same lien dignity and priority as a writ of fieri facias or execution issued for ad valorem taxes. Each annual installment shall become a lien against the residential unit served on January 1 of each year in the same manner and the same priority that a lien attaches for ad valorem taxes. Any garbage collection fee that remains unpaid shall accrue penalty, interest, and fieri facias charges in the same manner and the same rate as delinquent ad valorem taxes. 
(e)  In lieu of payment of this garbage collection fee, all properties which are exempt from ad valorem taxes under Georgia law shall be charged and invoiced for all sanitation service received from the city through a monthly bill to the registered address of the owner of such property. The charge for such services shall be determined by the governing authority. 
(f)  There shall be no free service offered by the city for garbage collection service. Persons, firms, individuals, corporations or associations of individuals who have their collection service discontinued shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 54-12 herein. 
(g)  Unless requested by the property owner, no garbage collection fee will be charged to vacant lots. Only properties that have thereupon a residential unit shall be charged the garbage collection fee. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005; Ord. No. 2014-006, § 2, 10-13-2014) 
Sec. 54-12. - Penalty. 
    Any person in violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be subject to prosecution and fined up to $1,000.00 for each occasion on which a violation occurs. Each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Secs. 54-13-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 54-31. - Supervision by city. 
    The public works director and/or city's code enforcement officer shall be empowered to inspect the manner in which all garbage, refuse or within the city are accumulated or disposed for compliance with this chapter. The public works director and/or city's code enforcement officer is empowered to order the discontinuance of actions in violation of this chapter or take any other action authorized to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, amended the Code by deleting former § 54-31, which pertained to provisions saved from repeal and derived from the original codification. 
Sec. 54-32. - Pickup hours regulated. 
    It shall be unlawful for any commercial garbage service to pick up trash carts, dumpsters, or other such containers between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except in the case of a bona fide emergency, the nature of which has been communicated to the public works director of the city at the time of said emergency. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-33. - Owner and operator of premises to maintain dumpster site. 
    The owner and/or the person in charge of the premises for which a dumpster is permitted shall, at all times, maintain the premises in a state, free and clear of litter, debris, and trash. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-34. - Garbage and recycling collection. 
    All residents of the city shall participate in the garbage collection and may participate in the recycling collection by using the city contractor. All residents shall pay the monthly fees charged by the contractor for this service and approved by the city council. All commercial establishments must immediately participate in the garbage collection and may participate in the recycling collection by using the city contractor if the commercial establishment does not maintain a contract with another waste management company. If a commercial establishment can show the city council in an open meeting that it maintains a contract for waste management services executed before January 10, 2005 that commercial establishment may honor its contract. However, under all circumstances all commercial establishments shall use the city contractor by January 1, 2008. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-35. - Uncovered garbage. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city any garbage, or other material subject to decay, other than leaves or grass, except in a tightly covered cart or dumpster. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-36. - Consent of owner. 
    It shall be unlawful to dump or place any garbage, refuse or on any premises in the city without the consent of the owner of such premises. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-37. - Disposal. 
    It shall be unlawful to dispose of any garbage, refuse, trash anywhere in the city except in an incinerator, or disposal device, properly constructed and operated or in a lawfully established garbage or refuse dump. Such materials not so properly disposed of shall be placed in carts or dumpsters for collection by a licensed trash and garbage collection service as hereinafter described. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-38. - Accumulation of material treated as disposed. 
    Where a party claims the accumulation of refuse, dust, or wastes from building operations is not a "disposal" within the section 54-37 meaning, the allowance of the accumulation for a period of more than seven days without removal will presumptively cause the accumulation to come within the meaning of section 54-37. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-39. - Reserved. 
Sec. 54-40. - Restaurant container. 
    Restaurant containers shall be placed on a concrete pad or other nonabsorbent surface material, in accordance with the county health department requirements. Each restaurant shall have its own container. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-41. - Certain matters not to be placed in containers. 
    Dead animals, feces, explosives, dangerous and corrosive materials, clothing taken from persons with infectious diseases, heavy metals, bulky waste or any hazardous waste shall not be placed in any trash or garbage receptacle, cart or dumpster. Produce, meats, poultry, and food preparation oils shall be placed in sealed bags prior to being placed in any trash or garbage receptacle, cart or dumpster in such a manner as to minimize noxious or offensive odor emanating therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-42. - Doors and lids to be kept closed. 
    Except when trash or garbage is being loaded into carts or dumpsters, or pickup of the same is being affected, all doors for screening, doors or lids of carts or dumpsters shall be kept closed. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-43. - Scavenging. 
    No person other than the owner thereof shall interfere with any trash or garbage receptacle, cart or dumpster placed for the purpose of storing solid waste, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any trash or garbage receptacle, cart or dumpster from the location where the trash or garbage receptacle, cart or dumpster has been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-44. - Dumping and littering prohibited. 
(a)  All persons, firms, individuals, corporations or associations of individuals are hereby prohibited from dumping or discarding trash, refuse, bulky waste, rubbish, garbage, or discarded articles of all kinds, including but not limited to refrigerators, stoves, furniture, cans, bottles, boxes, sacks, waste paper, tires, batteries, hazardous waste, and all types of articles not suitable for human use, on private or public property in the corporate limits of the city, including streets, alleys sidewalks, highways, parks and recreational areas. 
(b)  Dumping of any of the items referenced in subsection (a) above by any person, firm, individual, corporation, or association (hereinafter "person") in a container not owned by such person or for which such person does not have permission shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-45. - Method of disposal. 
    All waste and related materials described in section 54-44 shall be discarded in containers, transfer station, landfills and sanitary dumps. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-46. - Maintenance of carts. 
    The city contractor shall provide one cart for each residential unit and commercial unit, as appropriate. The city contractor will replace (or at its option, repair) carts, which require replacement or repair as a result of normal wear and tear, and not as a result of misuse by the city resident. If the cart is deemed destroyed by the resident, then a charge of $50.00 will be applied to the resident's next quarterly bill. If the cart is deemed lost or stolen, then a charge of $40.00 will be applied to the residential unit or commercial unit's next quarterly bill. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-47. - Placement of carts. 
    All moveable carts provided to residents shall be placed at the curbside location for pick-up not earlier than 12 hours prior to the scheduled collection date and shall be removed from such location within 24 hours of the collection date. No person shall leave the cart at the location for pick-up in excess of the time periods set forth herein; provided, however, that no person shall be cited for violating this section in the event that the regular collection schedule is interrupted. Carts shall not be placed in such a manner so as to block or obstruct mail receptacles, water meters or fire hydrants. Carts shall be placed within four feet of the roadside. 
Sec. 54-48. - Penalty. 
    Any person in violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be subject to prosecution and fined up to $1,000.00 for each occasion on which a violation occurs. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Secs. 54-49-54-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SANITATION AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 54-56. - Collection by city contractor. 
    All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city contractor. All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed by the city contractor under the supervision of the public works director. The public works director shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the administration of this chapter as he/she finds necessary, and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-57. - Residential services; general conditions of residential collection. 
(a)  The city contractor for refuse collection and removal shall provide minimum once weekly curb service collection of refuse at residential units except as otherwise set out herein. 
(b)  The city or its authorized agent for refuse collection and removal shall provide collection of refuse for disabled persons, as defined in section 54-59 and as directed in that section. 
(c)  Owners or tenants of residential units shall place the refuse in the carts and the carts shall be placed, on assigned collection days, at front curbside locations in such manner as not to obstruct passage. Owners shall place the carts at appropriate curbside locations at or before 6:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the collection vehicles. This placement shall not be made before dusk on the date prior to collection day. Any refuse placed on the curb after departure of the pickup crew of the city or its authorized agent shall subject the owner to prosecution for violation of this chapter should the street become littered from refuse. 
(d)  Owners or tenants shall remove the carts from curbside location to storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting the premises; removal of the cart should be accomplished within 24 hours following collection on the date the contents are emptied and collected. 
(e)  Owners or tenants shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon their property or the public thoroughfares bounding upon owner's property. 
(f)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to place or cause to be placed for collection any hazardous waste, any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(g)  Bulky waste may be collected at the curbside once every week. Owners shall be responsible for the removal of any CFCs and Freon from any items of bulky waste prior to its collection. 
(h)  Refuse generated from the conduct of customary home occupations carried on from residential units will be collected on a residential fee basis. 
(i)  All refuse will be collected by the city contractor if placed in the cart. No open containers shall be permitted. 
(j)  Yard trimmings shall be collected by the city contractor once every week if placed at curbside for collection. A private contractor providing landscaping maintenance must remove yard trimmings from the premises and may not be placed at curbside for collection. 
(k)  Owners of a residential unit shall be responsible for the proper disposition of any dead animals. 
(l)  During any week in which there is an observed holiday or extremely harsh weather conditions, such as snow or ice, the city contractor may collect refuse in accordance with an altered collection schedule as needed. 
(m)  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent owners from contracting with the city contractor for additional services at additional costs. 
(n)  The city at all times reserves the right to direct and control all relevant aspects of the time, place and manner of residential refuse service. Nothing in this chapter is intended to abridge the city's right to ownership and control of the waste stream. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-58. - Residential disposal methods. 
    Owners of record of all residential units shall obtain service for each such unit from the city contractor. Failure to provide evidence of proper disposal of refuse upon request by city officials (receipts, canceled checks, etc.) shall be a violation of this chapter, punishable as set forth in section 54-48. Refuse may not be disposed of by any person in an open dump nor may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his/her property. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-59. - Disabled. 
(a)  Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential unit and who is disabled to the extent that he or she is incapable of moving his/her refuse shall obtain a physician's certificate which states with particularity the nature and extent of such disability. Disabled persons shall not be required to place the refuse at curbside. This subsection shall not apply unless all of the adult persons in a residential unit are disabled and obtain such physician's certificate. Certificates will be mailed to the city contractor with a copy to the public works director. This subsection also applies to temporary disability not to exceed 90 days. The city's contractor may make reasonable rules for noncurbside collection for disabled persons; all garbage and refuse must be bagged. 
(b)  The city contractor or its authorized agent shall provide recycling services to disabled persons to the same extent such services may be provided under section 54-61. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-60. - Commercial collection. 
(a)  The owner of any commercial establishment shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all refuse accumulated at such establishment to a refuse handling facility operating in compliance with state regulation and must arrange for service with the city or its authorized agent. No business license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the owner or occupant of such premises has arranged with the city contractor to provide refuse collection for that commercial establishment. 
(b)  The frequency of refuse collection from any commercial establishment shall be determined in accordance with its need and convenience as determined by the public works director. If necessary to protect public health, the public works director shall have the authority to require more frequent collections than originally determined. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided for herein, no other person, firm or corporation shall collect or convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city other than the city contractor. To the extent there exists, as of the date of the enactment of this chapter, a validly enforceable contract for refuse collection by and between any commercial establishment within the city an a third party company, not the authorized agent of the city, such contract will, upon application made by the commercial establishment who is a party to the contract, be allowed to expire, excluding any provisions for renewal, before the city shall require the commercial establishment to exclusively use the city contractor for refuse collection services. 
(d)  All commercial establishments or other entities producing hazardous waste or special waste shall be responsible for the disposal of and provide for the disposal of the hazardous waste or special waste in accordance with all federal and state laws and regulations. 
(e)  The owner of any commercial establishment serviced by dumpsters which property is adjacent to a residential area shall cause to be built, around the area in which the dumpster is located, a screened fence of durable quality and construction at least six feet in height which conceals and blocks the container from the view of any public property. The owner of any commercial establishment shall provide to the city or its authorized agent unimpeded access to each dumpster by the collection vehicles on collection days at collection times. No parking or other obstructions shall be permitted in the access area for dumpsters. 
(f)  Concrete pads of appropriate size and construction shall be provided for dumpsters or groups of dumpsters by the property owner. Adequate drainage shall be provided in and around the pad areas. 
(g)  As a condition to the issuance of a permit for the construction of a commercial establishment, arrangements for the storage of refuse and location of dumpsters must be approved by the public works director or his/her designee. 
(h)  Owners of commercial establishments shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding dumpsters clean and free of accumulation of refuse. 
(i)  The city reserves the right at all times to direct and control all relevant aspects of the time, place and manner of commercial refuse service. Nothing in this chapter is intended to abridge the city's right to ownership and control of the waste stream. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-61. - Recycling program. 
(a)  Owners of all residential units may participate in the city's recycling program. 
(b)  The city contractor shall collect at least once every week, pursuant to a contractor-provided list of guidelines, certain recyclable materials which may include corrugated cardboard boxes, newspapers, plastic (PET and HDPE), aluminum and tin cans. The recyclable materials shall not overflow or protrude from the three-foot square recycling container. 
(c)  The city contractor may change the type and number of recyclable materials, and to redetermine collection and disposal of recyclable materials as viable alternatives are developed. 
(d)  The city contractor may provide one bin to each unit of a residential unit in which the residents shall deposit their recyclable materials. The cost of the bin shall be incorporated into the monthly charge for refuse collection services. The contractor may provide carts to condominiums or multifamily residential units to be placed in a common location where all residents of the condominium or multifamily residential unit may deposit their recyclable materials. The contractor may provide other appropriate recycling containers to customers as the need arises. 
(e)  Recyclable materials, which are placed in designated recycling bins for regular curbside collection, collected by the contractor shall become the property of the contractor. 
(f)  Owners of residential units shall place the recyclable materials in the bin and the bin shall be placed, on assigned collection days, at front curbside locations in such manner as not to obstruct passage. Owners shall place the bins at appropriate curbside location at or before 6:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the collection vehicles. This placement shall not be made before dusk on the day prior to collection day. Any recyclable materials placed on the curb after departure of the collection crew of the city contractor shall subject the owner to prosecution for violation of this chapter should the street become littered from such recyclable materials. 
(g)  Owners of residential units shall remove bins from curbside location to a storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting the premises; removal of the bin should be accomplished within 24 hours following collection on the day the contents are emptied and collected. 
(h)  During the 24-hour period commencing at 6:00 p.m. on any day preceding a day designated by the contractor for collection of recyclable materials, no person other than any authorized employee or agent of the contractor shall remove recyclable materials from the designated recycling container which has been properly placed for collection. Each collection in violation of this section during that period shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as provided in section 54-48. 
(i)  Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of any individual, organization or other entity to donate any recyclable materials for disposal, if such disposal does not violate any applicable statute, regulation or chapter. 
(j)  Participation in this recycling program shall be voluntary. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-62. - Accumulation. 
(a)  No owner or tenant shall allow the accumulation on his or her premises of solid waste where such solid waste creates or may create a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or is unsightly, or emits foul or obnoxious odors which constitute either a public or private nuisance. Such conduct shall constitute a violation of this chapter for each day the solid waste remains on the premises and for each day the solid waste remains on the premises and shall be punishable as set forth in section 54-48. 
(b)  Any owner or tenant failing to comply with the requirements of this section may be prosecuted by the city in accordance with this chapter and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 54-48. 
Secs. 54-63-54-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - YARD TRIMMINGS DISPOSAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 54-71. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical lift. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-72. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. 
    Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in the following manner: 
(1)  Composted on the site where the material was grown, followed by incorporation of the finished compost into the soil at that site; or 
(2)  Chipping woody material on the site where such material was generated; or 
(3)  Collecting yard trimmings and transporting them to another site to be chipped or composted. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-73. - Penalty. 
    Any person in violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be subject to prosecution and fined up to $1,000.00 for each occasion on which a violation occurs. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Secs. 54-74-54-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LITTERING 

Sec. 54-81. - Intent. 
    It is the intention of the mayor and council of the city, to provide for the uniform prohibition throughout the corporate limits of the city, of any and all littering on public or private property, and to curb thereby the description of the beauty of the city, and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of all of the citizens of the city, and to assure that all persons, residing, working, traveling, or visiting within the corporate limits of the city, property dispose of garbage and refuse. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-82. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  The word "litter" shall include all garbage waste material, rubbish, tin cans, bottles, sand, gravel, concrete, slag, refuse, trash, debris, dead animals or discarded materials of any and every kind and description. 
(2)  The phrase "public or private property" shall be all inclusive, such that no property shall be exempt from the regulation by this chapter. 
(3)  "Nuisance" means any use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises is located. This includes but is not limited to the keeping of the following: ashes, rubbish, garbage, lumber, bricks, cinder blocks, insulation materials, building debris, refuse, litter, or waste of any kind whether liquid or solid. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-83. - Unlawful activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, in person or by his or her agent, employee or servant, to cast, throw, sweep, sift, deposit, accumulate, dump, place, leave, or to cause or permit the casting, throwing, sweeping, sifting, depositing, accumulating, dumping, placing, or leaving in any manner in or upon any public or private place in the corporate limits of the city or any lake, river, stream, public body of water, drain, sewer or receiving basin within the corporate limits of the city, any kind of litter, waste article, thing or substance whatsoever, whether liquid or solid, or shall any person, firm, or corporation, cast, throw, sweep, sift, deposit, accumulate, dump, place or leave any of the aforementioned items anywhere within the corporate limits of the city in such manner that it may be carried or deposited in whole or in part, by the action of the wind, rain or other precipitation to any aforementioned place unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property. 
(2)  The material is deposited under a permit authorized by any ordinance of the city or is deposited in or conducted into the city sewer system through lawful drains in accordance with the ordinances of the city relating thereto. 
(3)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property, and used for its designated purpose. 
(4)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare and this chapter. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything else contained herein to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to dump or deposit garbage, waste or litter of any kind or nature, household or commercial, in any litter receptacle or container, public or private, the total weight of which, by volume, exceeds five pounds, which garbage, waste or litter, household or commercial, has been generated outside of the corporate limits of the city and which is brought into the corporate limits of the city; except that this section shall not apply to garbage, waste or litter, household or commercial, dumped or deposited into a property licensed waste transfer station. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-84. - Vehicles to be covered. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by his or her or its agent, employee, or servant, to use any vehicle to haul any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste, articles or things of substance, whether liquid or solid, unless such vehicle is covered to prevent any part of its load from spilling or dropping at all times while such vehicle is in motion on any street or alley in the city. 
    Provided, however, that the requirements herein for covering such vehicles shall not apply to vehicles carrying brush cuttings, tree trimmings, branches, logs and similar waste material, if such matter is securely lashed to such vehicle to prevent spilling or dropping of the aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-85. - Prima facie evidence. 
    Whenever litter is thrown, placed, deposited, dropped, dumped or cast from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance containing more than one person, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of said conveyance shall have violated this chapter. 
    Wherever any litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, dumped, cast or accumulated on public or private property in violation with this chapter is discovered to contain items which display the name of a person thereon in such a way as to indicate that the item belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-86. - Notification. 
    Notice of a violation of this chapter shall be made by serving a citation by mail or in person by an officer, agent or official of the city empowered by the this Code or by the state to issue citations on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-87. - Penalties. 
    Any person in violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be subject to prosecution and fined up to $1,000.00 for each occasion on which a violation occurs. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 54-88. - Abatement. 
    Whenever any person convicted of violating this chapter shall continue to maintain property in violation of this chapter, an appropriate designee of the city may be empowered to enter upon the property and correct the unlawful condition, and to place a lien against the property for the cost of such litter removal and the cost of preparing and filing the lien, including legal expenses incurred. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-10-2005) 
Chapter 58 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way saved from repeal, § 1-7(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(14); buildings and building regulations, ch. 16; peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, § 18-321 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34; historical preservation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 50; signs, ch. 52; subdivisions, ch. 62; telecommunications, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

Secs. 58-11-58-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Numbering of houses and buildings. 
    Each occupant, whether owner or tenant, of each business or residential building located within the city is required to place upon that house or building, within two feet of the front door or door stoop, the house number assigned to such lot by the official house numbering map of the city on file in the office of the city clerk. The numbers may be painted or made of any material and shall be of such size that they are easily visible from the centerline of the street. 
(Code 1987, § 5-1-2) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 16. 
Sec. 58-2. - Display or deposit of merchandise upon streets, sidewalks or parkways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to display or deposit any merchandise upon the streets, sidewalks, alleyways or parkways of the city; provided, however, that merchants may contain three permits per year to conduct sidewalk sales in front of their businesses. Each such sale shall be limited to three consecutive days in duration. 
(Code 1987, § 5-1-3) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 58-3. - Obstructing streets generally; digging holes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or construct any fence or building or other obstruction upon or over, or otherwise obstruct, all or any part of any street, avenue, alley, lane or sidewalk, or other public ground of the city, or to dig any hole in any street, sidewalk or other public highway or grounds of the city, without the written consent of the city council. 
(Code 1987, § 5-1-4) 
Sec. 58-4. - Obstructions at street corners. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, place or grow any structure, vegetation or obstruction of any kind or permit any such obstruction to be constructed, placed or grown which exceeds three feet in height measured from the crown of the street, on any property zoned as residential, and which is located at the corner of intersecting streets within the area formed by a triangle, the apex of which is the point of intersection of the centerline of the streets, the legs of which extend 75 feet along those centerlines and the hypotenuse of which connects the ends of the legs; provided, however, that the terms of this section shall not apply to utility facilities or to vegetation the branches of which are kept trimmed to a height of six feet above the ground. 
(Code 1987, § 5-1-5) 
Sec. 58-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 2, adopted Jan. 8, 2018, repealed § 58-5, which pertained to excavations in streets; permit required and derived from Code 1987, § 5-1-6. 
Sec. 58-6. - Deposit of building materials. 
    Building material for buildings in the process of construction may be deposited on the streets of the city if a permit is first obtained from the city and the materials are placed in such a manner as not to prevent the passage of vehicles. If such material obstructs the passage of vehicles, it shall be the duty of the chief of police or any police officer to remove the material at the cost of the owner. 
(Code 1987, § 5-1-7) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 16. 
Sec. 58-7. - Abatement and removal required. 
    All encroachments or obstructions on any public street of the city are hereby declared to be nuisances and shall be abated and removed in accordance with law. 
(Code 1987, § 5-1-8) 
Sec. 58-8. - Retail establishment parking lots. 
    All retail establishment parking lots shall be swept, blown or otherwise cleaned at least once weekly. 
(Code 1987, § 9-6-1) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 58-9. - Major thoroughfares designated. 
    The following streets and highways are designated as major thoroughfares of the city: 
(1)  State Route 19-41; 
(2)  State Route 54; 
(3)  Main Street; 
(4)  State Route 138; 
(5)  Smith Street; 
(6)  North Avenue; 
(7)  Stockbridge Road; and 
(8)  McDonough Street. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1988) 
Sec. 58-10. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
    The city's sign regulations as set forth in the ordinances adopted September 19, 1988 and October 9, 1989 are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 58-11-58-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-41. - Purpose and findings. 
    The mayor and council of the city find that special events as herein defined, are a medium through which individuals may conduct certain lawful economic and non-economic activities on the public properties, streets, sidewalks, and rights-of-way lying within the city, and that necessary to the protection of public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Jonesboro. By enacting this chapter the mayor and council of the city intend to: 
(1)  Balance the rights of individuals, groups, organizations, clubs, associations, or other entities to conduct such special events; 
(2)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(3)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
(4)  Reduce the possible adverse effect of such special events on the inhabitants and economic interests located in the city; 
(5)  Protect property values within the city by minimizing the possible adverse effects of such special events; 
(6)  Promote economic development; and 
(7)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of special events regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-42. - Definitions. 
    Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary. Words not defined herein or in the above referenced book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence, section, and article in which they occur. Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  The term "producer" shall mean any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for planning, producing and conducting a special event. 
(2)  The term "special event" shall mean any organized activity having as its primary purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education, such as a festival or celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade or march, rally or assembly which takes place on a public property, street, sidewalk or right-of-way, or which occurs on private property and impacts government services on a public property, street, sidewalk or right-of-way. 
(3)  The term "vendor" shall mean any person or persons who engages in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary basis during an approved special event. 
(4)  The term "sub-permit" shall mean any permit or written approval that authorizes some component of an outdoor event, such as, but not limited to, an electrical permit or an alcohol permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-006 , § 1, 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-43. - Applications and permits. 
(a)  Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person, group, organization, association, club or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any special event in the city without first obtaining from the city a valid permit for such special event. 
(b)  Geographic limitations. Each special event shall be conducted, located, and limited to the specific geographic area or areas authorized and permitted under the terms, conditions and restrictions of the city permit issued for each such special event and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Time limitations. Each special event shall be limited in time to the dates and time periods authorized and permitted under the terms, conditions, and restrictions of the city permit issued for each such special event and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Activity limitations. Each special event shall be limited to those activities authorized and permitted under the terms, conditions, and restrictions of the city permit issued for each such special event and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Application. A producer of a special event shall make application for such permit at the Jonesboro city hall in a form prescribed by the city, and file such completed application with the city clerk or his designee. Such applications may be obtained from city hall. 
(f)  Application fee. All fees will be published in the city's fee schedule. 
(g)  [Applications for special events.] Applications for special events which request the use of any public property, street, sidewalk, or right-of-way within the city, or for events which occur on private property and impact government services on a public property, street, sidewalk or right-of-way, and which propose more than 25 attendees, shall be filed with the city clerk or his designee at least 45 days prior to the date of the event. Applications for special events which request the use of any public property, street, sidewalk, or right-of-way within the city, or for events which occur on private property and impact government services on a public property, street, sidewalk, or right-of-way, and which propose 25 or fewer attendees, shall be filed with the city clerk or his designee at least 30 days prior to the date the event is scheduled to occur. However, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the proposed special event. 
(h)  Permit fee. In addition to the application fee, the producer shall pay a permit fee in order to conduct a special event within the city. The amount of said fee shall be based on the services which the city may elect to provide to the producer of such special event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the city to provide such services. The initial permit fee shall be the aggregate of the estimated costs of such services. If, at the conclusion of the special event, the cost of the services provided by the city is greater than the initial permit fee, the producer of the event shall be billed for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within 30 days of the billing date shall be a violation of this chapter. The initial permit fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of the special event permit for such special event. The application fee and the permit fee specified in this chapter shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other ordinances or regulations of the city which may be applicable. No producer of any special event, except as otherwise provided for, shall be exempt from the payment of the appropriate fees required under this chapter, except as authorized by the mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-44. - Identification of producer. 
    The producer of a special event, be it an individual, group or organization, shall be fully identified on the application. However, a special event permit shall be issued only to an individual person, who shall be the designated agent of any producer who is not an individual, and such individual person shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements, of this chapter and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-45. - Administrative review. 
    The city clerk will review each application in order to determine the nature and activities of the proposed event, and to evaluate the effect of such proposed special event on the city, and to determine the amount of the permit fee described in section 32-3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-46. - Special restrictions and conditions on permit. 
    After such determination and evaluation by the city clerk and chief of police, the city clerk and/or the chief of police may impose such special conditions or restrictions on said permit as may promote the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the city, and such special conditions and restrictions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as a provision of this chapter. A violation of any such special conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-47. - Prior permit from the department of transportation. 
    Any special event which is to use a portion of any State of Georgia highway right-of-way lying within the city must also have obtained all required permits from the Georgia Department of Transportation. It shall be the applicant's sole duty and responsibility to obtain all such permits prior to making application to the city for a special event permit. No city special event permit shall be issued without the proper Georgia Department of Transportation permit first having been obtained, and a copy of same filed with the city clerk with the application for the city special event permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-48. - Liability. 
    The producer of any special event shall hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, and agents from any and all liability for damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event. Proof of such waiver and indemnification shall be filed with and made part of, the application for a special event permit. The producer shall be responsible for providing a $1,000,000.00 certificate of insurance, with the City of Jonesboro listed as additional insured and certificate holder at least 14 days prior to the event. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-49. - Vendors. 
(a)  The sale of food, any merchandise and/or services of any type, by a vendor shall be allowed as a component of a special event permit. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to engage in such business at any location or in any manner not authorized by the city permit. 
(b)  Vendors must obtain a permit from the city clerk at least five business days prior to the event. All vendors must display a copy of such permit at all times during the event. 
(c)  Food vendors shall be subject to the applicable rules and regulations governing food service within the city, including, but not limited to the rules and regulations of the Clayton County Health Department. Food vendors shall provide proof of compliance with the Clayton County Health Department rules and regulations prior to the issuance of a permit by the city. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the producer of a special event to assure such compliance by such vendors. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-50. - Traffic and crowd control. 
    Such traffic and crowd control on public property, streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way lying within the city shall be the responsibility of the producer. A plan for such crowd control must be submitted with the application. The city can provide such crowd control at the request of the vendor for a fee to be determined by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-51. - Toilet facilities. 
    The producer of a special event shall be required to provide toilet facilities at any special event lasting more than three hours at which more than 100 or more persons are expected to be in attendance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-52. - Musical entertainment. 
    Musical entertainment shall be provided in a manner consistent with the peace and good order of the city. The producer of the special event shall be responsible for the full compliance with any and all ordinances governing such musical entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-53. - Tents, stages and structures. 
    Tents, arbors, stages, grandstands, and other temporary structures and facilities constructed or erected as a part of a permitted special event shall be approved by the city prior to and after construction and erection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-54. - Public property closing. 
    No public property, street, sidewalk or right-of-way shall be partially or completely closed as part of a special event unless such closure shall have been authorized in the special event permit issued by the city. Provided however, such closures shall require the prior approval of the mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-55. - Duration of permit. 
    No special event permit issued under this chapter shall be valid prior to or past the date of the special event for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-56. - Picketing and demonstrations, etc. 
    Any person, group or organization engaged in any picketing, demonstrations, assembly, gathering, procession, or other activity protected by the United States Constitution, shall be prohibited from blocking the ingress and egress of any public or private place within the city, and any such person, group or organization engaged in any picketing, demonstrations, assembly, gathering, procession, or other activity protected by the United States Constitution, may be required under the provisions of this chapter to conduct such protected activities in certain designated areas identified by the city. Any person, group or organization engaged in such protected activities is required to make application as set forth in section 32-3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-57. - Funeral processions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any motorcade conducted under the supervision and direction of a funeral director in conjunction with any funeral. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-58. - Revocation of permit. 
    If any permitted producer or vendor, and/or an employee, agent, or contractor of such producer or vendor, during the course of the permitted special event, shall violate any law of the United States, the State of Georgia, or any ordinance of the City of Jonesboro, and an arrest is made or citation is issued arising out of such violation, the special event permit may be immediately revoked by the city clerk or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-59. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who attempts to conduct a special event without having first obtained the necessary special event permit in the manner provided in this chapter shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as allowed pursuant to this Code. Every day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as herein set out. 
(b)  Action pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall not be a bar to the enforcement of this chapter by injunction or other appropriate remedy, and the city, acting by and through the city clerk or his designee, shall have the power to institute and maintain in the name of the city any and all such enforcement proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-005 , 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 58-60 - Alcohol subpermit. 
(a)  No alcohol may be served and/or sold at any outdoor event unless the host receives an alcohol subpermit. Where the outdoor event occurs in a park, the only type of outdoor event eligible for an alcohol subpermit is an outdoor festival. Alcohol is not permitted in parks absent a permitted outdoor festival alcohol subpermit. 
(b)  If the outdoor event is utilizing an alcohol pourer that has already obtained a city-issued liquor license from the city, the applicant shall complete and submit an alcohol subpermit application to the city clerk with the outdoor event application. Where the outdoor event application is due less than 30 days prior to the outdoor event, the alcohol subpermit application must nonetheless be submitted to the city clerk no later than 30 days before the outdoor event. 
(1)  The city clerk or his/her designee shall be the sole decision-maker of whether to issue a subpermit. 
(2)  The fee for an alcohol subpermit shall be $350.00 per day, per fixed location where alcohol is served. 
(3)  The applicant must obtain a license to serve alcohol at the outdoor event from the State of Georgia, and must supply the city with a copy of said license no later than three business days prior to the outdoor event. 
(c)  If the outdoor event is utilizing an alcohol pourer that has not already obtained a city-issued liquor license, the applicant must obtain an alcohol pourer license utilizing the standard procedures established by the city. 
(d)  The alcohol subpermit must be displayed at the approved event site and must be made available upon request of any city representative. 
(e)  Persons attending any event where alcohol is allowed are subject to park rules, state rules, county and city ordinances. All laws are strictly enforced. Offenders are subject to ejection from the park and/or prosecution. 
(f)  Glass containers shall not be allowed in the park. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2016-006 , § 2, 4-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-09 , § 1, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 2017-07 , §§ 1, 2, 5-8-2017) 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 58-61. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in, conduct or accompany any organized parade or procession, other than a funeral procession, on the public streets, sidewalks or other public property in the city unless an application has been previously filed and a permit granted to conduct such parade or procession within the city. 
(Code 1987, § 10-3-1) 
Sec. 58-62. - Application. 
    An application for a permit to conduct or sponsor a parade or procession shall be filed with the chief of police in writing and shall contain the following information furnished by the person in official charge of the proposed parade or procession: 
(1)  The name of all organizations or persons organizing or sponsoring the parade or procession; 
(2)  The purpose of the parade or procession; 
(3)  The date and hours of the parade or procession; 
(4)  The proposed route of the parade or procession, and its beginning and termination points; 
(5)  The number and types of vehicles, marching units and floats to be used in the parade or procession; 
(6)  The number of persons participating in the parade or procession; and 
(7)  The name of the person to be responsible for cleanup of the parade area as prescribed in section 58-41. 
(Code 1987, § 10-3-2) 
Sec. 58-63. - Investigation; issuance. 
(a)  Upon proper registration with the chief of police, and provided the parade or procession is otherwise lawful and complies with the standards of this section, a written permit shall issue to be valid for a certain date to be named by the city within 30 days from the date of issuance. In addition, such permit shall designate a particular route to be followed by the paraders and marchers, and no other route shall be permitted. 
(b)  In deciding whether to issue a permit under the provisions of this section, the chief of police shall consider in addition to all other considerations, the following: 
(1)  The number of persons to participate; 
(2)  The anticipated traffic conditions at the time and date proposed for the activity; 
(3)  The schedule of other similar activities for which permits may have been issued; 
(4)  The adequacy of adult supervision for any minor scheduled to participate; 
(5)  The availability of city personnel whose presence on duty may be required by the activity and by the necessity to protect the general public; and 
(6)  The adequacy of public facilities in the location proposed for the activity to accommodate the proposed activity and the normal public use of public facilities in the proposed location. 
(Code 1987, § 10-3-3) 
Secs. 58-64-58-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as art. II, §§ 58-70-58-80. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been included as art. III, §§ 58-70-58-80, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 58-70. - Intent and purpose. 
    The city is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public works infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including, but not limited to Article 9, Section 1, Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6), as may be amended in the future, has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 58-71. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 58-72. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meaning set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
    City means the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
    Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
    Director means the Public Works Director of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
    Emergency means a condition that poses clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
    Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
    Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
    Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code. 
    Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
    Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
    Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
    Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
    Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval or registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
    Unused facilities means facilities located in the right-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
    Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 58-73. - Utility registration. 
(a)  Registration required. Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law, or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the public works director within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable, or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)  Acceptance of a registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse the requirement to obtain a proper franchise agreement with the city, whether by contract or by operation of state law. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(e)  Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 58-74. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the public works department in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedure. Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the public works department. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damage to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable, or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(c)  Permit fees. When applicable, fees shall be determined by the mayor and city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing the permit will be consistent with this article; and 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(e)  Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(f)  Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; 
c.  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(g)  Cancellation for cause. If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(h)  Expiration of permit. If work has not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 58-75. - Required minimum standards. 
(a)  Utility accommodation manual adopted. The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modifications contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city municipal equivalents. 
(b)  Protection of traffic and roadway. Unless specifically stated on the face of the permit, no utility may occupy the city right-of-way where sufficient space is unavailable so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the city from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(c)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changes at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(d)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(e)  Blasting or excavating. As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(f)  [Post-excavation replacement of surfacing material.] Where excavations are to be made in any hard-surfaced or brick-paved streets, all excavations and replacements of surfacing material or paving shall be done by the city at the cost of the person desiring to lay such piping or doing other work therein. The director shall estimate the cost of such work by averaging three solicited quotes, and in all cases the person desiring the doing of the work shall deposit with the city clerk the amount of money necessary to cover its estimated cost before the performance of the work shall commence. Upon the completion of work, the director shall file with the city clerk an itemized statement of the cost of the work and where the cost does not exceed the amount deposited therefor, the balance shall be returned to the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 58-76. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities manage. 
(b)  A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the word performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 58-77. - Inspection. 
(a)  The utility shall make the construction site available to the director or designee and to all others as authorized by law, for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)  At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this chapter or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)  When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 58-78. - Other approvals, permits and agreements. 
    Additional permits required. The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state, or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 58-79. - Penalties. 
    Every utility, or authorized representative thereof, convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 58-80. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(b)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city, by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the city charter, and under the provisions of this Code to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility, by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specification of facilities. 
(c)  Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of the city to enforce compliance. 
(d)  Appeal of administrative decisions. All appeals provided for by this article and any notifications to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the city manager as specified in this article. 
(e)  Section headings. Section headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Chapter 62 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-7(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 16; environment, ch. 34; historical preservation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 50; signs, ch. 52; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d). 

Sec. 62-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
    Sections 8-4-1 through 8-4-3 of the 1987 Code on the subject of subdivisions are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Chapter 66 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(13); any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes saved from repeal, § 1-7(15); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-151 et seq.; alcoholic beverages excise tax, § 6-126 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18; occupation taxes and regulatory fees, § 18-31 et seq. 
State Law reference- Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 66-31. - Levied; rate. 
    An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city is hereby levied, beginning with the calendar year 1990, and continuing thereafter. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1989(1), § 1(3-2-41)) 
Sec. 66-32. - Billing; payment. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes due the city shall be billed and paid in one payment. 
(b)  All ad valorem taxes due the city on all property in the city subject to taxation shall be due and payable annually. Any such tax not paid by December 20 shall be declared delinquent. Delinquent taxes shall accrue interest at the highest legal rate per annum authorized by state law from December 20 to the date the payment is made. 
(c)  The city shall contract with the county tax commissioner for the purposes of billing and collecting this tax. All fees and penalties for late payment of county taxes shall apply to delinquent payment of city taxes. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1989(1), § 1(3-2-42)) 
Sec. 66-33. - Collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue; interest. 
(a)  For the collection of delinquent taxes, a fi. fa. shall be issued by the city clerk and executed by the chief of police under the procedure provided by the laws of the state governing execution of process from the superior court, or by use of any other available process and remedies. 
(b)  A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those for federal, state or county taxes. 
(c)  The amount due on all delinquent fi. fas. issued under subsection (a) of this section, as well as any interest or penalty thereon, shall be listed as a part of and in addition to the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
(d)  Any license, privilege or permit granted by the city shall be revoked by the city clerk for the failure to pay any money due the city for taxes, fees, penalties, interest, fines or other revenue, within three calendar months and ten days after any payment is due; provided, however, that any person aggrieved by the order may, within ten days thereof, appeal to the city council, who, after a hearing thereon, may approve or modify the order or restore the license, privilege or permit by adopting a motion to that effect but only upon finding that the city clerk's action was not factually or legally correct. 
(e)  Unless otherwise provided in this article, all fi. fas. issued under this article shall earn interest at the maximum rate allowed by state law. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1989(1), § 1(3-2-43)) 
Secs. 66-34-66-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JOINT SALES AND USE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Joint county and municipal sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-80 et seq. 

Sec. 66-66. - Imposed; rate; authority. 
(a)  The city council hereby authorize the imposition of a joint sales and use tax at the rate of one percent within the special district of the county, and within the city, as approved in a referendum by the majority vote of the electorate of the county on November 2, 1993. 
(b)  The imposition of the joint sales and use tax is hereby imposed pursuant to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-8-80 et seq. and shall be distributed to the respective jurisdictions in accordance with the certificate of distribution previously agreed to by the county and other participating municipalities. 
(Res. of 1-4-1994) 
Secs. 66-67-66-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 66-101. - Levy; rate. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of one-fourth of one percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institutions pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1987, § 3-2-8(a)) 
Sec. 66-102. - Gross receipts defined; calculation. 
    For purposes of this article, the term "gross receipts" shall mean the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized below during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax imposed is due: 
(1)  Banks. Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: 
a.  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
b.  Interest on balance with other depository financial institutions; 
c.  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale; 
d.  Interest on other bonds, notes and debentures, excluding interest on obligations in the state or its political subdivisions and obligations on the United States; 
e.  Dividends on stocks; 
f.  Income from direct lease financing; 
g.  Income from fiduciary activities; 
h.  Service charges on deposit accounts; 
i.  Other service charges, commissions and fees; and 
j.  Other income. 
(2)  Savings and loan associations. Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
a.  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
b.  Interest on mortgages, participations or mortgage-backed securities; 
c.  Interest on real estate sold on contract; 
d.  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; 
e.  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
f.  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; 
g.  Loan fees; 
h.  Loan servicing fees; 
i.  Other fees and charges; 
j.  Gross income from real estate owned operations; 
k.  Net income from office buildings operations; 
l.  Gross income from real estate held for investment; 
m.  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; 
n.  Miscellaneous operating income; 
o.  Profit on sale of real estate owned investment securities, loans and other assets; and 
p.  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
(3)  Deductions from gross receipts. The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to subsections (1) or (2) of this section: 
a.  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; 
b.  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 7-1-730 through 7-1-734; 
c.  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions; 
d.  An amount equal to a depository financial institution's gross income which is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than Georgia; and 
e.  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (3)b-(3)d of this section, any deductions taken under subsection (3)a of this section shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (3)b-(3)d of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (3)a-(3)d of this section. 
(Code 1987, § 3-2-8(b)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-103. - Filing of returns; assessment and collection of tax; due date. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city clerk on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. The returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon information provided in the return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1987, § 3-2-8(c), (d)) 
Secs. 66-104-66-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INSURERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 66-136. - Annual license fees; levied; amount. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, there is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges, and an additional annual license fee in the same amount for each separate business location in excess of one operated and maintained by such insurer within the city. 
(Code 1987, § 3-2-7(a)) 
Sec. 66-137. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations, amount. 
    For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing, and which, in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of the insurer for insurance, the insurer shall pay an additional license fee in an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges per location each year. 
(Code 1987, § 3-2-7(b)) 
Sec. 66-138. - Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies and brokers not otherwise licensed; levied; amount. 
    There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent insurance agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which such insurance business is not subject to a license fee imposed by sections 66-136 or 66-137 in the amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges for each such location within the city. 
(Code 1987, § 3-2-7(c)) 
Sec. 66-139. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers; rate. 
    There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 66-136. 
(Code 1987, § 3-2-7(d)) 
Sec. 66-140. - Gross premiums tax; all other insurers; imposed; rate. 
    There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Code 1987, § 3-2-7(e)) 
Sec. 66-141. - Due date for license fees. 
    License fees imposed in sections 66-136-66-138 shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1987, § 3-2-7(f)) 
Secs. 66-142-66-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Tourist courts, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq.; local excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 66-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Due date means from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
    Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
    Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
    Local government means a county, a municipality, a consolidated government, or a county or independent school district located within the State of Georgia. 
    Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
    Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
    Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days next preceding such date. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided in this article. 
    Rent means the consideration received for occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
    Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 2-9-1998, § 1(3-3-1); Ord. No. 2014-009, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-2014) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-172. - Imposition and rate. 
    There shall be paid a tax of eight percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the city. 
(Ord. of 2-9-1998, § 1(3-3-2); Ord. No. 2016-12 , § 1, 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 66-173. - Collection of tax by operator. 
    Every operator maintaining a place of business in this city, as provided in section 66-171, and renting guestrooms in the city, not exempted under section 66-174, shall collect a tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupant. 
(Ord. of 2-9-1998, § 1(3-3-3); Ord. No. 2016-12 , § 1, 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 66-174. - Exemptions. 
    No tax shall be imposed under this article upon: 
(1)  An occupant who certifies in writing that his occupancy of the guestroom is the result of the destruction of his home or residence by fire or other casualty; 
(2)  An occupant whose occupancy was provided without charge; 
(3)  An occupant who is an official or employee of the State of Georgia or a local government whose occupancy occurs while he is traveling on official business, provided that he presents substantiation thereof or pays for such occupancy with a State of Georgia or local government credit or debit card; or 
(4)  An occupant after he becomes a permanent resident. 
(Ord. of 2-9-1998, § 1(3-3-4); Ord. No. 2014-009, §§ 3, 4, 10-13-2014) 
Sec. 66-175. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
    Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk. Persons engaged in such business must go register no later than 30 days after March 1, 1998, and the tax is imposed as set forth in section 66-172, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of such tax on and after the date of imposition of the tax, regardless of registration. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the city clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner, if a natural person; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. of 2-9-1998, § 1(3-3-5)) 
Sec. 66-176. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amount of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of every month, or the next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth in section 66-171. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city clerk showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(c)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailers and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951 (1951 Ga. Laws, page 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. of 2-9-1998, § 1(3-3-6)) 
Sec. 66-177. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputations. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession, or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk or his designated representatives shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail, if by mail such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. of 2-9-1998, § 1(3-3-7)) 
Sec. 66-178. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return, and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 66-177(c). 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or a fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Ord. of 2-9-1998, § 1(3-3-8)) 
Sec. 66-179. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records and forms required from operators. Every operator renting guestrooms in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city clerk may require. 
(c)  Examination of records and audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the city clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person, and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(Ord. of 2-9-1998, § 1(3-3-9)) 
Sec. 66-180. - Penalty for violation of article; failure to register or furnish return. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 4.13 of the Charter of the city. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or any other person who fails to register as required in this article, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as described in this section. 
(Ord. of 2-9-1998, § 1(3-3-10)) 
Sec. 66-181. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Tax credit or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset by the city clerk. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, he will have three years from date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city clerk, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators or executors. 
(Ord. of 2-9-1998, § 1(3-3-11)) 
Secs. 66-182-66-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FRANCHISE FEE FOR STATE-ISSUED CABLE OR VIDEO FRANCHISE 

Sec. 66-190. - Fee levied. 
(a)  There is set and levied on all holders of a state-issued franchise for cable or video a franchise fee in the amount of five percent of the gross revenues generated within the city. 
(b)  The franchise fee be paid quarterly within 30 days of the end of the quarter. 
(c)  The city treasurer, or his/her designee, is authorized, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 1, 3-10-2008) 
Chapter 70 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Charges for 911 system. 
(a)  9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(b)  Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the Commissioner of the Department of Revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. Chapter 8 of Title 48 with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(c)  Administrative provisions. The Clerk of the City of Jonesboro is hereby directed to file with the State Revenue Commissioner a certified copy of this section and amendments thereto in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), by December 31, 2011. 
(d)  Depositing of funds; use of funds. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this city from charges imposed by this section shall be deposited in the Emergency Telephone System Fund maintained by this city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(3)(2) and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction. All such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Res. of 7-12-1999, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 2011-003, §§ 1-4, 10-10-2011) 
Secs. 70-2-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

Sec. 70-31. - Provisions incorporated by reference. 
    The ordinance adopted January 14, 1980, as codified in sections 9-2-1 through 9-2-36 of the 1987 Code relating to cable television franchise regulations, is by this reference incorporated in this section and made a part of this Code in as full and complete a manner and with like effect as though set out in full in this section. 
Secs. 70-32-70-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2018, repealed the former art. III, §§ 70-51-70-67, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 1(8-8-1-8-8-16); Ord. No. 02-04, §§ 7-9, adopted June 10, 2002; and Ord. No. 05-05, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 14, 2005. 

Sec. 70-51. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines and regulations for the siting of all wireless, cellular, television, and radio telecommunications facilities, including all equipment and network components, any underlying support structure, such as antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, accessory equipment, or other mechanisms used to provide and or aid the transmission of wireless data, cellular, television, radio, or other telecommunications services. The mayor and council recognize that the city is to provide for the siting of telecommunication facilities, support structures, and antennas pursuant to the mandates of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended. While mandated to make such provisions, the mayor and council also recognize that telecommunications facilities, such as towers and monopoles, telecommunication support structures, and antennas may negatively impact the aesthetic appearance of the city, and may reduce the property value of lots proximately located to such telecommunication support structures, particularly when they are sited adjacent to residential areas. 
    The goals of this article, therefore, are: 
(a)  To encourage the location of telecommunications facilities, including all telecommunication support structures, equipment, and/or antenna(s) in nonresidential areas; 
(b)  To promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public by regulating the siting of and establishing development standards for wireless facilities and related wireless support structures, equipment, and infrastructure; 
(c)  To minimize the total number of telecommunication support structures within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to residents of the city; 
(d)  To encourage the joint use of new and existing telecommunication support structure sites among providers; 
(e)  To locate telecommunication facilities and antennas in areas where adverse impacts on the community are minimized; 
(f)  To encourage the design and construction of telecommunication facilities and antennas in a manner that minimizes adverse visual impacts; 
(g)  To follow and promote policies embodied in Section 704 of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and O.C.G.A. § 36-66B-1, et al., in such a manner as not to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent wireless services or to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless services in the city; 
(h)  To encourage the location of telecommunication support structures on municipal property but not in public parks; and 
(i)  To enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to deliver such services to the community effectively, efficiently and safely. 
(j)  To establish a local policy concerning applications for the erection or modification of telecommunication facilities, including telecommunication support structures, in any public rights-of-way in accordance with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and O.C.G.A. §§ 32-4-92 and 46-5-1; permit and manage reasonable access to the city's public rights-of-way for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory basis; assure the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect public health, safety, and welfare; promote competition in telecommunications; and establish clear guidelines for applicants seeking a permit with respect to any public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-52. - Definitions. 
(a)  Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this section shall be as defined in The Latest Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (2007, Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above-referenced text shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary usage and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence, section and section in which they occur. 
(b)  Definitions: 
    Alternative telecommunication support structure means clock telecommunication support structures, bell telecommunication support structures, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission telecommunication support structures, manmade trees and similar natural or manmade alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or telecommunication support structures. An alternative telecommunication support structure may include a pre-existing building. 
    Antenna means any equipment designed for wireless telecommunication, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves or beams of visible or invisible light and radio signals used in the provision of all types of telecommunication services, including standalone equipment and equipment affixed to or proposed to be affixed to existing telecommunication support structures and/or authorized alternative telecommunication support structures. 
    Applicant means a person or entity with an application for the permit of the erection of, modification of, or co-location of telecommunication facilities in the city, whether located on private lands or in a public right-of-way. For purposes of this section, this term shall include any co-applicant or party with an ownership interest in a proposed or affected existing telecommunication facility, including, but not limited to, property owners, telecommunication support structure owners, and any proposed tenants for the facility. 
    Chief building inspector means the building official as designated and defined by section 16-31 of this Code. 
    City property means all real property owned by the city, other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city, are not subject to right-of-way access. 
    Co-location or co-locate means the placement or installation of new telecommunications facilities, including, but not limited to, antennas, upon a single telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure previously approved and constructed, including towers and monopoles, both self-supporting and guyed, in a manner that negates the need to construct a new freestanding telecommunications support structure in the city. 
    Commission means the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
    Department means the Office of the City Manager of the City of Jonesboro and any designated building officials and zoning administrators. 
    Equipment means any device or telecommunications infrastructure component serving or being used in conjunction with the delivery or transmission of all types of telecommunication services, including, but not limited to, antennas, utility transmission devices, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, storage sheds, shelters or similar structures, small cell devices, and similar wireless transmitters or conduits. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Geographic search area means the geographic area within which the placement of equipment is necessary to meet the engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting need. 
    Grantee means applicant in receipt of written authorization from the city to erect, operate, and/or maintain telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way. 
    Guyed structure means a style of telecommunication support structure consisting of a single truss assembly composed of sections with bracing incorporated. The sections are attached to each other, and the assembly is attached to a foundation and supported by a series of wires that are connected to anchors placed in the ground or on a building. 
    Height means, when referring to a telecommunication support structure or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure, including all antennas or lightning rods. 
    Modification or modify means the change, or proposed change, of any portion of an existing telecommunication facility from its description as previously approved by the city, including improvements, upgrades, expansions, or the replacement of any existing telecommunication equipment, conduit, or infrastructure apparatus, provided such improvement, upgrade, expansion, or replacement does not increase the height of the telecommunication support structure. 
    Monopole means a style of freestanding telecommunication support structure that consists of a single shaft usually composed of two or more hollow sections that are in turn attached to a foundation. This type of support structure is designed to support itself without the use of guy wires or other stabilization devices. These facilities are mounted to a foundation that rests on or in the ground or on the roof of a building. 
    Preexisting telecommunication support structures and antennas means structures as set forth in section 70-53(c). 
    Private street means a privately owned street, road, highway, boulevard, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive constructed to city standards. 
    Provider means any legal entity authorized and/or engaged in the provision of telecommunication services. 
    Public officer means, as used in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7-41-2-17, the city manager and/or chief building inspector of the city, as designated. 
    Public right-of-way or public rights-of-way means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as defined in this section, now or hereafter owned by or granted to the city, but only to the extent of the city's right, title, interest or authority to authorize or permit an applicant to occupy and use such streets and easements for the erection and operation of telecommunication facilities. 
    Public street means a street, road, highway, boulevard, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive which is owned by a public entity or to which a public entity has an easement for street purposes, and with respect to which, and to the extent that, the city has a right to grant use of the surface of and space above and below in connection with an authorized provider of telecommunications services and/or owner of telecommunication facilities. 
    Small cell or small cell installations means one-provider units that provide additional capacity for wireless systems and are supplemental to standard telecommunication equipment, including distributive antenna systems (DAS) and like devices. 
    Substantial increase in size means: 
(1)  Any increase in an existing telecommunication support structure height by more than ten percent or ten feet (on private property) or 20 feet (on right-of-way), whichever is greater, as previously approved by the city, or increase in the width of the added appurtenances more than 20 feet on private property or six feet on the right-of-way as a result of modification or co-location of antennas or similar telecommunication equipment; 
(2)  An increase in the dimensions of a telecommunication facility's equipment compound as approved by the city as a result of modification or co-location by more than ten percent, inclusive of the increase due to placement of an additional equipment compound or, if in the right-of-way, an installation of any equipment compound where none existed prior to the modification or co-location; 
(3)  A modification or co-location that will, as proposed, violate condition(s) of approval of an existing telecommunication facility, including any subsequently adopted amendments; 
(4)  A modification or co-location of equipment that, as proposed, will exceed the applicable weight limits for an existing telecommunication facility, as approved by the city; 
(5)  The addition of more than four new equipment cabinets or one new shelter; and/or 
(6)  The excavation outside existing leased or owned property and current easements. 
(7)  For concealed or stealth-designed facilities, if a modification or co-location would defeat the concealment elements of the wireless tower or base station. 
    Telecommunication facility or facilities means any physical component utilized in the provision of all types of telecommunications services, including all telecommunication support structures, alternative telecommunication support structures, antennas, equipment, infrastructure apparatus, base support mechanism, accessory equipment, towers, monopoles, small cell installations, and physical attachments necessary for the provision of such telecommunications services. 
    Telecommunication facility owner means any person or entity that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates, or manages telecommunications facilities, including any related equipment or property within the city, used or to be used for the purpose of offering or transmitting signals used in the provision of any telecommunication services. 
    Telecommunications service(s) means the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic, and video programming between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or other facilities. This term shall include commercial mobile radio services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange services as identified in the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
    Telecommunication support structure means any freestanding structure that is designed to support or capable of supporting and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting telecommunication equipment; this term shall include self-supporting, guyed, and monopole support structures. The term includes, and is not limited to, radio and television transmission telecommunication support structures, microwave telecommunication support structures, common-carrier telecommunication support structures, cellular telecommunication support structures, manmade trees, alternative telecommunication support structures, and other similar structures. In the public rights-of-way, only telecommunication support structures erected for the installation of small cells shall be permitted. 
    Utility means any person, corporation, municipality, county, or other legal entity, or department thereof or entity related or subordinate thereto, providing retail or wholesale electric, data, cable, or telecommunications services, or otherwise subject in any way to the lawful jurisdiction of the commission. 
    Utility easement means any easement owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated, or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with telecommunication facilities, telecommunication support structures, alternative telecommunication support structures, and any antennas. 
    Visual quality means the appropriate design, arrangement, and location of telecommunication support structures in relation to the built or natural environment to avoid abrupt or severe differences. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-53. - Application of article. 
(a)  General applicability. This article shall apply to the erection or modification of any telecommunication facility within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Amateur radio; receive-only antenna(s). This article shall not govern any telecommunication support structure, or the installation of any antenna, that is 35 feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator from the operator's residence, or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna. 
(c)  Preexisting telecommunication support structures and antenna(s). Any telecommunication support structure or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be required to meet the provisions of this article, other than the requirements of sections 70-54, 70-56, 70-57, 70-58, 70-66, 70-67, 70-72, 70-73, 70-74, 70-79 and 70-80. Any such telecommunication facilities shall be referred to in this article as either "preexisting telecommunication support structures" or "preexisting antennas." 
(d)  Additional antenna(s). If an additional antenna is co-located upon a preexisting telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure after adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the fencing and landscaping requirements of sections 70-63 and 70-64 shall be a required part of the permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-54. - Removal of abandoned telecommunication facilities. 
    Any telecommunication support structure or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period exceeding six months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such telecommunication facility shall place the applicable antenna or telecommunication support structure into operation or remove the same within 60 days of receipt of notice from the city manager notifying the owner of such abandonment. If all applicable telecommunication support structure(s) or antenna(s) are not removed within said 60 days, the city may, at the direction of the city manager or designee, and in the manner provided in the O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7-41-2-17, remove such antenna or telecommunication support structure at the owner or co-owners' expense. If there are two or more users of a single telecommunication support structure, this provision shall not become effective unless and until all users cease utilizing the telecommunication support structure. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-55. - Legal status provisions. 
(a)  Whenever the regulations of this article require a greater width, depth, or size of yard, or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or covenants, with the exception of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the requirements of this article shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, covenant or provision of this Code shall require more restrictive standards than those of this article, the provisions of such statutes, codes or covenants shall govern. 
(b)  Any preexisting telecommunication facility which does not meet the requirements of this article shall be considered nonconforming and subject to the nonconforming use provisions of the city zoning ordinance; provided, however, that the installation of a new antenna on a preexisting telecommunication support structure shall not constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use provided that (a) the new antenna does not result in a substantial increase in size and (b) the resulting height of the preexisting telecommunication support structure is less than the maximum height of the telecommunication support structure previously approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-56. - Annual registration of telecommunications facilities. 
    The owner of any telecommunications facility shall submit an annual registration of such facility on forms provided by the city. Each annual registration shall identify the tax parcel identification and physical street address for the parcel on which such telecommunication facility is located. Each annual registration of such telecommunication facility shall describe all telecommunication support structures, alternative telecommunication support structures, antennas, and other telecommunication equipment on the site, describe in detail any improvements during the preceding calendar year, and, for telecommunication support structures only, state the total gross income from all improvements on the site for the preceding calendar year. Each annual return shall be filed with the city manager or designee on or before April 1st of each year and shall be accompanied by an annual administrative fee in an amount of $75.00. Section 70-73 shall apply where an owner fails to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-57. - Principal or accessory use. 
    A telecommunication support structure and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any parcel as the sole or primary structure, and is considered an accessory use if located on a parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structure. An existing use or structure on the same parcel shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or telecommunication support structure. For purposes of determining whether the erection of a telecommunication support structure or antenna complies with the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located (including, but not limited to, all setback and buffer requirements), the dimensions of the entire parcel shall control, even though the antenna or telecommunication support structure may be located on a leased area within the dimensions of such parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-58. - Inventory of existing sites for new telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure applications. 
(a)  The city manager shall maintain an itemized list of all telecommunication support structures or alternative telecommunication support structures, active and inactive, which are located within the municipal limits of the city. This list shall include specific information about the location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, telecommunication support structure type and general suitability for antenna co-location of each telecommunication support structure and authorized alternative telecommunication support structure, and other pertinent information as may be decided by the city manager. 
(b)  To facilitate the co-location of antennas, each applicant seeking to erect a new telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure, or to modify any such existing structure, shall provide to the city manager an itemized list of its existing telecommunication support structures and authorized alternative telecommunication support structures as provided for below. Applicants seeking to erect an amateur radio telecommunication support structure or antenna less than 35 feet in height shall be exempt from this provision. 
(c)  Each applicant seeking to erect a new telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure or to modify existing support structures shall provide the city manager with an itemized list, including all of the following: a complete listing of all applicant-owned telecommunication support structures that are within the municipal limits of the city or within one-quarter mile of the municipal limits of the city; with respect to each listed telecommunication support structure, specific information, including the location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, structure type, and general suitability for antenna co-location; and other pertinent information as may be required by the city manager. The city manager shall share such information with any other applicant under this article or any other organization or governmental entity seeking to locate a telecommunication facility within the municipal limits of the city, provided, however, that the city manager shall not, by sharing such information, in any way be deemed to have represented or warranted that such sites are available or suitable. 
(d)  An application, with the exception of an application to erect an amateur radio telecommunication support structure or antenna less than 35 feet in height as set forth in subsection (b), shall not be considered complete without the itemized list required in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-59. - Co-location mandate; availability of suitable existing structures; demonstration of necessity. 
(a)  Applicants for the erection of an antenna, except amateur radio operators, shall be required to co-locate upon an existing telecommunication support structure or authorized alternative telecommunication support structure to the extent reasonable. No new telecommunication support structure, except amateur radio telecommunication support structures, shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city manager that no existing telecommunication support structure or authorized alternative telecommunication support structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna(s) and related equipment. The applicant must present an affidavit which lists the available existing telecommunication support structures and reasons why co-location on those telecommunication support structures is not possible. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts and shall consist of more than mere conclusory statements that no existing telecommunication support structure is suitable. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing telecommunication support structure can accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of one or more of the following: 
(1)  That no existing telecommunication support structures or suitable, authorized alternative telecommunication support structures are located within the geographic search area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
(2)  That existing telecommunication support structures or alternative telecommunication support structures within the geographic search area do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna(s) and related equipment. Such information shall be certified by a state-licensed professional engineer; 
(3)  That the applicant's proposed antenna(s) would cause electromagnetic interference with public safety emergency communications or existing antenna(s) in the geographic search area, or the antenna(s) on the existing telecommunication support structures or alternative telecommunication support structures in the geographic search area would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna(s); 
(4)  That the cost or contractual provisions required by the telecommunication support structure owner or co-owners to share an existing telecommunication support structure in the geographic search area or to adapt an existing telecommunication support structure for co-location are unreasonable. Costs exceeding the erection of a new telecommunication support structure are presumed to be unreasonable; and/or 
(5)  That the applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing telecommunication support structures or authorized alternative telecommunication structures unsuitable for co-location. 
(b)  For each of the above, the applicant must provide a listing of the existing telecommunication support structures or authorized alternative telecommunication support structures within the geographic search area that were considered, and ultimately rejected, by the applicant and provide a detailed explanation of why the existing telecommunication support structures or authorized alternative telecommunication structures within the geographic search area are not suitable. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-60. - Co-location design requirements. 
    In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all telecommunication support structures, whether erected in public rights-of-way or not, except amateur radio telecommunication support structures, shall be designed to accommodate the co-location of antennas according to the following standards: 
(1)  For telecommunication support structures up to 125 feet in height, the structure shall be designed to accommodate at least four antennas; and 
(2)  For telecommunication support structures greater than 125 feet in height, the structure shall be designed to accommodate at least five antennas. 
(3)  If the city approves a telecommunication support structure greater than 199 feet in height, additional capacity may be required. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-61. - Aesthetics. 
    The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the design and erection of all telecommunication facilities governed by this article. 
(1)  Telecommunication support structures and antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel outer shell or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA and FCC, shall be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  All telecommunication support structure sites and related structure designs shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the telecommunication facilities to the natural setting and surrounding environment. 
(3)  For antennas erected on an alternative telecommunication support structure, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical ground equipment shall be a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as is reasonable. 
(4)  Telecommunication support structures shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA, FCC, or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the city manager may review the available federally-approved lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding area. 
(5)  No signage or other identifying markings of any nature shall be permitted upon any telecommunication support structure or authorized alternative telecommunication support structure without prior approval of the city and shall comply with the city's existing sign ordinance, unless otherwise required by the FAA, FCC, or other applicable authority. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-62. - Setbacks and separation. 
    The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all telecommunication support structures, except those existing within or proposed to be erected within any public right-of-way: 
(1)  Telecommunication support structures shall be set back a distance equal to the greater of the height of the telecommunication support structure or 50 feet, from its base, to any property line of the parcel containing the telecommunication support structure. 
(2)  Guy-wires and accessory buildings and related equipment shall meet the minimum accessory use location and setback requirements and shall be completely contained within the parcel on which the telecommunication support structure is located. 
(3)  Telecommunication support structures over 100 feet in height shall not be located closer than 1,500 feet from any existing telecommunication support structure that is over 100 feet in height. 
(4)  Telecommunication support structures must be set back from any adjoining residentially zoned property the greater of (a) two times the height of the telecommunication support structure from any residentially-zoned property, or (b) a distance of 500 feet, as measured from the base of the telecommunication support structure. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-63. - Security fencing/anti-climbing devices. 
(a)  All telecommunication support structures and related equipment shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Fencing shall be of chain link, wood, or other approved alternative materials, as determined by the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Amateur radio telecommunication support structures, or receive-only antennas, shall not be subject to the provisions of this section unless such structures exceed 35 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-64. - Landscaping. 
    The following requirements shall govern landscaping surrounding all telecommunication support structures: 
(1)  Where adequate vegetation is not present, telecommunication support structures shall be landscaped with a landscaped strip of plant materials which effectively screens the view of the equipment compound. Landscaped strips shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and shall be located outside the fenced perimeter of the compound. Landscaped strips shall satisfy the minimum design and planting requirements for buffers established in this Code. 
(2)  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on any site containing an approved telecommunications facility shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Where natural vegetation around the perimeter of the site would provide an adequate visual screen, an undisturbed buffer may be utilized. 
(3)  Amateur radio telecommunication support structures, or receive-only antennas, shall not be subject to the provisions of this section unless such structures exceed 35 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-65. - Documentation from applicable regulatory agencies and review for aviation purposes. 
    Any applicant for the erection of a telecommunication facility governed by this article shall demonstrate compliance with all FAA and FCC regulations with respect to prior approval, registration, and/or licensure of a proposed telecommunication facility. No building permit shall be issued until an applicant has received approval from the FAA and/or registered the proposed facility with the FCC when such approval and/or registration is required and provided copies of all applicable approvals, registrations, and/or licenses to the city's chief building inspector. In the alternative, applicants may demonstrate that such prior authorization and/or registration is not required to be accompanied by a sworn affidavit asserting the same. The city manager or designee shall submit a copy of any application deemed to risk interference with the operation of existing or proposed airport facilities or deemed to require prior FAA and/or FCC approval and/or registration to the City of Atlanta Department of Aviation for review and recommendation. All telecommunication facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, the commission, and any other agency of the federal government authorized to regulate such facilities, as should be prospectively amended. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-66. - Building codes; safety standards. 
    To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunication facilities, the owner, permittee, or subsequent lessee of a telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure shall ensure that all applicable telecommunication facilities on such site are maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes. If, upon inspection, the chief building inspector concludes that an applicable telecommunication facility fails to comply with all governing codes and standards, or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon receipt of written notice by the owner, permittee, or lessee of such a facility, the recipient shall have 15 days to bring the telecommunication facility into compliance with such standards. If the owner, permittee, or lessee fails to bring the telecommunication facility into compliance within the 15-day period, the city may, at the direction of the chief building inspector, remove the non-compliant telecommunication facility at the owner, permittee, or lessee's expense. Prior to the removal of any telecommunication facility, the city manager or designee may consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee, or subsequent lessee for repair of substandard telecommunication support structures, and may grant a reasonable extension of the above referenced compliance period. Any such removal by the city shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7-41-2-17. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-67. - Change of ownership or control notification. 
(a)  Upon the transfer of ownership or control of any telecommunication facility not located in a public right-of-way or of any parcel upon which such a telecommunication facility has been erected, the party transferring such ownership or control shall notify the city of the transaction in writing within 30 days of the transfer. 
(b)  A grantee and any proposed assignee or transferee of an existing permit to erect and operate a telecommunication facility in a public right-of-way shall provide and certify, via sworn affidavit, the following information to the city not more than 30 days after the date of such transfer or assignment of control: 
(1)  Information setting forth the nature, terms, and conditions of the proposed transfer or assignment of ownership and/or control; 
(2)  All contact information for the transferee/assignee; and 
(3)  Any other information reasonably required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-68. - Applications required. 
    All applications for a permit to erect telecommunication facilities, including telecommunication support structures or antennas, including applications to modify existing telecommunication facilities and co-locate new antennas and/or equipment onto existing telecommunication facilities, whether proposed on private lands or in public rights-of-way, shall be made to the city manager. The application forms and other documents and papers necessary for the implementation and enforcement of this section shall be on such forms provided by the city or, if such forms are not available, on applicant's identifiable letterhead and include all required submissions of this article. No application shall be considered by the city until such application is complete and accompanied by all necessary documents, papers, and other evidence of eligibility as may be set forth or otherwise required by the application, as well as any application fee. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by a manager or member if a limited liability company, or by an officer or equivalent position if a corporation or other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-69. - Applications for permit to modify or co-locate telecommunication facilities not resulting in a substantial increase in size. 
(a)  Application of section. The city manager or designee may approve the erection of additional antennas or otherwise telecommunications equipment upon existing telecommunication support structures or alternative telecommunication support structures under this section that do not result in a substantial increase in size as defined in this article to any existing telecommunication facility. 
(b)  Setback adjustments. As part of any approval under this section, the city manager or designee may reduce setback requirements for applications not in the right-of-way by up to ten percent to compensate for irregularly shaped lots or parcels. 
(c)  Contents of applications on private property. All applications for permits to modify an existing telecommunication facility and/or co-locate telecommunication equipment onto an existing telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of a principal office and local agent of the applicant; 
(2)  An affirmative indication that the applicant seeks either to modify an existing telecommunication facility or co-locate a telecommunication facility or facilities on an existing telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure as well as an affirmative indication that the proposed plans do not result in a substantial increase in size; 
(3)  The physical address of the telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure to be modified or upon which a proposed antenna(s) is to be installed; 
(4)  Name of the person, firm, corporation or association performing modifications to existing telecommunication support structures or alternative telecommunication support structures or erecting the antenna(s); 
(5)  Written consent of the owner of the existing telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure, and any party with an ownership interest in the applicable telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure to be modified or upon which the antenna(s) is to be erected; 
(6)  Proof of and/or certified copies of any required approval and registration, to provide such services in the state, where applicable, and any other required FAA, FCC, or otherwise state and federal approval, registration, and/or licensure required to erect, modify, or co-locate the proposed telecommunication facility; 
(7)  A description of the telecommunication services to be provided by and through, or otherwise in connection with, the proposed telecommunication facility or modified, existing telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure; 
(8)  An affirmative declaration that the applicant shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including all applicable provisions of this Code and conditions imposed by the city regarding the erection and maintenance of telecommunication facilities consistent with federal standards and, if applicable, applied equally to all users of the public rights-of-way; 
(9)  Applications for permits to co-locate through the erection of new antenna(s) or other telecommunication facilities onto an existing telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure, shall contain or have attached thereto six sets of accurate scale drawings including a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation including, but not limited to, the method of construction and attachment to the telecommunication support structure for the proposed telecommunication facility or facilities. Plans for co-location shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer licensed in the state as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable federal, state, and city codes and regulations; and 
(10)  Any other information as the city manager or designee may require to demonstrate full compliance with this article, all other ordinances of the city and all applicable requirements of state or federal law. 
(d)  Additional requirements for right-of-way applications. Applicants seeking to modify or co-locate telecommunication facilities on city property and/or in any public right-of-way within the municipal limits of the city, shall provide the following, in addition to the requirements of subsection (c): 
(1)  Proof of adequate insurance or self-insurance of the applicant to defend and cover all claims of third parties against the applicant and/or city personnel related to the use of the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  A description of the applicant's service area, where applicable, which shall be sufficiently detailed so as to allow the city to respond to subscriber or end-user inquiries. For the purpose of this paragraph, an applicant providing telecommunication services may, in lieu of or as a supplement to a written description, provide a map on 81/2 by 11 inch paper that is clear and legible and that fairly depicts the service area within the municipal limits of the city. If such service area is less than the municipal limits of the city, the map shall describe the boundaries of the geographic area to be served in clear and concise terms; 
(3)  Proof of the existence of a valid telecommunications franchise to locate utilities in the public rights-of-way of the city, as applicable, in accordance with state law. 
(e)  Review procedures. 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Prior to submitting any application governed by this section, all applicants shall be required to attend a pre-application meeting with the chief building inspector and applicable city staff to discuss the requirements for the application. The chief building inspector shall have the discretion to waive this requirement. 
(2)  Deficiencies in applications. The city manager or designee shall notify an applicant submitting an application governed by this section of any identified deficiencies therein within 30 calendar days of receipt of such an application. If the city manager or designee determines an application is not complete, it shall notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete the application. To the extent additional information is required, the time required for an applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward the 60 calendar day review period set forth herein. Upon any resubmittal of an application, the city manager shall have ten additional calendar days to give notice as to the completeness of the revised submission. If the application remains incomplete after resubmission, said incompleteness may serve as valid reason for denial of the application. 
(3)  Determination by the city. Within 60 calendar days after receiving an application under this section, unless otherwise deemed incomplete and denied for that purpose after resubmission, the city manager, at the direction of the chief building inspector or designee, shall issue a written determination granting, granting subject to enumerated condition(s), or denying the application in whole or in part. To the extent an application is denied, the written determination shall be based solely on whether the installation results in a substantial increase in size as defined in this article and said basis shall be included in the written determination. 
(f)  Appellate rights. An applicant may appeal the city manager's decision with respect to an application, including any denial or conditional approval of an application, to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten calendar days of the issuance of said decision with the city manager. Failure to file a notice of appeal within ten calendar days of the decision shall constitute a waiver of the applicant's appeal rights. 
(g)  Appellate procedure. The mayor and council shall hold a public hearing at the next available council meeting, but in no circumstance more than 30 calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal of an application as provided in subsection (d). Official notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the zoning procedures law of the state. In addition, said official notice of the public hearing shall include the location of the proposed facility. The mayor and city council shall review the appeal on the record and its determination shall be based on the same substantial increase in size factors as the decision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-70. - Application for permits for modification, and/or co-location of telecommunication antennas which would result in a substantial increase in size. 
(a)  Contents of application. Applications for permits to erect new telecommunication antennas, including, but not limited to, small cells and network infrastructure, excluding any telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure, which as proposed would result in substantial increase in size, shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of a principal office and local agent of the applicant; 
(2)  An indication of whether the applicant seeks modify existing telecommunication facilities or co-locate telecommunication facilities on an existing telecommunication support structure or an alternative telecommunication support structure as well as an indication that the proposed plans result in a substantial increase in size; 
(3)  Address of telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure to be modified or upon which the proposed antenna(s) is to be installed; 
(4)  Name of the person, firm, corporation or association installing the antenna(s); 
(5)  Written consent of the owner of the telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure to be modified or upon which a proposed antenna(s) is to be erected, and any party with an ownership interest therein whose rights and/or use will be impacted through the city's approval of the application; 
(6)  Proof of and/or certified copies of any required approval, registration, and/or licensure from the commission for any provider of telecommunications service to provide telecommunication services in the state, where applicable, and any other required FAA, FCC, or otherwise state and federal approval, registration, and/or licensure required to erect or modify the proposed telecommunication facility; 
(7)  A certified statement prepared by an engineer licensed in the state or other qualified industry professional that the erection and operation of the proposed antenna(s) on an existing telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with public safety communications or the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other telecommunication service enjoyed by adjacent properties; 
(8)  A description of all telecommunication services to be provided by and through, or otherwise in connection with, the proposed telecommunication facility or modified, existing telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure; 
(9)  A declaration that the applicant shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including all city ordinances and conditions imposed by the city regarding the erection and maintenance of telecommunication facilities; 
(10)  Applications shall contain or have attached thereto six sets of accurate scale drawings including a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation including, but not limited to, the method of construction and attachment to the telecommunication support structure for the proposed equipment. Plans for co-location shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer licensed in the state as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable federal, state, and city codes; and 
(11)  Any other information as the city manager or designee may require to demonstrate full compliance with this article, all other ordinances of the city and all applicable requirements of state or federal law. 
(b)  Additional requirements for right-of-way applications. Applicants seeking to modify or co-locate telecommunication facilities on city property and/or in any public right-of-way within the municipal limits of the city, resulting in substantial increase in size, shall provide the following, in addition to the requirements of subsection (a): 
(1)  Proof of adequate insurance or self-insurance of the applicant to defend and cover all claims of third parties against the applicant and/or city personnel related to the use of the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  A description of the applicant's service area, where applicable, which shall be sufficiently detailed so as to allow the city to respond to subscriber or end-user inquiries. For the purpose of this paragraph, an applicant providing telecommunication services may, in lieu of or as a supplement to a written description, provide a map on 81/2 by 11 inch paper that is clear and legible and that fairly depicts the service area within the municipal limits of the city. If such service area is less than the municipal limits of the city, the map shall describe the boundaries of the geographic area to be served in clear and concise terms; 
(3)  Proof of the existence of a valid telecommunications franchise to locate utilities in the public rights-of-way of the city, as applicable, in accordance with state law. 
(c)  Administrative fee. All applications for permits governed by this section shall be accompanied by an administrative fee as provided for in section 70-76. 
(d)  Considerations in approval or denial of an application. Any denial of a request to modify an existing telecommunication support structure or co-locate an antenna(s) onto an existing telecommunication support structure that would result in a substantial increase in size shall be issued by the city manager in writing and supported by substantial evidence. The city manager shall consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in acting upon an application under the provisions of this section: 
(1)  The nature of uses, as well as the height of existing structures, on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(2)  The surrounding topography; 
(3)  The surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(4)  The design of the existing telecommunication facility, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness, where applicable; 
(5)  The availability of suitable existing telecommunication support structures or other alternative telecommunication support structures for antenna co-location that would not need modification that would substantially increase in size as defined in this article; 
(6)  The evidence submitted regarding the need for the telecommunication facility in the area, including, but not limited to, propagation maps and other similar materials, where applicable; 
(7)  The effect, if any, on health, safety, and welfare if the proposed modification or co-location is permitted; 
(8)  Applicable federal, state, and local telecommunications laws, regulations, and policies; 
(9)  Such other factors as the department may reasonably deem in the community interest. 
(e)  Procedure for issuance of permits. 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Prior to submitting any application governed by this section, all applicants shall be required to attend a pre-application meeting with the chief building inspector and applicable city staff to discuss the requirements for the application. The chief building inspector shall have the discretion to waive this requirement. 
(2)  Review for completeness. The city manager shall notify an applicant submitting an application governed by this section of any identified deficiencies therein within 30 calendar days of receipt of such an application. If the city manager or designee determines an application is not complete, the city manager shall notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete the application. To the extent additional information is required, the time required for an applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward the applicable review period set forth herein. Upon any resubmittal of an application, the department shall have ten additional calendar days to give notice as to the completeness of the revised submission. If an application is not complete upon resubmission, said incompleteness may serve as reason for immediate denial of the application. 
(3)  Period of review. Within 90 calendar days after receiving a complete application for the modification, or co-location of a telecommunications facility governed by this section, the city manager shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, including imposing any conditions. Any decision by the city manager to deny an application shall be in writing, shall include reasons for denial, and shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
(4)  Appellate rights. The city manager's decision to deny an application may be appealed to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten calendar days of the denial. Failure to file a notice of appeal within ten calendar days of such a denial shall constitute a waiver of the applicant's appeal rights. 
(5)  Appellate procedure. The mayor and council shall hold a public hearing within at the next available scheduled council meeting, but not later than 30 calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal of an application as provided in subsection (d)(3). Official notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the state zoning procedures law. In addition, said official notice of the public hearing shall include the location of the proposed facility. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-71. - Applications for permits to erect new telecommunication support structures and alternative telecommunication support structures. 
    Prior to submitting any application governed by this section, all applicants shall be required to attend a pre-application meeting with the chief building inspector and applicable city staff to discuss the requirements for the application. The chief building inspector shall have the discretion to waive this requirement. 
(a)  Contents of applications. Applications for permits to erect a new telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of a principal office and local agent of the applicant; 
(2)  Physical address of the parcel upon which the proposed telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure is to be erected; 
(3)  Name of the person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure, including all parties with a prospective ownership interest in the proposed telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure; 
(4)  Written consent of all parties with an existing ownership interest, including all underlying land owners and owners or licensees of any affected, existing telecommunication support structures or alternative telecommunication support structures, allowing the application; 
(5)  A site plan showing existing vegetation to be removed from the site and vegetation to be replanted to replace the vegetation that will be removed; 
(6)  A certified statement prepared by an engineer licensed in the state or other qualified industry professional indicating that the erection and operation of the proposed telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with public safety communications or the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other telecommunication service enjoyed by adjacent properties; 
(7)  Proof of and/or certified copies of any required approval, registration, and/or licensure from the commission for any provider of telecommunications services to provide such services in the state, where applicable, and any other required FAA, FCC, or otherwise state and federal approval, registration, and/or licensure required to erect the proposed new telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure; 
(8)  Written certification that all emissions from any antenna on the telecommunication support structure will comply with FCC frequency emissions standards; 
(9)  The applicant shall provide photo-simulated post-construction renderings of the completed proposed telecommunication support structure, equipment compound and/or equipment cabinets, ancillary structures, and landscaping, if any, from locations determined at the pre-application conference, if held. The views shall incorporate before and after scenarios, a scaled color image of the proposed type of facility, an aerial map with the location of the selected views, and a description of the technical approach used to create the photo simulations. The simulations shall include a minimum of four vantage points (generally north, south, east, and west). Based on the information provided at the pre-application conference, the applicant may be required to provide other pictorial representations from other viewpoints, including, but not limited to, state highways and other major roads; state and local parks; other public lands; historic districts; preserves and historic sites normally open to the public; and from any other location where the site is visible to a large number of visitors, travelers or residents; 
(10)  The city manager may, at its sole discretion, require a balloon test to be conducted at any time during which an application is pending before the city for telecommunication support structures on private property; 
(11)  Applications for permits to erect a telecommunication support structure shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
a.  Six sets of accurate scale drawings including a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation including, but not limited to, the method of construction and attachment to the ground for the telecommunication support structure. The plans for the telecommunication support structure construction shall be certified by a registered structural engineer licensed in the state as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable federal, state, and city codes, and shall show the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, telecommunication support structure height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the city manager or designee to be necessary to assess compliance with this section. In addition, the report from the structural engineer must contain: 
1.  Telecommunication support structure height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design. A cross-section of the telecommunication support structure shall be included; 
2.  Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including number and types of antenna(s) which can be accommodated; 
3.  Evidence of structural integrity of the proposed telecommunication support structure; and 
4.  Failure characteristics of the telecommunication support structure and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
(12)  Substantial and detailed showing of need for the new telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure and the reason the telecommunication facility cannot be co-located on an existing telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure, including written proof of contact made with owners of existing telecommunication or alternative telecommunication support structures, reasons for why co-location on said structures was denied or unavailable, and any engineering documentation showing that co-location on existing structures was not feasible for the geographic search area, the needed design of the telecommunication facility, was inadequate for the necessary provision of service to the affected customers and any other substantially convincing evidence that erection of a new telecommunication or alternative telecommunication support structure is the only way to provide the needed telecommunication services to affected customers. 
(b)  Additional requirements for right-of-way applications. Applicants seeking to erect new telecommunication support structures or alternative telecommunication support structures on city property and/or in any public right-of-way within the municipal limits of the city, shall provide the following, in addition to the requirements of subsection (a): 
(1)  Proof of adequate insurance or self-insurance of the applicant to defend and cover all claims of third parties against the applicant and/or city personnel related to the use of the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  A description of the applicant's service area, where applicable, which shall be sufficiently detailed so as to allow the city to respond to subscriber or end-user inquiries. For the purpose of this paragraph, an applicant providing telecommunication services may, in lieu of or as a supplement to a written description, provide a map on 81/2 by 11 inch paper that is clear and legible and that fairly depicts the service area within the municipal limits of the city. If such service area is less than the municipal limits of the city, the map shall describe the boundaries of the geographic area to be served in clear and concise terms; 
(3)  Proof of the existence of a valid telecommunications franchise to locate utilities in the public rights-of-way of the city, as applicable, in accordance with state law. 
(c)  Administrative fee. All applications for permits to erect new telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structures shall be accompanied by an administrative fee as provided for in section 70-76. 
(d)  Considerations in approval or denial of an application. Any approval or denial of a request to erect a new telecommunication or alternative telecommunication support structure in any mixed use, office institutional, commercial or industrial zoning district, or in the public right-of-way, shall be issued by the city manager in writing and supported by substantial evidence. For a request to erect a new telecommunication or alternative telecommunication support structure in a residential zoning district, the applicant shall apply for same via an application for a conditional use permit in accordance with the requirements of article VI of chapter 86 (zoning) of this Code. The city manager or mayor and city council, as applicable, shall consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in acting upon an application under the provisions of this section: 
(1)  The height and setbacks of the proposed telecommunication support structure and appurtenances thereon. In case of placement on the right-of-way, the height of the proposed telecommunication support structure shall not exceed the height of the nearest existing utility pole; 
(2)  The proximity of the proposed telecommunication support structure to residential structures and residential district boundaries, where applicable; 
(3)  The nature of uses, as well as the height of existing structures, on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)  The surrounding topography; 
(5)  The surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(6)  The design of the proposed telecommunication support structure, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness, where applicable. In case of placement on the public rights-of-way, the design must be substantially similar to the nearest utility poles and any deviations therefrom shall be at the sole discretion of the city manager; 
(7)  The proposed ingress and egress; 
(8)  The availability of suitable existing telecommunication support structures or other alternative telecommunication support structures for antenna co-location; 
(9)  The evidence submitted regarding the need for the telecommunication support structure and facility in the area, including, but not limited to, propagation maps and other similar materials, where applicable; 
(10)  The effect, if any, on health, safety, and welfare if the proposed telecommunication support structure is permitted; 
(11)  Applicable federal, state, and local telecommunications laws, regulations, and policies; 
(12)  The proposed telecommunication support structure's effect on property values of any adjacent and nearby residential properties; 
(13)  Structural safety concerns associated with the proposed telecommunication support structure, including design features which minimize risks to surrounding areas in the event of major structural failure; 
(14)  The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public rights-of-way, if applicable; 
(15)  If for a support structure in the public right-of-way, the likelihood, if any, that the proposed telecommunication facility or modification would obstruct free and clear vision from pedestrians or motor vehicle operators, interfere with the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or otherwise pose a risk to pedestrians or motor vehicle operators; and 
(16)  Such other factors as the city manager or mayor and council, as applicable, may reasonably deem in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and, if applicable, factors as may affect the city's management of its public rights-of-way in the community interest; 
(e)  Procedure for issuance. 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Prior to submitting any application governed by this section, all applicants shall be required to attend a pre-application meeting with the chief building inspector and applicable city staff to discuss the requirements for the application. The chief building inspector shall have the discretion to waive this requirement. 
(2)  Review for completeness. The city manager shall notify an applicant submitting an application governed by this section of any identified deficiencies therein within 30 calendar days of receipt of such an application. If the city manager or designee determines an application is not complete, the city manager shall notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete the application. To the extent additional information is required, the time required for an applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward the applicable review period set forth herein. Upon any resubmittal of an application, the city manager shall have 30 additional calendar days to give notice as to the completeness of the revised submission. In case of the application in residential zoning districts, the city manager shall not forward the application for a public hearing on the conditional use permit to the city council until the application is deemed complete. 
(3)  Period of review. Within 150 calendar days after receiving a complete application for the erection of a new telecommunications or alternative telecommunications support structure, the city manager or mayor and city council, as applicable, shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, including imposing any conditions. Any decision to deny an application shall be in writing, shall include reasons for denial, and shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
(4)  Appellate rights. The city manager's decision to deny an application in mixed use, office and institutional, commercial and industrial zones, as well as the right-of-way, may be appealed to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 calendar days of the denial. Failure to file a notice of appeal within 30 calendar days of such a denial shall constitute a waiver of the applicant's appeal rights. 
(5)  Appellate procedure. The mayor and council shall hold a public hearing within at the next available and scheduled council meeting, but in no respect later than 30 calendar days following the receipt of the notice of appeal of an application as provided in subsection (d)(3). Official notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the state zoning procedures law. In addition, said official notice of the public hearing shall include the location of the proposed facility. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-72. - Access to public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Franchise fees. Pursuant to O.C.G.A § 46-5-1(b) and in accordance with applicable state law, providers of telecommunication services and applicants for same in the public rights-of-way shall provide the city due compensation for use of, and access to, a public right-of-way. Such compensation shall not be assessed in a discriminatory fashion with respect to the telecommunication services to be provided or transmitted by or through a proposed telecommunication facility, in accordance with applicable state law. Said compensation for the use of the public right-of-way shall be paid by the applicant within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. 
(b)  Restoration of public rights-of-way and city property. When a grantee authorized to construct telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way, or any person acting on behalf of a grantee, does any work affecting any public right-of-way or city property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such public right-of-way or city property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the city manager or designee. Restoration will be consistent with standards required by the city. 
(c)  Indemnification. Each applicant shall, upon receiving a permit to erect or modify telecommunication facilities in a public right-of-way, and to the extent permitted by law, as a condition of such access, expressly undertake to defend, indemnify, and hold the city and its officers, appointed officials, agents, employees, and assigns harmless from and against any and all damages, losses, and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless, or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act, or misconduct of the applicant or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of any telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way, whether such acts are authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-73. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Any authorization to erect or operate telecommunication facilities granted by the city manager, may be revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  Erection or operation of telecommunication facilities at an unauthorized location; 
(2)  Misrepresentation by or on behalf of an applicant or permit holder in any representation to the city; 
(3)  Abandonment of applicable telecommunication facilities as set forth in this in this article; 
(4)  Failure to pay required franchise fees for access and use of public rights-of-way, as applicable; 
(5)  Violation of a material provision of this article, or city, state or federal laws applicable to erection and maintenance of a telecommunication support structure or facility; or 
(6)  Violation of a material condition set forth in any permit or authorization to erect and operate a telecommunication support structure or facility. 
(b)  A notice of revocation shall be given to the support structure and/or facility owner or assignee in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the reasons therefor. An appeal of a notice of revocation may be made by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager within ten business days following the notice of revocation. A notice of appeal shall be heard by the mayor and city council within 30 days following said notice of appeal, and a decision by the mayor and city council must be made at, or within ten days of, said hearing, and must be delivered to the appellant in writing, stating the reasons therefor. Said writing shall constitute the final decision of the city concerning said appeal. A conditional use permit to erect a telecommunication support or alternate telecommunication support structure as required in this article may only be revoked by a process consistent with the Zoning Procedures Act. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-74. - Maintenance. 
    A telecommunication support structure and/or facility shall be maintained in good condition, as required by applicable building, property maintenance and fire codes, as well as state and federal law. Maintenance of such telecommunication facilities shall include, but not be limited to, the structural integrity of all telecommunication support structures, alternative telecommunication support structures, antennas, equipment compounds, equipment cabinets, painting, irrigation systems, buffer areas, and landscaping, to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-75. - Limitation on municipal authority. 
    In regulating the erection and maintenance of telecommunication facilities, whether located on private lands or in public rights-of-way, the city shall not: 
(a)  Condition the approval of any application for a new telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure on a requirement that a modification or co-location to such structure be subject to a review inconsistent with this article; 
(b)  Require the removal of an existing telecommunication support structure, alternative telecommunication support structure, or telecommunication facility as a condition of approval of an application for a new telecommunication facility unless such existing telecommunication support structure, alternative telecommunication support structure, or telecommunication facility is abandoned and owned by the applicant; 
(c)  Require the applicant to place an antenna or other equipment on publicly owned land or on a publicly or privately owned water tank, building, or electric transmission tower as an alternative to the location proposed by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-76. - Fees. 
    For applications seeking to modify an existing telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure or seeking to co-locate equipment onto an existing telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure, not resulting in a substantial increase in size as governed by this article, the fee shall be $500.00 for review and inspection. The fee for applications fee seeking to modify an existing support structure or co-locate equipment on an existing support structure resulting in a substantial increase in size, the fee shall be $1,000.00 for review and inspection. The fee for applications seeking to erect a new telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure shall be the same as the fee for filing a conditional use permit under the zoning ordinance, plus an additional fee for the city retaining an expert to assist in assessing applicant's data on the demonstrated need for erection of a new support structure, not to exceed $5,000.00 for proposed telecommunications support structures or $2,500.00 for proposed alternative telecommunication support structures or support structures for small cells only. These fees shall be in addition to any building permit-related fees or any applicable occupation taxes otherwise levied by the city pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-77. - Bond requirement for new telecommunication support structures. 
    Prior to the issuance of a permit for the erection of a telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure, an applicant shall procure a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount not less than $25,000.00 conditioned upon the removal of the telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure, should it be deemed abandoned under the provisions set forth in this article. Such bond or letter of credit: 
(a)  Shall be renewed at least every two years during the life of the telecommunication support structure or alternative telecommunication support structure; 
(b)  Shall not expire unless the city is given 60 calendar days' prior written notice; 
(c)  Shall include the name, address, telephone number, and contact for the provider bond or letter of credit; and 
(d)  In the case of a bond, shall include a statement that the provider of the bond is listed in the latest issue of the U.S. Treasury Circular 570. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-78. - Non-discrimination. 
    In evaluating any application governed by this article, the city shall not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services and technical capabilities and/or deny an application based solely on the financial status of an applicant, type of telecommunication services to be provided should a prospective application be approved, and/or the content of telecommunications to be provided by and/or through proposed telecommunication facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-79. - Inspections. 
(a)  Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with a telecommunication support structure, alternative telecommunication support structure, or antenna are provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the applicant, or the person(s) responsible for the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer, agent, or employee of the city who is authorized or directed to make such inspection, at any reasonable time that admission is requested. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the permit granted to any applicant who refuses to allow any authorized officer, agent or employee of the city to make any inspection provided for in subsection (a) hereinabove, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection, may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-80. - Penalties for violation. 
    In addition to the other remedies available to the city for violation of this article set forth herein or in any other applicable provision of this Code, the municipal court of the city, after notice to the applicant or permittee and hearing, may impose a fine for failure to comply with the provisions of this section or a sentence not to exceed 60 days. Such a fine shall not exceed $1,000.00 per day and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. In addition, the applicant or permittee shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-81. - Appeals of decisions of the mayor and council. 
    Appeals of decisions of mayor and council under this article shall be by writ of certiorari to the county superior court in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-82. - Facilities lease. 
    The mayor and city council may approve facilities leases for the location of telecommunications facilities upon city-owned property. Neither this section, nor any other provision of this article, shall be construed to create an entitlement or vested right in any person or entity of any type. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-83. - Lease application. 
    Any person that desires to solicit the city's approval of a facilities lease pursuant to this article shall file a lease proposal with the city manager which, in addition to the information required by sections 70-68, 70-69 or 70-70, as applicable, shall include the following: 
(1)  A description of the telecommunications facilities or other equipment proposed to be located upon city property; 
(2)  A description of the city property upon which the applicant proposes to locate telecommunications facilities or other equipment; 
(3)  Preliminary plans and specifications in sufficient detail to identify: 
a.  The location(s) of existing wireless transmission or telecommunications facilities or other equipment upon the city property, whether publicly or privately owned; and 
b.  The location and source of electric and other utilities required for the installation and operation of the proposed facilities. 
(4)  Accurate scaled conceptual drawings and diagrams of sufficient specificity to analyze the aesthetic impacts of the proposed telecommunications facilities or other equipment; 
(5)  Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial tone service or other video programming service from the facility, and sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising; 
(6)  An accurate map showing the location of any wireless telecommunications facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or lease; 
(7)  A landscaping bond in an amount to be determined by the city manager or designee; 
(8)  Such other and further information as may be requested by the city; and 
(9)  An application fee of $100.00 for lease negotiation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-84. - Determination by the city. 
    Recognizing that the city is under no obligation to grant a facilities lease for the use of city property, the city shall strive to consider and take action on applications for facilities leases within 60 days after receiving a complete application for such a lease. When such action is taken, the city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the lease in whole or in part, applying such criteria as the mayor and city council may choose to apply. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-85. - Agreement. 
    No facilities lease shall be deemed to have been granted hereunder until the applicant and the city have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the lessee has been granted the right to occupy and use the city property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-86. - Non-exclusive lease. 
    No facilities lease granted under this article shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license, or franchise to occupy or use city property for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes nor shall approval of a lease entitle the applicant to a building or other applicable permit to construct or place a wireless telecommunications facility. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-87. - Term of lease. 
    Unless otherwise specified in a lease agreement, a facilities lease granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of up to five years, with the lessee granted a maximum of three, five-year renewal options which options shall also be subject to approval of council. The aggregate term of any such agreement shall not exceed 20 years. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-88. - Rights granted. 
    No facilities lease granted under this article shall convey any right, title or interest in the city property, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the city property for the limited purposes and term stated in the lease agreement. Further, no facilities lease shall be construed as any warranty of title. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-89. - Interference with other users. 
    No facilities lease shall be granted under this article unless it contains a provision which is substantially similar to the following: 
"The city has previously entered into leases with other tenants for their equipment and wireless telecommunications facilities. Lessee acknowledges that the city is also leasing the city property for the purposes of transmitting and receiving telecommunication signals from the city property. The city, however, is not in any way responsible or liable for any interference with lessee's use of the city property which may be caused by the use and operation of any other tenant's equipment, even if caused by new technology. In the event that any other tenant's activities interfere with the lessee's use of the city property, and the lessee cannot work out this interference with the other tenants, the lessee may, upon 60 days' notice to the city, terminate this lease and restore the city property to its original condition, reasonable wear and tear excepted. The lessee shall cooperate with all other tenants to identify the causes of and work towards the resolution of any electronic interference problem. In addition, the lessee agrees to eliminate any radio or television interference caused to city-owned facilities or surrounding residences at lessee's own expense and without installation of extra filters on city-owned equipment. Lessee further agrees to accept such interference as may be received from city-operated telecommunications or other facilities located upon the city property subject to this lease." 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-90. - Ownership and removal of improvements. 
    No facilities lease shall be granted under this article unless it contains a provision which states that all buildings, landscaping, and all other improvements, except telecommunications equipment, shall become the property of the city upon expiration or termination of the lease. In the event that the city requires removal of such improvements, such removal shall be accomplished at the sole expense of the lessee and completed within 90 days after receiving notice form the city requiring removal of the improvements. In the event that wireless telecommunications facilities or other equipment are left upon city property after expiration or termination of the lease, they shall become the property of the city if not removed by the lessee upon 30 days' written notice from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-91. - Compensation to the city. 
(a)  Each facilities lease granted under this article is subject to the city's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the rights granted to the lessee; provided, nothing in these sections shall prohibit the city and a lessee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. Such compensation shall be payable in advance of the effective date of the lease and on or before January 31 of each calendar year. Any payments received after the due date shall include a late payment penalty of two percent of the annual rental fee for each day or part thereof past the due date. The compensation shall be negotiated by the city manager or designee, subject to the mayor and city council's final approval, based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Comparable lease rates for other public or private property; 
(2)  In the case land is leased, an appraisal opinion upon which the land and air space is rented; 
(3)  If structure of another user is involved, any amount needed to reimburse that user, in addition to the above; 
(4)  A yearly escalator rate commonly used in comparable leases; 
(5)  The additional rent such structure may generate if leased to additional users (the city should be entitled to rent as a result of a sublease); 
(6)  Additional fees or charges may be established by the city to cover actual costs of processing the application, including engineering review, inspection and appraisal cost, legal, administration of the agreement, providing on-site services, and/or other direct or indirect costs. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-92. - Amendment of facilities lease. 
    Except as provided within an existing lease agreement, a new lease application and lease agreement shall be required of any telecommunications carrier or other entity that desire to expand, modify, or relocate its telecommunications facilities or other equipment located upon city property. If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities or other equipment on the city property, the city shall grant a lease amendment without further application. Such amendment must be approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-93. - Term renewal. 
    A lessee that desires to exercise a renewal option in its facilities lease under this article shall, not more than 180 days nor less than 120 days before expiration of the current facilities lease term, give the city manager written notice of same and submit the following information: 
(1)  Any information required pursuant to the facilities lease agreement between the city and the lessee; 
(2)  A report certified by a radiofrequency engineer that the site is in compliance with current FCC radio emission standards; and 
(3)  All deposits or charges required pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 70-94. - Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal. 
    No facilities lease shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the lessee's performance of the lease agreement, or of the requirements of these sections, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the lessee has been approved by the city. In no event shall a facilities lease be renewed if lessee fails to cure. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003 , § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Chapter 74 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicle sales, § 18-241 et seq.; courts, ch. 30; sound trucks and sound amplifying devices, § 34-122; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; vehicle repair, maintenance and other work, § 46-11; operation of motorized vehicle race tracks, § 46-21; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; parades and demonstrations, § 58-41 et seq.; off-street automobile parking, § 86-4; off-street loading and unloading space, § 86-5. 
State Law reference- Deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Vehicle cover required. 
    No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
(Code 1987, § 10-1-4) 
Sec. 74-2. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
    Whenever a space is marked off on any highway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Code 1987, § 10-1-5) 
Sec. 74-3. - Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles. 
    Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, boat, camping and hauling trailers, shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Not more than one commercial vehicle per family living on the premises, which does not exceed 11/2 tons rated capacity, shall be permitted; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted. 
(2)  Not more than one camping or travel trailer, one hauling trailer, and one boat trailer per family living on the premises shall be permitted and the trailer shall not exceed 33 feet in length, or eight feet in width; and further provided that the trailer shall not be parked or stored for more than 48 hours unless it is located behind the front yard building line. A camping or travel trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area except in a travel trailer court authorized under this chapter. 
(3)  Not more than one tractor cab per family living on the premises, which cab does not exceed 21/2 tons rated capacity, shall be permitted on any lot; and further provided that such tractor cab shall not be parked on a city street or a private driveway, but shall be parked only on a paved pad, constructed to accommodate the weight of the cab, as approved by the city building inspector. For the purposes of this section, a tractor cab shall mean a motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing trailers or semitrailers, and not designed to normally operate independently as a means of transportation without the presence of such trailer or semitrailer. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to park a tractor trailer with or without tractor cab on any street between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except where zoning specifically provides for such parking in an area zoned M-1. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to use a tractor trailer for the purpose of storage except where zoning specifically provides for such parking in areas zoned C-1, C-2 and M-1. In such instances, no more than two such trailers may be used for each lot and only for the purposes of storing seasonal horticultural perishables. 
(Code 1987, § 10-1-6; Ord. of 5-10-1993(2), § 1) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 74-4. - Parking of cars for sale. 
    Only city personnel on official business may park a car on public property for the purpose of utilizing the same for signage. 
(Code 1987, § 10-1-7; Ord. No. 02-04, § 10, 6-10-2002) 
Sec. 74-5. - Riding bicycle upon sidewalk; Main Street. 
    It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle on the sidewalks on Main Street from the Methodist Church to Smith Street. 
(Code 1987, § 10-1-8) 
Sec. 74-6. - Railroads; street blocking restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, engineer, firefighter, conductor or the employees of any railroad company to stop or cause to be stopped, any train or portion of train, car or locomotive, on or across any street crossing in the city for a longer period of time than five minutes at any one time. 
(Code 1987, § 10-1-9) 
Sec. 74-7. - Overnight parking in residential districts. 
(a)  On all public streets, except where parking spaces have been officially designated by the city, in areas of the city zoned R-1, R-2, R-2D, R-3, R-4 and HD no stopping, standing or parking of vehicles shall be allowed in any public street from 5:00 p.m. until 9:00 a.m. 
(b)  Traffic control devices shall be placed in areas designated as residential above to regulate stopping, standing and parking of vehicles. 
(c)  The definitions found in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 shall be and are made applicable to this section. 
(d)  Vehicles found in violation of this section shall be towed to a city authorized impound facility or lot. All costs for towing and storage of vehicles shall be paid for by the owners of the vehicle. 
(e)  All impounded vehicles shall be deemed to be abandoned pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1(C) after impound for 30 days. 
(f)  The procedures regarding notice, foreclosure, abandonments, liens and sales as set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-11-2 through 40-11-9 shall be used by parties removing vehicles from public property. 
(g)  Penalties for violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2001, § 1) 
Secs. 74-8-74-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM RULES OF THE ROAD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 

Sec. 74-41. - Uniform Rules of the Road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372-40-6-376 and O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2-40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-13. 
(Code 1987, § 10-1-1) 
Secs. 74-42-74-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED ZONES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 74-71. - On-system. 
    Based on an engineering and traffic investigation, when appropriate signage giving notice thereof is erected, the following maximum speed limits shall be in effect upon the following streets or parts of streets: 
ON-SYSTEM 
STATE
ROUTE WITHIN
THE CITY/TOWN LIMITS OF 
and/or School Name FROM MILE
POINT TO MILE
POINT LENGTH
IN MILES SPEED
LIMIT S.R. 3 
U.S. 19/41 JONESBORO A point 0.42 miles south of South Avenue (Jonesboro city limits) 6.04 A point 0.10 miles south of State Route 54(Fayetteville Road) 6.51 0.47 55 S.R. 3 
U.S. 19/41 JONESBORO A point 0.10 miles south of State Route 54(Fayetteville Road) 6.51 A point 0.10 miles north of State Route 54(Fayetteville Road)(Jonesboro city limits) 6.71 0.20 45 S.R. 3 
U.S. 19/41 JONESBORO A point 0.17 miles south of Robert E. Lee Parkway (Jonesboro city limits) 7.03 A point 50 feet north of Smith Street (Jonesboro city limits) 7.21 0.18 45  
Signs to be erected by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1995; Ord. No. 2015-001, § 1(Att.), 1-12-2015; Ord. No. 2015-009, § 1(Att.), 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 74-72. - Off-system. 
    Based on an engineering and traffic investigation, when appropriate signage giving notice thereof is erected, the following maximum speed limits shall be in effect upon the following streets or parts of streets: 
OFF-SYSTEM 
ROAD NAME WITHIN THE
CITY/TOWN
LIMITS OF 
and/or School Name FROM TO LENGTH
IN MILES SPEED
LIMIT Burnside Street South Main Street Fayette Avenue 0.40 25 Church Street South Main Street Stewart Street 0.40 25 Cloud Street South Avenue College Street 0.35 25 College Street Fayetteville Road Main Street 0.47 25 Fayetteville Road Tara Boulevard Williamson Mill Road 1.20 35 Fayetteville Road 
SCHOOL ZONE EULA WILBORN 
PONDS PERRY 
LEARNING CENTER A point .03 miles South of Smith Street A point .006 miles North of Dixon Street .45 25 Jodeco Road Turner Road A point 0.05 miles east of Mercer Drive 0.40 35 Jodeco Road 
SCHOOL ZONE SUDER 
ELEMENTARY 
SCHOOL A point 0.05 miles east of Mercer Drive 0.10 miles west of Thornton Drive 0.25 25 Johnson Street North McDonough Street Royston Street 0.25 25 Jonesboro Road North Avenue State Route 54 0.70 45 Lee Street Mill Street North Avenue 0.60 25 Lee Street 
SCHOOL ZONE LEE STREET 
ELEMENTARY 
SCHOOL AND 
EULA WILBORN 
PONDS PERRY 
LEARING CENTER Mill Street Pine Circle 0.25 25 Mill Street Fayetteville Road Main Street 0.40 25 North Avenue Tara Boulevard North Main Street 0.60 35 North Main Street 5th Avenue North Avenue 0.60 35 North Main Street North Avenue Smith Street 0.55 35 North Main Street Smith Street College Avenue 0.25 30 North McDonough Street Courthouse Way Spring Street 0.35 30 North McDonough Street Spring Street A point 50 feet south of Government Circle 0.90 35 Old Stockbridge Road Stockbridge Road Irvin Street 0.25 25 Smith Street North Main Street Tara Boulevard 0.50 25 Smith Street 
SCHOOL ZONE LEE STREET 
ELEMENTARY 
SCHOOL AND 
EULA WILBORN 
PONDS PERRY 
LEARNING 
CENTER North Main Street Fayetteville Road 0.4 25 South Avenue Main Street Tara Boulevard 0.45 25 South Main Street College Street Batiste Way 0.43 35 South Main Street Batiste Way A point 0.32 miles south of Batiste Road-south city limits 0.32 45 South McDonough Street Courthouse Way College Street 0.15 30 South McDonough Street College Street Turner Road 0.30 35 Spring Street North Main Street West Avenue 0.40 25 Spring Street 
SCHOOL ZONE LEE STREET 
ELEMENTARY 
SCHOOL AND 
EULA WILBORN 
PONDS PERRY 
LEARNING 
CENTER Fayetteville Road North Main Street 0.30 25 Stockbridge Road North McDonough Street A point 0.05 miles west of Sunnydale Lane 0.75 35 Stockbridge Road 
SCHOOL ZONE J.W. ARNOLD 
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL AND 
JONESBORO ELEMENTARY SCHOOL A point 200 feet west of Wilburn Street A point 0.10 miles east of Moore Street 0.53 25 Turner Road Jodeco Road A point 0.35 miles north of Paramore Road 0.65 35 West Avenue North Avenue Dixon Street 0.27 25 Williamson Mill Road North Avenue Fayetteville Road 0.44 25  
Signs to be erected by the City of Jonesboro. 
School Zone Hours Effective: 
a.m. - From 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time - School days only. 
p.m. - From 30 minutes prior to [dismissal] time to 30 minutes after dismissal time. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1995; Ord. No. 2015-001, § 2(Att.), 1-12-2015; Ord. No. 2015-009, § 2(Att.), 8-10-2015) 
Secs. 74-73-74-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 74-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly maintained way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Temporary delivery means the nonregular, nonpermanent transport of materials or property to or from any location on a residential highway associated with an activity of limited duration. This term does not include the use of a truck as defined in this section to deliver a driver or passengers. 
    Traffic control device means any signal or sign of any kind used to direct, permit, prohibit, or regulate in any way the use of any public roadway or highway. 
    Truck means every motor vehicle with more than six wheels designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property where such motor vehicle is not the property of, not used by or not operating with the express written consent of the city in the pursuit of city business or is not engaged in a temporary delivery as defined in this section. 
(Ord. of 9-27-1999, § 1(b)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-92. - Construction. 
(a)  This article shall not be construed to prohibit truck traffic on state routes. 
(b)  This article shall not be construed to generally prohibit the transportation and flow of goods and services in the ordinary flow of commerce or persons through the city, except as reasonably regulated in this article. 
(c)  This article shall not be construed to generally prevent the pickup and delivery of goods and services and persons in the ordinary course of business except as reasonably regulated in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-27-1999, § 1(k)-(m)) 
Sec. 74-93. - Violations. 
    Jurisdiction over a violation of this article shall be in any court having jurisdiction to try and dispose of traffic offenses. 
(Ord. of 9-27-1999, § 1(i)) 
Sec. 74-94. - Established. 
    A truck route for trucks with over six wheels is established. The purpose of this route is to redirect truck traffic away from city streets. The truck route shall be as designated in figure 1. 
PU MP 226. 
(Ord. of 9-27-1999, § 1(j)) 
Sec. 74-95. - Traffic control devices prohibiting certain truck traffic. 
(a)  Traffic control devices prohibiting trucks with over six wheels on city streets shall be erected in that such truck traffic is incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic on city streets. 
(b)  Where these traffic control devices are in place no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such traffic control devices. 
(c)  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instruction of the official traffic control device in place in accordance with this article, unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer or authorized emergency official acting in an official capacity, and subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in accordance with local ordinances and the laws of the state. 
(d)  The traffic control devices described in this section shall be placed in a position so as to be sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
(e)  The traffic control device shall conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such traffic control devices. 
(f)  The disregard or disobedience of the instructions of the traffic control devices set out and placed in accordance with the provisions of this article by a driver of a vehicle shall constitute a misdemeanor offense. 
(g)  Destruction or damage to a traffic control device shall constitute a misdemeanor offense. 
(Ord. of 9-27-1999, § 1(a), (c)-(h)) 
Secs. 74-96-74-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 6, 2016, repealed Art. V, §§ 74-121-74-155, which pertained to taxicabs and derived from an ordinance adopted Sept. 11, 200, § 1; Ord. No. 02-04, § 11, adopted Jun 10, 2002. 

Secs. 74-121-74-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOTORIZED CARTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-012 , § 1, adopted Oct. 8, 2018, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 74-175-74-181, pertained to golf carts, and derived from Ord. No. 2008-004, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 2008; and Ord. No. 2010-002, § 1, 2-8-10. 

Sec. 74-175. - Findings, purpose and definitions. 
(a)  The mayor and city council find that all public streets and paved recreational paths located within the geographic boundaries of the city are designed and constructed as to safely permit their use. 
(b)  It shall be the intent of this article to regulate the use of motorized carts by residents within the city and provide for the regulated use of motorized carts by non-city residents within the city limits. 
(c)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Jonesboro. 
    City resident means a citizen living within the incorporated limits of the City of Jonesboro. 
    Driver is defined as the person driving and having physical control over the motorized cart and being the licensee. 
    Motorized carts are defined as those electric and gasoline-powered pleasure carts, commonly referred as to "golf carts", and further defined by reference to O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(17.3). These are the only personal transportation vehicles, as that term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(43.1), authorized for use under this article. 
    Non-city resident means a citizen living outside of the incorporated limits of the city with personal business within the incorporated limits of the city. 
    Recreational paths are defined as areas designated for multi-use and having widths in greater than seven feet. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12, § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 74-176. - Registration/inspection/certification. 
(a)  (1)  General. Before any motorized cart is operated over any recreational paths, authorized streets or any other public property pursuant to this article, it shall be the duty of the owner thereof to register the cart with and obtain a permit from the city. Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a motorized cart. Motorized cart registration may be in one person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person. A record of each motorized cart number with corresponding owner information shall be maintained by the city. 
(2)  Application. Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the following minimum information: 
a.  Name and current address (street and mailing) of applicant. 
b.  Model, make, name and cart identification number. 
c.  Copy of current Georgia driver's license number. 
d.  Evidence of current motor vehicle insurance as required by law. 
e.  For gasoline powered motorized carts, a current dealer certification that the vehicle meets the emission standards required herein. 
f.  Such other information which the city may require in order to effectuate the purpose and intent of this article. 
(3)  Fee. An annual registration fee for each newly-purchased motorized cart shall be $25.00 for city residents and $30.00 for non-city residents. All citizens aged 65 and over shall be entitled to a 50 percent reduction in the annual registration fee amount. The registration shall be effective until the ownership of the motorized cart is transferred to another person or entity. The registration fees shall be due by January 31st each year and shall be paid annually until such time as the cart is transferred or otherwise disposed of. 
(4)  Transfer. Upon any transfer of ownership of a previously registered motorized cart, the new owner shall, before he or she shall operate the motorized cart in a manner regulated hereunder, apply for a new permit and registration. The new owner shall pay the registration and permit fee as required herein. 
(5)  Decals. Two numerical decals shall be issued upon completion of registration. The decals must be affixed to the sides of the cart in such a manner as to be fully visible at all times. Decals for city residents and non-city residents shall be different, distinct colors. Decals for city residents and non-city residents shall change color annually, in a revolving schedule determined by the city. 
(6)  Revocation of permit. Permits may be revoked if it is found that: 
a.  The permit holder no longer holds a valid Georgia driver's license; 
b.  The permit holder, or any operator of the registered vehicle, shall repeatedly fail to abide by the rules and regulations of this article, including, but not limited to, failing to have a current registration and properly displaying current decals. 
c.  The permit holder shall fail to abide by traffic laws in the use of a motorized cart on authorized streets; 
d.  The permit holder shall fail to grant right-of-way to pedestrians and bicyclists; or 
e.  The permit holder cannot safely operate the motorized cart on a designated roadway or pose a threat to the safety of others. 
(7)  Homeowner relocation. In the event that a registered motorized cart owner changes his/her address or contact information after the motorized cart is registered, that owner shall have 60 days to provide their new contact information to the city. If the ownership information is not updated within 60 days of relocation, a $20.00 penalty will be applied and the cart shall be considered an unregistered cart after the 60-day period. 
(8)  Temporary permits. For short-term visitors or guests to the city using a motorized cart within the city, which is registered in another municipality other than the city or Clayton County, Georgia, a temporary permit card is required by the city and shall be placed in a conspicuous place on the subject cart. No affixed decals are required for temporary permits. 
(b)  Gasoline carts. 
(1)  Every motorized cart powered by gasoline shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
a.  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer; 
b.  The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened, with brackets or hangers which are designed for the particular purpose of fastening the motorized cart exhaust systems; and 
c.  The engine and powered mechanism of every motorized cart shall be so equipped, adjusted and tuned so that the exhaust is in good working order. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart to operate or permit the operation of such motorized cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions, which is placed on a cart by the manufacturer, is rendered unserviceable by removal, alteration or other acts which interfere with its operation. 
(3)  Every two years, running with the time of registration, every gasoline motorized cart must be inspected by a dealer holding a valid business license for the inspection and repair of motorized carts, and the dealer must certify that the exhaust system meets the standards required by this article. This certification must be presented to the city in order to obtain a renewal permit. 
(c)  Rental carts. Motorized cart dealers and distributors, as well as other commercial establishments, may rent carts to the public for use on authorized streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city. Each such establishment renting carts shall be required to register each such rental cart in accordance with subsection (a) of this section and shall maintain a written record of each person who rents each cart. Operators of rental vehicles shall be required to furnish positive identification, shall be provided a copy of this article, shall carry a copy of the current registration in the vehicle, and must be at least 18 years of age. The registration fee and transfer fees and regulations shall be the same as those in subsections (a)(4) and (5) of this section. Motorized carts for temporary use by the city during special events are exempt from the requirement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12, § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 74-177. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  Only those persons who hold a valid driver's license may drive a motorized cart on authorized streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city. 
(b)  Motorized carts shall only be operated over those authorized streets and those areas accessible by the public during daylight hours, unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights and taillights. All carts must have functional brake lights and turn signals. 
(c)  Children (passengers) under the age of 12 must wear a certified bicycle helmet. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart or any other person operating, employing, permitting the use of or otherwise directing the use of such cart to operate or permit the operator of any such cart to drive over the authorized streets or those areas accessible by the public in the city in violation of this article. 
(e)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on streets of the city, shall also apply to motorized carts. 
(f)  Sidewalks and recreational paths. Motorized carts shall not be driven on any city sidewalks or on unauthorized recreational paths. 
(g)  Designated parking areas. Except where specifically authorized, motorized carts shall not be parked on streets, street shoulders, or within rights-of-way. Motorized carts at residences shall only be parked in driveways or in carports/garages and shall be provided adequate off-street parking space as other types of vehicles. The city shall reserve the right to create motorized cart parking areas in certain districts. 
(h)  All motorized cart operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the streets and those areas accessible by the public in the city. Where cart paths exist, they must be used in preference to parallel city streets with the exclusion of those cart paths privately owned and maintained and not used by the general public. 
(i)  All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during the operation of the motorized cart. No person may sit on the operator's lap during the operation of the motorized cart. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12, § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 74-178. - Authorized streets and other areas. 
(a)  Motorized carts may be operated on all city streets and areas, except as provided below: 
(1)  Streets and areas north of Georgia State Route 138 Spur. 
(2)  Turner Road. 
(3)  Stockbridge Road. 
(4)  Tara Boulevard. 
(5)  Public sidewalks and unauthorized recreational paths. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12, § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 74-179. - Liability. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the city for any injuries to persons or property which may result from the operation of a motorized cart by a license holder or the failure by the city to revoke said license. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12, § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 74-180. - Penalties. 
(a)  All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the streets and those areas accessible by the public. Violations shall be punished as provided herein. 
(b)  In addition to any fine as may be imposed by operation of subsection (a) above, the registered owner of the cart, shall, upon any violation of this article by any operator of the registered vehicle, be charged a civil penalty as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, a civil penalty of not less than $100.00. 
(2)  For the second offense, a civil penalty of not less than $250.00. 
(3)  For a third offense committed within one year of the imposition of a civil penalty for a second offense, the minimum fine shall be $500.00, and the registered owner's motorized cart registration shall be revoked. The registered owner may not thereafter operate a motorized cart in the city for a period of two years after imposition of the civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12, § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Sec. 74-181. - Signs. 
    The city shall post signs in conjunction with all existing city speed limit signs (on relevant streets) currently erected by the city, informing drivers of which city streets are authorized for motorized carts. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12, § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Chapter 78 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 16; self-inspection of sewer lines by plumbers and utility contractors, § 16-1; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; historical preservation, ch. 42; discharging sewage and other polluted waste into natural outlets, § 46-3; insanitary deposits of excrement, garbage and other objectionable waste, § 46-18; planning, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 62; telecommunications, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; waterwell standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; authority to provide for the development storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Wells not in use. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant in possession of property to maintain or cause to be maintained any well that is not in use. Any such well shall be filled up to the level of the surface surrounding it. 
(Code 1987, § 6-1-5) 
State Law reference- Abatement of abandoned wells or holes, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-14. 
Sec. 78-2. - Compulsory sewer connections. 
    Every residence, house or business establishment in the city is hereby required to connect and tap-in to the public sewer system when a sewer line is available on the street which fronts or is contiguous to the property on which the structure is erected or when a sewer line is located within 300 feet of the structure. 
(Code 1987, § 6-1-11) 
Secs. 78-3-78-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 34-31 et seq.; obstructing drainage, § 46-2. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

Sec. 78-36. - Authority of article. 
    The authority for this article is based on home rule provisions of the Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1995, § 1(8-8-1)) 
Sec. 78-37. - Findings. 
    Recent federal regulations (1987 Clean Water Act Amendments) require maintenance and management of municipal separate storm sewer systems and discharges. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1995, § 1(8-8-2)) 
Sec. 78-38. - Objectives of article. 
    It is the objective of this article to comply with state and federal stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1995, § 1(8-8-3)) 
Sec. 78-39. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the city separate storm sewer system which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
    City separate storm sewer system means a conveyance or system of conveyances which is located within city owned rights-of-way and designed and used only for collecting or conveying stormwater runoff or other approved surface water discharges. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
    Conveyance means stormwater features designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, storm drains, etc. 
    Development activity means manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
    Discharge means the release of treated or untreated stormwater runoff or other material to the city separate storm sewer system. 
    Drainage system means a conveyance or system of conveyances designed and used for collecting or conveying stormwater runoff. 
    Hazardous material means a flammable, highly corrosive, acidic or toxic material as identified in O.C.G.A. § 12-14-1 in the "Oil and Hazardous Materials Spill Reporting" requirements. 
    Illicit discharge means a discharge to the city separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the city separate storm sewer system). 
    Maximum extent practicable means best management practices, control techniques, system design or engineering methods and any other provisions which can be economically and reasonably implemented to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the city separate storm sewer system. 
    Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, and includes any individual, firm, corporation, government agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity. 
    Pollution means the contamination or other significant alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
    Private means property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations and other organizations and not by city, county, state or federal government. 
    Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater management facility means constructed or natural components of a stormwater drainage system, designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions including, but not limited to, pipes, swales, ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catchbasins, oil/water separators, sediment basins, natural systems and modular pavement. 
    Stormwater runoff means the direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff, that enters a stormwater conveyance system or other concentrated flow during and following a precipitation event. 
    Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1995, § 1(8-8-4)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-40. - Application of article provisions; implementation; scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the city. 
(b)  The director of the county transportation and development department or his designee shall assist the city with the implementation of the provisions of this article by providing technical assistance, plan review and inspection services upon written request by the city's designated representative. 
(c)  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. This article shall control where ordinances actually conflict. However, if another chapter or statute requires further or more stringent action, this article does not conflict. All persons must take necessary actions to meet other statutes and ordinances not in conflict with this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1995, § 1(8-8-5)) 
Sec. 78-41. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Upon determination that a violation of this article has occurred, the violator shall receive notice of such violation. This notice shall specify the nature and evidence of violation and the amount of time in which to correct deficiencies. 
(b)  A violation of this article, including any noncompliance for correction or alleviation of violations specified in the city's first notice within the specified time for the alleviation in the notice, shall constitute an offense. In the absence of a time specified for the corrections or alleviation in the first notice, all violations must be corrected or alleviated as specified in the first notice within 30 days from the date of such notice. Failure to comply shall also constitute a separate offense. The maximum penalty and punishment for any single violation of this article may not exceed a fine of $200.00 or imprisonment in the city jail for 60 days, or both. Each day the noncompliance or violation is not corrected constitutes a separate violation. The city may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this article or to correct violations of this article. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. Nothing in this section contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief. 
(c)  Upon notice from the city, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent, the persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1995, § 1(8-8-10)) 
Sec. 78-42. - Minimum requirements to reduce pollutant discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system from areas of new developments. 
(a)  Application for a clearing or grading permit shall be made to the city on forms furnished by it prior to commencing any development activities which direct stormwater runoff or other discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. Such application may require plans prepared by a registered professional engineer or other qualified professional, to be submitted in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the development vicinity; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed drainage systems; and proposed activities on the site. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  A plan to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of pollutants to the city separate storm sewer system from areas of new development. Plans may include, but are not limited to, structural and source control measures to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff, management practices or other appropriate provisions. 
(2)  Plans shall also address controls to reduce pollutants in discharges to the city separate storm sewer system after construction is completed. 
(3)  A plan to ensure that the postdeveloped peak stormwater runoff rate is no greater than the predeveloped peak stormwater runoff rate and minimize downstream erosion and property damage. This requirement may be waived if appropriate information is submitted that documents downstream impacts are not significant. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from obtaining a development permit unless such activities are identified as possible pollutant sources and provided that this exemption shall not relieve such activities from complying with the remaining provisions of this article: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work and other related activities; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, provided that construction of any such residence conforms to the minimum standards as set forth in section 34-39 and that such standards may be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural activities; 
(6)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(7)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; construction and maintenance, or either, by any water or sewerage authority established by the general assembly of the state; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 34-39 and that such standards may be enforced by the issuing authority; and 
(8)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electric system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1995, § 1(8-8-6)) 
Sec. 78-43. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to throw, drain, run or otherwise discharge to any component of the city separate storm sewer system, or to cause, permit or suffer to be thrown, drained, run or allow to seep or otherwise discharge into such system all matter of any nature excepting only such stormwater or surface water as authorized in this article. It shall be the responsibility of the discharger to provide to the city appropriate certifications that discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The following discharges may be exempted from provisions of subsection (a) of this section unless such discharges are identified as possible pollution sources: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, and unpolluted groundwater infiltration; 
(2)  Unpolluted pumped groundwater; 
(3)  Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and street wash water; 
(4)  Discharges or flows from firefighting; and 
(5)  Other unpolluted water. 
(c)  In the event of an accidental discharge or an unavoidable loss to the city separate storm sewer system of any hazardous material, the person concerned shall notify the city fire department through the 911 system immediately after the event is discovered. If the material discharged is not considered a hazardous material but is other than unpolluted stormwater runoff, then it should be reported to the county transportation and development department as soon as practicable. Notification shall include the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. The person concerned shall take immediate steps to stop the discharge and contain, treat or take other actions to minimize the effects of the discharge on the city separate storm sewer system. The person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge. A written report describing the occurrence, its impact on water quality and the cleanup, shall be prepared by the person concerned and submitted within 15 days of the occurrence to the city fire department and the county transportation and development department. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1995, § 1(8-8-7)) 
Sec. 78-44. - Illicit connections. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to connect any pipe, open channel or any other conveyance system that discharges anything except stormwater runoff or other water based on the exemptions listed in section 78-42(b), to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Connections to the separate storm sewer system which are in violation of this article must be disconnected. The owner of the property where the connection originates shall be responsible for redirecting such connections to an approved location. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1995, § 1(8-8-8)) 
Sec. 78-45. - Maintenance and inspection. 
(a)  Private storm sewer systems shall be operated and maintained by the property owner so as to prevent, to the maximum extent practicable, pollutant discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  The city, through its designated employees and agents bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter, in accordance with state and federal law, all properties for regular inspections, periodic investigations, observation, measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, in accordance with provisions of this article. The city shall duly notify the owner of such property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(c)  Measurements, tests and analyses required of any discharger to the city separate storm sewer system shall be in accordance with 40 CFR 136, unless another method is approved by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1995, § 1(8-8-9)) 
Sec. 78-46. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a notice issued by the city may appeal same by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within seven days of the receipt of such decision. A notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the decision of the city is alleged to be in error. 
(b)  All appeals shall be heard by the city council. The hearing shall be held within the next two meetings of the city council or on a date mutually agreed upon in writing by the appellant and the city council. The city council shall then make its findings within 30 days of the appeal hearing. The appellant shall not be relieved of his obligations during the appeal process. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1995, § 1(8-8-11)) 
Sec. 78-47. - Property owner liability; supplemental charges. 
    Any person in violation of any portion of this article shall pay for all costs associated with the violation including, but not limited to, sampling, testing, containment, cleanup, injury, legal and other costs. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1995, § 1(8-8-12)) 
Chapter 82 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 16; environment, ch. 34; weeds and rubbish as nuisances, § 34-89; historical preservation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 62; zoning, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
    Sections 8-7-1 through 8-7-3 and 8-7-11 through 8-7-14 of the 1987 Code on the subject of tree protection are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 82-2-82-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LANDSCAPING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-14, adopted June 16, 2003, provided material for § 82-10. At the discretion of the editor, and with the concurrence of the city, the material as been set out as article II, §§ 82-10-82-21. 

Sec. 82-10. - Purpose and applicability. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide requirements for the landscaping of developments in industrial, commercial, office-institutional, multifamily residential and single-family zoning districts, in order to enrich the urbanized and natural environment of the city. The article also applies to institutional uses such as churches, schools, day care centers, and nursing homes which are allowed in residential zoning districts pursuant to a conditional use permit. It is the intent and purpose of this landscape article to reduce the adverse visual, environmental and aesthetic effects of parking lots, drives, loading areas, and other development through the introduction of trees and other plant materials in order to: 
(1)  Minimize the rate of stormwater runoff; 
(2)  Maximize the capability of groundwater recharge in urban or suburban areas; 
(3)  Increase air filtration and the removal of particulate and gaseous pollutants through plant materials; 
(4)  Provide shade and noise attenuation; 
(5)  Filter and reduce the glare of headlights and reflected sunlight from parked automobiles onto the public street rights-of-way; 
(6)  Improve the appearance of parking areas and vehicular surface areas; and 
(7)  Minimize the visual blight created by large expanses of paved surface area. 
(b)  Intent. This article shall apply to all properties or portions thereof located within the incorporated areas of the City of Jonesboro. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Sec. 82-11. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning prescribed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Buffer shall mean land area consisting of trees, shrubs, grasses, fences or some combination thereof used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance, to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other conditions, to minimize physical passage to non-similar areas, or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter. 
    Buffer strip shall mean land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping and upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
    Building department or department shall mean the city department responsible for the issuance of building permits and inspections of developments. 
    Building official shall mean the official of the building department or his/her designee. 
    Canopy tree shall mean any tree that, under normal forest conditions, will compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and generally will reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
    Clearing shall mean the removal of vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means. 
    Construction buffer shall mean a type of buffer which is temporary and remains in effect during the construction of a project. 
    Diameter, tree shall mean the diameter of a tree measured as follows: 1) for existing preserved trees, at a point four and one-half feet above the ground; 2) for new replaced trees, at a point 6 inches above the ground. 
    Dripline shall mean a line on the ground established by a vertical plane extending from a tree's outermost branch tips down to the ground; i.e., the line enclosing the area directly beneath the tree's crown from which rainfall would drip. 
    Floodplain, 100-year shall mean any land susceptible to being flooded or inundated by water during a storm or other weather event with accumulated precipitation of a measured amount which occurs, on average, once every 100 years. This definition shall include, without limitation, any land identified on the flood insurance rate map as being within a delineated zone of special flood hazard. 
    Grading shall mean the placement, removal, or movement of earth by use of mechanical equipment on a property. 
    Interior landscape area shall mean an area to be landscaped which is located in the interior area of a development or building site where vehicular parking spaces are to be provided or which is otherwise to be covered with impervious surface. 
    Land distributing permit (LDP) shall mean any permit other than a building permit issued by the city that authorizes clearing or grading activities on a site or portion of a site. This permit may be a clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading, or development permit as defined and authorized by the city. 
    Landscape plan shall mean a detailed plan depicting proposed landscaping which will accompany all site plans submitted for development approval for uses affected by this article. 
    Landscape strip shall mean land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
    Modification shall mean a type of administrative appeal that may be granted by the director only where specifically authorized in this ordinance. 
    Nonresidential landscape planning area shall mean an area to be landscaped in a nonresidential zoning district which is located around the perimeter of each residential structure or in the front yard of a residential structure. 
    Perimeter landscape area shall mean an area to be landscaped which is located between the buffer area required by article X of this chapter and the interior landscape area, as defined in this article. 
    Residential landscape planting area shall mean an area to be landscaped in a residential zoning district which is located around the perimeter of each residential structure or in the front yard of a residential structure. 
    Screening shall mean a method of shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, or the like. 
    Shade tree shall mean any tree, evergreen or deciduous, whose mature height can be expected to exceed 35 feet and whose crown spread can be expected to exceed 30 feet. Shade trees existing or planted, shall be at least eight feet in height and two inches in diameter, measured at six inches above grade for new trees and measured at four and one-half feet above grade for existing trees. 
    Shrub shall mean a woody plant of relatively low height, as distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk, 
    Tree shall mean any live, self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually having a main stem or trunk and many branches, and at maturity normally attaining a trunk diameter greater than four inches at any point and a height of over 12 feet. 
    Tree diameter shall mean the widest cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at diameter breast height (dbh) or at a point below diameter breast height for new trees or multitrunk species, but in no case less than six inches from the ground. 
    Understory tree shall mean a tree that, under normal forest conditions grows to maturity beneath overstory trees and will generally reach a mature height of at least ten feet but less than 40 feet. 
    Vehicular use areas shall mean any area, paved or unpaved, used for egress or ingress, or to store or park motor vehicles. 
    Zoning buffer shall mean a buffer required by the zoning ordinance or as a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval for a specific property. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Sec. 82-12. - Plans. 
    A buffer and landscape plan shall be prepared for any project wherein buffer areas or other landscaping areas or treatment are required by this ordinance, the zoning ordinances of the city, conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval, or other regulations of the city, and shall be approved prior to issuance of a development permit. While the plan shall cover, at a minimum, the required buffer and landscape areas, the plan can be combined with a general landscaping plan for the entire project at the developers option. 
(1)  The buffer and landscape plan shall be shown on a site plan or boundary survey drawn to the same or a larger scale as the other plan documents prepared for the development permit application and shall cover the same area. 
(2)  The buffer and landscape plan shall contain but need not be limited to the following: 
a.  Project name and land district, land lot, and acreage; 
b.  Developer's name and telephone number; 
c.  The name, address, and telephone number of the registered landscape architect, urban forester, or arborist responsible for preparation of the plan, and the Seal or statement of professional qualifications of said person (which may be attached separately). The performance of professional services in the preparation of plans required herein shall comply with Georgia Law governing the practice of the applicable profession; 
d.  A scale sufficient to clearly indicate all details shall be used, along with a north arrow; 
e.  Boundary lines of each buffer or other landscape area, appropriately labeled. 
f.  Depiction of undisturbed buffer areas and protective areas, and any other areas wherein trees are proposed to be retained to meet city requirements, along the driplines of the trees or groups of trees contained therein; 
g.  Identification of all proposed structures, vehicle use areas, sidewalks, wheel stops or curbs, walls and fences; 
h.  A description of proposed landscaping improvements and plantings, including the species, site, quantity, and location of all trees, shrubs, vines, groundcover and other landscaping materials; 
i.  Within areas involving or adjacent to land form changes, existing and finish grade topographic lines at an interval of no more than two feet may be required; 
j.  For new plant materials to be installed, a plant material list including but not limited to: 
1.  Common and botanical names of all proposed plants. 
2.  Plant quantities. 
3.  Size and condition of plants. (Example: one inch diameter, six feet height, balled and burlapped) 
4.  Spacing. 
5.  Remarks as necessary to insure proper plant selection upon installation. (Example: specimen, multi-trunked). 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Sec. 82-13. - Buffer regulations. 
    Buffers shall be required between dissimilar districts or uses in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance or as a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval. 
(1)  Width of buffers. Buffers shall meet the minimum width requirements contained in the zoning ordinance, except as required by a condition of zoning, special use, or variance approval. 
(2)  Screening requirements. 
a.  Buffers shall be natural, undisturbed, and free of encroachments except as authorized by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval, or as authorized herein, and shall contain the existing tree cover and vegetation as well as any supplemental plantings or replantings as may be required. 
b.  Buffers shall be of such nature and density so as to screen activities, structures and uses on the property from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot and shall further provide a year-round effective visual screen. 
c.  Buffers required along side property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required by the director in order to observe the sight distance requirements contained in the development regulations, or as authorized by a condition of zoning, special use, or variance approval. 
d.  In situations where the required buffer width is partially or completely contained within an existing easement (e.g. power or natural gas transmission, etc.), the screening requirements of this article shall be met outside of the easement area. 
(3)  Supplemental plantings. 
a.  Buffers in which vegetation is non-existent or is inadequate to meet the screening requirements of this article shall be planted with supplemental plantings so as to provide a year-round effective visual screen, 
b.  Supplemental plantings and replantings shall consist of evergreen trees, shrubs, or combination thereof, native or adaptable to the region. All trees planted shall be a minimum of six feet in height at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. All shrubs planted shall be a large growing species, shall be a minimum of three feet in height at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least ten feet at maturity. 
c.  All supplemental plantings shall be installed to allow for proper plant growth and maintenance. 
(4)  Non-vegetative screening. 
a.  Non-vegetative materials utilized to satisfy the screening requirements of this article, in addition to the use of existing vegetation and/or supplemental plantings, may consist of walls, fences, earthen berms or any combination thereof. 
b.  If walls or fences are to be utilized, their placement and installation shall be such so as to cause minimal disturbance of existing vegetation and located so as to provide an effective visual screen. All walls or fences must be architecturally compatible with existing adjacent structures and at least six feet in height. 
(5)  Disturbance or encroachments. 
a.  Ditches, swales, storm water conveyance facilities, storm water detention ponds, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any associated easements, shall not encroach into a buffer except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g. storm water or sanitary sewer pipes) may encroach into the buffer as near to perpendicular as practical. 
b.  Supplemental plantings or replantings of vegetation, or authorized non-vegetative screening devices shall be authorized to encroach into a buffer provided their is minimal disturbance of any significant existing vegetation. 
c.  Land disturbance is authorized in areas of a buffer that are devoid of significant vegetation provided that the final grade and replantings of vegetation meet the screening requirements contained herein. 
d.  Dying, diseased or dead vegetation may be removed from a buffer provided minimal disturbance occurs, vegetation thus removed shall be replaced where necessary to meet the screening requirements contained herein. 
(6)  Protection during land disturbing activities. 
a.  During authorized land disturbing activities, buffers shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during, construction. 
b.  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with best management practices or as required by the department. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Sec. 82-14. - Standards for construction buffers. 
(a)  Construction buffers shall only be required where specifically provided as a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval. 
(b)  Time constraints. Construction buffers shall only be in effect during the construction period of a project and shall terminate upon project completion. In the case of a residential subdivision, a construction buffer shall terminate upon each individual lot with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal dwelling. 
(c)  Disturbance or encroachments. 
(1)  Construction buffers shall be natural, undisturbed and free of encroachments except as authorized by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval, or as authorized herein. 
(2)  The encroachment of ditches swales stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sediment basins, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any associated easements, into a construction buffer shall not be authorized except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g. storm water or sanitary sewer pipes) and natural bottom detention ponds (sediment basins must be located outside of the construction buffer) and their appurtenant structures which require no grading and removal of trees, may encroach upon the construction buffer. 
(3)  If the construction buffer on a residential lot is devoid of existing trees and vegetation, and a tree survey is submitted to document this situation prior to conducting land disturbing activities (including clearing) on the lot, then the department may authorize the encroachment of a building or structure into the construction buffer for a distance not to exceed 10 feet. 
(d)  Protection during land disturbing activities. 
(1)  During authorized land disturbing activities construction buffers shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during, construction. 
(2)  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with best management practices or as required by the department. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Sec. 82-15. - Landscape regulations. 
(a)  Nonresidential and multifamily uses. Nonresidential and multifamily uses shall provide for and maintain landscape plantings on-site as follows: 
(1)  One landscape strip at least ten feet in width adjacent to any street right-of-way abutting the property and running the length of the entire property frontage; 
(2)  In areas adjacent to or internal to off-street parking lots that are required by the zoning ordinances to contain more than five off-street parking spaces in accordance with section 86-4; 
(3)  As required by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval; 
(4)  One nonresidential landscape planting area at least six feet in width around the perimeter of each structure, 
(5)  The remaining ground area shall be sodded, seeded or hydroseeded with grass. 
(6)  The building official is hereby authorized to grant a modification of up to 50 percent of the ten foot landscape strip width provided the strip is not required by a condition of zoning, special use, modification variance or waiver approval. 
(b)  Residential uses. Residential uses shall provide for and maintain landscape plantings on-site as follows: 
(1)  As required by a condition of zoning, special use, modification, variance or waiver approval, 
(2)  A residential landscape planting area on each lot at least six feet in width around the perimeter of each structure; and 
(3)  Within the interior of an individual lot, a 150-square-foot interior landscape planting area shall be required for each 5,000 square feet of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 03-13, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Sec. 82-16. - Landscape strip planting requirements. 
(a)  Ten-foot wide landscape strips. Landscape strips which are required to be ten feet in width shall contain landscaping and plantings within the strip as follows: 
(1)  One canopy tree for each 25 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Deciduous trees shall be at least two inches in diameter and evergreens trees shall be six feet in height at time of planting. Trees shall be a species native or suitable to this region; 
(2)  One under canopy tree for each 25 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Each canopy tree shall be a species native or suitable to this region; 
(3)  One shrub for each 25 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Each shrub shall be a species native or suitable to this region; 
(4)  Trees and shrubs required herein may be planted and spaced singly or in groups as authorized by the director so long as the total number of plantings is achieved; and 
(5)  The remaining ground area shall be sodded, seeded or hydroseeded with grass, and/or planted with groundcover species and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof. 
(b)  Six-foot wide landscaping strips. Landscape strips which are required to be six feet in width shall contain landscaping and plantings within or adjacent to the strip as follows: 
(1)  One canopy tree for each 50 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Deciduous trees shall be at least two inches in diameter and evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height at time of planting. Trees shall be a species native or suitable to this region. 
(2)  One shrub for each 50 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Each shrub shall be a species native or suitable to this region. 
(3)  One under-canopy tree for each 25 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Each canopy tree shall be a species native or suitable to this region; 
(4)  Trees and shrubs required herein may be planted and spaced singly or in groups as authorized by the director so long as the total number of required plantings is achieved. 
(5)  The remaining ground area shall be sodded, seeded or hydroseeded with grass, and/or planted with groundcover species and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof. 
(c)  Landscape strips wider than ten feet. Tree and shrub quantities in landscape strips that are required to be wider than ten feet by a condition of zoning, special use, variance or waiver approval shall be proportional to their width (e.g. a 20-foot wide landscape strip would require two trees and two shrubs for each 25 linear feet of strip length). 
(d)  Encroachments into landscape strips. Landscaped strips shall not be encroached upon by parking spaces, driveway surfaces or storm water detention facilities except that driveway crossings may traverse such strip as near to a perpendicular alignment as practical. Signs may also be located in such strip. 
(e)  Residential or nonresidential landscape planting area. 
(1)  A six foot wide residential or nonresidential landscape planting area shall be required around the perimeter of each structure with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  One interior shrub with a minimum diameter of ten inches for every 15 linear feet with a minimum of six interior shrubs for every dwelling unit or structure; 
b.  One interior shrub with a minimum diameter of five inches for every 15 linear feet with a minimum of six interior shrubs for every dwelling unit or structure; 
c.  One understory tree at least two inches in diameter for every 30 linear feet with a minimum of two trees per dwelling unit or structure; and 
d.  Ground cover shall be placed on all areas within the planting area which are not occupied by other landscape materials. 
(2)  A 150-square-foot residential landscape planting area shall be required for each 5,000 square feet of the lot with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  A minimum of one planting area shall be located in the front yard of the dwelling unit. 
b.  One interior shrub with a minimum diameter of 25 inches for every 15 linear feet; 
c.  One interior shrub with a minimum diameter of 18 inches for every 15 linear feet; 
d.  One canopy tree with a minimum diameter of six inches for every 30 linear feet with a minimum of two trees per dwelling unit; and 
e.  Ground cover shall be placed on all areas within the planting area which are not occupied by other landscape materials. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Sec. 82-17. - Vehicle use area planting requirements. 
    Quantity, spacing and planting standards. Vehicle use areas which are required to contain more than five parking spaces shall contain landscaping and plantings as follows: 
(1)  Interior landscape areas shall be installed such as islands, peninsulas, and medians, so that no more than ten adjacent parking spaces exist without a landscaped separation at least four feet in width. Interior planting areas shall be located to most effectively relieve the monotony of large expanses of paving and contribute to orderly circulation of vehicles and pedestrian traffic. 
a.  Trees shall be provided and maintained adjacent to, and in the interior portions of, parking lots in a ratio of one tree for each seven parking spaces. In addition, every parking space shall be within 60 feet of the trunk of a tree. 
b.  Deciduous trees shall be at least two inches in diameter and evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height. At least one in every three trees shall be a canopy tree. 
(2)  Within the interior of a site, 250 square feet of planting areas shall be required for each 5,000 square feet or major portion thereof of vehicular parking area. 
(3)  A minimum of one canopy tree shall be provided for every 80 square feet of planting area. 
(4)  A minimum of one under-canopy tree shall be provided for every 40 square feet of planting area. 
(5)  The minimum planting area or island for each canopy tree shall be at least 200 square feet. If shared with other trees, 80 square feet for each additional tree shall be added. 
(6)  The minimum planting area or island for each understory tree shall be 100 square feet. If shared with other trees, 40 square feet for each additional tree shall be added. 
(7)  Each planting area or island shall not be less than four feet in width in any direction. 
(8)  Ground areas shall be sodded, seeded or hydroseeded with grass and/or planted with groundcover species, and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof. 
(9)  Paved or striped islands greater than 50 square feet shall not be allowed. These areas shall contain landscape plantings. 
(10)  Trees removed or having had their tops cut after compliance with this article shall be replaced with the equivalent inches of removed trees. However, trees removed due to disease or insect infestation upon the written advice and findings of the County Extension Service or the Georgia Forestry Commission shall be replaced in accordance with the minimum standards contained in the article. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Sec. 82-18. - No-access easement screening requirements. 
    No-access easements that are along the line of double frontage lots abutting upon a city road shall be screened as follows: 
(1)  Planted with a single line of evergreen trees at least six feet in height and spaced no greater than ten feet apart; or, 
(2)  Contain a solid or decorative fence at least four feet in height; or, 
(3)  Contain such other landscaping treatments or grade changes that will produce a partial screening effect of at least four feet as authorized by the director. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Sec. 82-19. - Compliance. 
(a)  Artificial materials prohibited. All artificial plants, trees, shrubs, grass or other vegetation shall be prohibited from fulfilling the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Warranty or maintenance surety. Upon final installation of new trees, shrubs or other landscape material planted to meet the requirements of this ordinance, and following acceptance by the department in accordance with the procedures set forth in the development regulations, the owner of the property upon which the landscape material exists shall either provide proof of warranty or post a maintenance bond or other acceptable surety, warranting the new trees, shrubs or landscape material for a period of no less than one year. This article shall not apply to individual residential lot trees. The owner of buffer strips around residential developments shall be the homeowners association. 
(c)  Inspection. The department shall perform an inspection of the plantings and landscape materials required by this ordinance prior to expiration of the one year warranty or maintenance period. The owner shall be notified of any replacements or restoration that must be made to maintain compliance with this article or conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval. Required landscape material found to be dead or near death shall be replaced prior to release by the department of the warranty or maintenance surety. In no case shall replacement be delayed greater than 30 days from notification unless a performance bond is posted with the department. 
(d)  Performance surety. In the event that trees or landscape material required to be planted as set forth in the buffer regulations or landscape regulations contained herein, are not installed upon application for a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval as appropriate to the project, then a performance bond or other acceptable surety in an amount equal to 110 percent of the value of the new trees or landscape material and their installation shall be posted with the department in accordance with the performance bonding requirements and provisions of the development regulations. 
(d)  Continuing maintenance. The owner, occupant, tenant, and respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the perpetual maintenance and protection of buffers, trees and landscape plantings required by this article. The department is hereby authorized to order diseased, infested, dying, dead or damaged landscaping required herein to be replaced. Buffers that, over a period of time, lose their screening ability shall be replanted to meet the requirements of this article. Replacement, trees and landscaping shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Sec. 82-20. - Enforcement, violation and appeals. 
(a)  Enforcement. It shall be the responsibility of the building official to enforce this article. The building official shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading, development or building permit or to withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy or approval of a final flat, and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof, where tree removal or damage occurs in violation of this article. 
(b)  Violation and penalty. Any person violating a provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city, and upon conviction by municipal court, may be punished either by a fine not less than $100.00 per day and not to exceed $1,000.00 per day, or confinement in the county jail not to exceed 60 days, or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this article on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of said suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law which may include mandatory attendance at an educational program regarding tree preservation. The owner of any property wherein a violation exists, and any builder, contractor, or agent who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(c)  Appeals, modifications and waivers. 
(1)  The preservation of trees may be considered as a condition peculiar to a piece of property in support of a request for a variance from the literal application of the provisions of the zoning resolution, under the procedures and requirements contained therein. 
(2)  Appeals of the interpretation of the requirements of this article by the director shall be filed and processed in accordance with the appeal procedures as set forth in the development regulations. 
(3)  Waiver requests of the requirements of this article shall be filed and processed in accordance with the waiver procedures as set forth in the development regulations. 
(4)  Modification requests, where this article specifically authorizes their granting, shall be filed and processed in accordance with the modification procedures established by the development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Sec. 82-21. - Selected species. 
(a)  The following plants are approved landscaping requirements: 
(1)  Large trees (Mature height: 35 feet or greater): 
American Beech 
Bald Cypress 
Bradford Pear 
Chinese Elm 
Darlington Oak 
Dawn Redwood 
Deodar Cedar 
English Oak 
Gingko (male only) 
Japanese Cedar 
Japanese Katsura Tree 
Japanese Pagoda 
Japanese Zelkova 
Littleleaf Linden 
Loblolly Pine 
London Plane-Tree (Sycamore) 
Red Maple 
Scarlet Oak 
Schumard Oak 
Sequoia 
Southern Magnolia 
Sugar Maple 
Tulip Poplar 
White Oak 
Willow Oak 
(2)  Medium trees (Mature height: 25 to 35 feet): 
American Holly 
Golden Rain Tree 
Japanese Black Pine 
Kwansan Cherry 
Leyland Cypress 
Mountain Ash 
Mountain Silverbell 
Pistachio 
Redmond Linden 
Saucer Magnolia 
Sourwood 
Weeping Cherry 
Yellowwood 
Yoshino Cherry 
(3)  Small trees (Mature height: less than 25 feet): 
Amur Maple 
Crabapple 
Crape Myrtle 
Eastern Redbud 
Flowering Dogwood 
Golden Chain Tree 
Japanese Dogwood 
Japanese Maple 
Star Magnolia 
Wax Myrtle 
Yaupon Holly 
(4)  Large screening shrubs: 
American Holly 
Arborvitae 
Burford Holly 
Eastern Red Cedar 
Hetz Juniper 
Japanese Black Pine 
Leyland Cypress 
Ligustrum 
Nellie R. Stevens Holly 
Osmanthus 
Russian Olive 
Savannah Holly 
Thorny Eleagnus 
(5)  Interior shrubs (Mature height: approximately 36 inches): 
Evergreen 
Dwarf Burford Holly 
Dwarf Chinese Holly 
Dwarf Nandina 
Dwarf Yaupon Holly 
Japanese Holly 
Juniper 
Leatherleaf Vinburnum 
Mugo Pine 
Nandina 
Oregonholly Grape 
Warty Barberry 
Winter Honeysuckle 
Deciduous 
Azalea 
Chinese Privet 
Chinese Witchhazel 
Dwarf Burning Bush 
Flowering Jasmine 
Forsythia 
Japanese Flowering Quince 
Oakleaf Hydrangea 
Spirea (all varieties) 
Viburnum 
Weigela 
Winter Jasmine 
(6)  Ground cover (planting areas, berms, wall planters): 
Aaronsbeard St. Johnswort 
Creeping Lilyturf (shade) 
Dwarf Roses 
English Ivy (shade) 
Evergreen Candytuft (border) 
Hybrid Daylily 
Lily-Turf 
Ornamental Grasses 
Pachysandra (shade) 
Periwinkle (shade) 
Purpleleaf Wintercreeper 
Rockyspray Cotoneaster 
Shore Juniper 
Willowleaf Cotoneaster 
(7)  Grasses: 
Bermuda 
Centipede 
Fescue 
Zoysia 
(b)  Grasses may be sodded, sprigged, plugged or seeded except that solid sod shall be used within 50 feet of all road right-of-ways and in drainage swales or other areas subject to erosion. Lawn grasses shall be planted so as to achieve complete coverage within two calendar years from the time of planting. 
(c)  Other plant materials with similar growth characteristics may be substituted upon approval of the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 6-16-2003) 
Chapter 86 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-08, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Aug. 15, 2005, repealed the former Ch. 86, §§ 86-1-86-6, 86-41-86-47, 86-81-86-84, 86-116-86-123, 86-156-86-166, 86-196-86-200, 86-231-86-237, 86-271-86-293, and 86-301-86-304 relative to zoning, and enacted a new Ch. 86 as set out herein. See the various Code Comparative Tables for a complete derivation of these former provisions. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 16; environment, ch. 34; historical preservation, ch. 42; land development, ch. 44; planning, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 62; vegetation, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60; authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Title. 
    This chapter establishes regulations for development and use of all property within the City of Jonesboro, Georgia, and shall be known as the 2005 Jonesboro Zoning Ordinance, and shall be effective throughout the City of Jonesboro. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(1.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-2. - Authority. 
    This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Charter of the City of Jonesboro, as approved by the Governor in 1996, and under the authority granted to municipal corporations by the laws of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(1.02), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-3. - Applicability. 
    Standards and regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to all present and future land use and development of property located in the incorporated area of Jonesboro, Georgia. Requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to implement the purposes of this zoning ordinance. This ordinance shall regulate building height, number of stories, size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the dimension of yards and other open spaces, residential density and distribution, location and use of buildings and other structures, and the use, condition of use or occupancy of land for trade, industry, housing, recreation, transportation or for any other purpose. This ordinance, in tandem with the official zoning map, creates zoning districts for such purposes and establishes the boundaries thereof. The ordinance also defines certain terms used herein; provides for the method of administration, enforcement and amendment; and defines the powers and duties thereof; establishes enforcement and penalty provisions and is adopted for other public purposes. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(1.03), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-4. - Purpose. 
    This chapter has been prepared in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia, and is established for the purpose of promoting orderly and sustainable development; protecting public health, safety, convenience and welfare; minimizing traffic congestion; ensuring such access, design and density of development and use as will secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; providing adequate access to natural light and air; achieving such timing, density, distribution and design of development and use as will facilitate an economic, adequate and timely provision of transportation, communication, water supply, sanitary sewer, drainage, sanitation, educational, police and fire protection, recreational and other public services; protecting existing development and property against blight and depreciation; preventing flooding of improved property; improving the quality of life through protection of Jonesboro's total environment, including prevention of air, land, water, visual and noise pollution; encouraging greater efficiency and economy of land development through natural resource conservation; preventing the overcrowding of land, undue concentration of population and urban sprawl; encouraging the most appropriate use of land, buildings and other structures; achieving such density, dwelling type, design and distribution of housing as will protect and enhance residential property values and facilitate provision of adequate housing; preserve established development patterns and historic district and structures; and for other purposes. These regulations have been developed with reasonable consideration of the character of various zoning districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with the general objective of promoting desirable living and working environments, stable neighborhoods, functional and attractive commercial and industrial districts and protecting Jonesboro's natural resources. These regulations have also been developed to accommodate a reasonable balance between the exercise of private property rights and beneficial use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(1.04), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-5. - Effective date. 
    This Zoning Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its adoption by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(1.05), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-6. - Repeal of conflicting regulations and ordinances; validity of prior approvals. 
(a)  The [former] Zoning Ordinance of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia, contained in this Code of Ordinances, City of Jonesboro adopted and approved January 23, 2001, as amended is hereby repealed. The 2005 City of Jonesboro Zoning Ordinance is hereby adopted and enacted in lieu, thereof. 
(b)  This is the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Jonesboro, and all other conflicting ordinances, regulations, resolutions or parts thereof in conflict are hereby repealed; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of operation or conditions of site development accompanying those zoning approvals or use permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions. Modification or repeal of such past conditions of approval may be accomplished as provided by this chapter. 
(c)  All variances and exceptions heretofore granted by the city shall remain in full force and effect and all terms, conditions and obligations imposed by the city shall remain in full force and effect and shall be binding. Prior ordinances shall remain in effect insofar as required for initiation of any proceedings against violations thereof, and for the prosecution of any violations heretofore commenced. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein and notwithstanding any change in zoning classification, all previous stipulations, conditions, restrictions, agreements and terms contained in prior zoning ordinances shall remain in full force and effect and shall not be amended by this document and shall carry forward to any new zoning classification and shall be binding upon said property. Prior ordinances shall remain in effect and shall remain as such stipulations, conditions, restrictions, agreements and terms, even though the zoning category itself may be changed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(1.06), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-7. - Zoning regulations shall govern. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, applicants shall be held to be the minimum requirements for promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with this chapter. Nor is this chapter intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon building heights or stories; requires a larger lot area or greater width or size of yards, courts or other open spaces, or requires a larger percentage of a lot to remain unoccupied, or imposes other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, ordinances, easements, covenants, or agreements, the regulations and requirements of this chapter shall govern. 
    Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(1.07), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-8. - Development projects under construction. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the development or proposed use of properties legally under construction, or for which a development plan or preliminary plat has been approved within three years of the effective date of this chapter, provided development of which shall be commenced within 90 days immediately following the effective date of this chapter. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in a permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner on the property. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun in preparation for rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be pursued diligently toward completion. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(1.08), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-9. - Existing plans, construction, size and use. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of a building, structure or part thereof, for which a building permit has been granted or for which plans were on file with the city manager prior to the effective date of this chapter, or an amendment thereof, and the construction of which in compliance with such plans shall have been commenced within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. Should any of the above requirements not be met within the time stated above or if construction operations are discontinued, for a period of 90 days, any further construction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(1.09), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-10-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 86-31. - Administration. 
    Standards and provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the city manager, except as otherwise provided. It shall also be the duty of all officers and employees of the city, and especially of all members of the Jonesboro Police Department, to assist the city manager by reporting any apparent violation in construction, reconstruction or land use. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-32. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the city manager and Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Jonesboro as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.02), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-33. - City manager; duties and authority. 
    The duties of the city manager of the City of Jonesboro with respect to this chapter shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Render interpretations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Grant administrative variances to the standards of this chapter. 
(3)  Post such public notices as are required under this chapter. 
(4)  Process applications filed in conjunction with all property rezonings and other approvals associated with actions regulated under this chapter. 
(5)  Provide staff support to the mayor and city council, as appropriate. 
(6)  Review development and building plans and assess compliance with this chapter. 
(7)  Issue building permits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.03), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-34. - Code enforcement officer authority. 
    The code enforcement officer with respect to this chapter shall have the authority to proactively enforce all provisions of the ordinance. The code enforcement officer shall also have the authority to conduct such investigations as may be reasonably necessary to assure or compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including accessing property and premises at reasonable times for the purpose of conducting investigations concerning matters regulated by this chapter. 
    No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized agent of the city seeking entry for the purpose of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such agent while in the process of executing his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.04), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-35. - Code enforcement officer duties. 
    The code enforcement officer shall promptly investigate complaints of violations, reporting his findings and actions to complainants, and shall use his best endeavors to prevent violations or to detect and secure the correction of violations. Upon discovery of any violation of any provision of this chapter, the code enforcement officer shall provide written notice to the person or persons responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering corrective action. 
    The code enforcement officer shall perform field inspections to determine whether a building or structure being constructed, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or used is in accordance with the application and development plans for which a building permit has been issued. The code enforcement officer shall issue citations when a violation is discovered so that appropriate legal action may be taken to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and such permit. 
    The code enforcement officer shall also determine whether land development and site and building construction has been completed in accordance with all applicable city codes prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
    The officer shall order discontinuance of any unlawful use of land, buildings or structures; removal of unlawful buildings or structures, including unlawful additions, alterations, or structural modifications; discontinuance of any unlawful work being performed; and shall pursue any other action authorized by this chapter or the laws of the city, county or state to ensure compliance with, and prevent violations of, the provisions of this chapter. 
    Should a violation of this chapter exist or be pursued, the code enforcement officer shall confer with the city attorney who may then, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, mandamus or any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such violation. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.05), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-36. - Plans required. 
    No land shall be developed, nor alteration, moving or construction of any building or structure be commenced, prior to architectural and development plans, as appropriate, being submitted to and approved by the city manager. The city manager shall establish the procedures and submittal requirements associated with such plans. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.06), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-37. - Certificate of zoning compliance. 
    In the absence of a certificate of zoning compliance, no representation by any official or employee of the city shall in any way legally bind the city or constitute any determination that structures or uses located on or proposed for a particular property comply with this chapter. Furthermore, no owner of property within the city or his agent, successor or assign shall be entitled to rely upon any such representation or claim any vested right to maintain or construct any structure or conduct any use located on or proposed for a particular property as a result of any such representation. 
    A property owner or his agent who wishes to determine whether an existing structure or use established on, or use proposed for, any property located within the city is being used, or may be used or developed, in compliance with this ordinance may request a certificate of zoning compliance. All such requests shall be in writing and filed with the city manager using an application developed by the city. The following information regarding the property for which a certificate is being requested shall be provided: 
(1)  Name, address and phone number of the property owner; 
(2)  Name, address and phone number of any agent of the owner; 
(3)  Legal description of the property; 
(4)  A complete description and inventory of all structures on the property; 
(5)  A complete description of all structures proposed to be located on the property; 
(6)  A complete description and inventory of any and all activities conducted on the property; 
(7)  A complete description and inventory of any and all activities proposed to occur on the property; and 
(8)  A notarized signature of owner. 
    The city manager shall respond to the owner requesting a certificate of zoning compliance or his agent in writing within 15 business days of receipt of such request. 
    Issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance shall merely constitute confirmation that the structures or uses located on, or proposed for, the property have been determined to be in compliance with this chapter as effective on the date of issuance of the certificate and may be legally conducted thereon as of the date of issuance of the certificate. 
    Any certificate issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of 30 days and renewable for additional 30-day periods up to six such 30-day periods from the date of the initial issuance of certificate of zoning compliance, provided that renewals shall only be granted by the city manager upon a satisfactory showing of evidence by the applicant that establishment of the use described in the certificate is being actively pursued. The applicant shall perform any necessary actions toward establishing or conducting the uses identified in the application or begin construction on any and all structures identified in the application within the period of a valid certificate or any renewal. Upon termination of the certificate or any renewal, any property addressed by the certificate shall be governed by any and all ordinances as may have been enacted or amended by mayor and council of the city during the period of a valid certificate or any renewal. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.07), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-38. - Administrative variances. 
    The city manager may grant an administrative variance of up to ten percent of the standards of this chapter. Such variance shall be limited to lot area, building setback and off-street parking, and shall be based on a finding that the relief would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the environment or of other property in the immediate vicinity, nor diminish or impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood or impair the purposes of this chapter. Applicants for an administrative variance shall apply to the city clerk on forms used for variances. No fee shall be imposed for administrative variances. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.08), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-39. - Permits required. 
    All applications to the city manager for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in ten sets of duplicates, drawn to scale, showing: 
(1)  Dimensions and location of the lot upon which construction is proposed; 
(2)  Floor area and dimension of the building to be erected; 
(3)  Location of the proposed building on the lot; 
(4)  Location of building setbacks and any existing structures on the lot; 
(5)  Number of dwelling units proposed, as appropriate; 
(6)  Building setbacks on adjoining lots; 
(7)  Landscape plans, as appropriate; and 
(8)  Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are met. 
    It shall be unlawful to excavate or fill any lot for the purpose of construction of any building, to construct any building, to move or alter any building or to develop land for a use not involving a building prior to issuance of a permit for such work by the city manager. 
    A formal review shall be required concerning any proposed use of land prior to issuance of any building permit, or initiation of any improvement, grading or alteration of land or building to determine compliance with all provisions of this chapter. Site plans and other development plans required under the provisions of article VIII of this chapter shall be prepared only by those currently registered or licensed to perform such work in accordance with Georgia laws. Building plans for structures having a value exceeding $10,000.00 shall be prepared by a registered architect or engineer. Development permit applications shall be reviewed by the city manager and shall be accompanied by complete, scaled plans signed by the applicant. 
    The city manager shall determine whether applications for building permits as required by the city building codes conform to all standards and requirements of this chapter, and no building permit shall be issued without prior certification of such conformance. Such applications shall provide information as may be specified on forms provided by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.09), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-40. - Conformity to regulations prerequisite to issuance of occupational tax certificate. 
    The city clerk shall not grant an occupational tax certificate to any person or firm unless the business conforms to the regulations of the zoning district in which the business is located or is established as a legal nonconforming use. A duly issued certificate of occupancy shall be evidence of such conformity. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.10), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-41. - Construction progress. 
    Any building permit issued shall be rendered invalid unless work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months of the date of issuance. Any building permit shall also be rendered invalid should work authorized by such permit be suspended or abandoned for a period of six months. All work sites shall be maintained in an acceptable condition, and in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.11), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-42. - Penalties for violation. 
    Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city manager or his designee shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city manager or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. No provision in this section shall be deemed to diminish or to nullify any power of the mayor and city council to hear and decide on appropriate penalties for the violation of this chapter if the mayor and council so desires. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may file in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a stop work order, ordered by a judge, which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city manager or his designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may file in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain an order from a judge suspending, revoking or modifying any permits authorizing any land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstate to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the city manager or his designee shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city manager or his designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city manager or his designee may issue a citation and impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional, flagrant or habitual violations of this ordinance, the city manager or his designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the City of Jonesboro Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Such proceedings shall be de novo. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.12), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-43. - Remedies. 
    Whenever any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used, in violation of any provision of this chapter, the code enforcement officer or any other appropriate authority of the city may, in addition to other remedies, for a violation of this Code. Such citation shall require the presence of the violator in municipal court, and shall institute an injunction or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use. Such citation shall also require correction or abatement of such violation, or prevent the occupancy of such building or land. The code enforcement officer may, in addition to other remedies, suspend utility services to the property on which the violation is said to have occurred until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.13), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-44. - Additional remedies. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this chapter, such as injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.14), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-45. - Records. 
    The city shall maintain records of all official administrative actions of his office, all related complaints and actions, and all violations discovered by whatever means, together with remedial action taken and the disposition of cases. Such records shall be public records. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(2.15), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-46-86-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 86-61. - Interpretations. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms are hereby defined. All other words used in this chapter shall indicate their customary dictionary definitions. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural, the singular. The word "building" shall include the word "structure;" the word "lot" includes the words "plot," "parcel," "tract" and "site." The word "person" includes "persons, firm, association, authority, organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, owner or authorized agent as well as individual." The word "shall" is always mandatory and not directory. The words "used" or "occupied" shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed" to be used or occupied. The masculine gender includes the feminine gender. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(3.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-62. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the terms and words of this section shall be assigned the meanings indicated. 
    Abutting, also adjoining. Sharing a common property boundary. 
    Access. A way or means of approach to provide physical entry to a property. 
    Accessory building. A subordinate structure customarily incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the principal building, such as a detached garage. 
    Accessory use. A use subordinate to the primary use on a lot and reasonably necessary and incidental to the primary use. 
    Accessory building setback. The minimum distance between a property line or right-of-way of an abutting street and an accessory building. 
    Adult day-care facility. Any dwelling or facility, whether operated for profit or not, in which three or more persons 18 years of age or older, who have difficulty in functioning independently, receive care for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody. 
    Alley. A vehicular service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties and not designed for general traffic circulation. 
    Alteration. Any change, addition or modification in construction, occupancy or use or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, or any enlargement to or reduction of a building, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building from one location to another. 
    Annexation. The incorporation of new land areas into the city limits of a municipality. 
    Animal hospital. A facility at which animals are given medical treatment and any boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to such treatment. 
    Antenna. Any device or combination of devices, whether rods, panels or dishes, designed to receive or transmit radio frequency signals including, but not limited to, broadcast radio and television, satellite television, wireless cable, amateur radio, Citizen's Band radio, land mobile communications, personal wireless services and fixed wireless signals. 
    Apartment. A dwelling unit physically attached to two or more other dwelling units, either directly or through an intervening unit, and that constitutes neither a condominium nor a townhouse. 
    Approved plan. A plan that has been given final approval by the appropriate authority. 
    Applicant. A property owner or their authorized representative who has petitioned the city for approval of a zoning petition, conditional use, subdivision plat, site plan, development permit, building permit, variance, appeal, or any other authorization for the use or development of their property under the requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
    Application. A petition for approval of a zoning map amendment, conditional use, project approval, development permit, building permit, variance, appeal or any other authorization for use or development of property under the requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
    Assisted living facility. A facility licensed by the State of Georgia for the transitional residency of elderly or disabled persons, progressing from independent living to congregate housing, within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services, transportation services and routine social and medical appointments and counseling. 
    Automobile broker. An establishment engaged solely in the business of bargaining or negotiating, for a commission or fee, between potential purchasers or lessees of vehicles and other automobile sales establishments for the lease or purchase of vehicles. 
    Automobile maintenance. The routine replacement and maintenance of non-engine related parts including brake repair, tire replacement, minor tune-ups and oil changes. This term does not include engine or body dismantling. 
    Automobile repair. General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers such as collision service, body repair and frame straightening; painting and upholstering; vehicle steam cleaning and undercoating. 
    Automobile sales. The use of any building, land area or other premise for the display and sale of new or used vehicles, and including any warranty repair work or other repair service. 
    Automobile storage yard. A facility used for the short-term storage of damaged or confiscated vehicles. 
    Automobile wrecking yard. Any land or building used for wrecking or storing of inoperable vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition. 
    Awning. A roof-like structure, such as canvas on a frame, attached to a building over a window, walkway or doorway and used as shelter from the elements. 
    Basement. A space within a structure having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average adjacent grade and having a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than 61/2 feet. A basement shall be termed a cellar when more than one-half its height is below the average adjacent grade. A basement or cellar shall be counted as a story when the vertical distance from the average adjacent grade to the ceiling exceeds five feet. 
    Bedroom. Any room in a dwelling designed and intended for sleeping, separable from other rooms by a door. 
    Berm. A mound of earth used to improve the appearance of a landscaped area or enhance the screening effect. 
    Best management practices. A collection of structural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
    Block. An area of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad right-of-way, waterway or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    Boarding house. A building containing a single dwelling unit having not more than ten guestrooms or suites of rooms, where lodging is provided with or without meals, for compensation for more than one week. 
    Buffer. An area of natural or planted vegetation intended to visually separate one land use from a more intense or otherwise incompatible use throughout the year. 
    Buildable area. The area of a lot outside the limits of the front, side and rear yards and which is not subject to the open space requirements or other environmental restrictions of this chapter or other laws, codes or ordinances. 
    Building. A structure with a roof, intended for shelter or enclosure. 
    Building addition. A walled and roofed expansion to the square footage of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. 
    Building code. The technical codes approved for enforcement or otherwise adopted or adopted as amended by the city under the Georgia Uniform Codes Act, which regulate the construction of buildings and structures. 
    Building facade. The elevation of a building extended from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation fronting a public street, excluding alleys and lanes; may also be referred to as the building face. 
    Building footprint. The horizontal area of a lot occupied by a building as measured from the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of the building. 
    Building frontage. The linear footage of the exterior building wall fronting a public right-of-way or private street or alley. 
    Building height. The average of two measurements of vertical distance from adjacent grade to the lowest and highest points of the roof of the highest story of a building. 
    Building line. The position of the front wall of principal building on the lot; also defined by the front yard setback. 
    Building permit. Written permission issued by the City of Jonesboro for construction, repair, alteration of, or addition to a structure. 
    Building, principal. The building in which the primary use on the lot is conducted. 
    Building setback line. A line beyond which a building or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered steps, may not encroach. 
    Caliper. The diameter of a tree (usually nursery stock) measured at a point six inches above the ground or top of root ball for up to and including four-inch caliper trees, and at a point 12 inches above the ground or top of root ball for larger trees. 
CALIPER 
    Car wash. A building, or portion thereof, in which automobiles are cleaned for a fee. 
    Carport. A structure attached or made a part of a principal dwelling and open to the elements on two or more sides, intended to shelter vehicles. 
    Cemetery. Property used for the interring of the deceased. 
    Central business district. The core commercial area of a city usually containing retail, service, office, public, cultural, recreational and entertainment uses; also the downtown or town center. 
    Certificate of occupancy (CO). A document issued by the code enforcement indicating that a building has been constructed in accordance with all codes and provisions of this chapter, or that a legal variance to the codes and provisions of this chapter has been granted. 
    Certificate of zoning compliance. A document issued by the city manager stating that a use of a building or land conforms to all provisions of this chapter or that a legal variance to the provisions of this chapter has been granted. 
    Child care center. A private establishment enrolling five or more children under 18 years of age and where tuition, fees or other forms of compensation for the care of the children is charged. The term includes day nurseries and kindergartens. 
    City. The City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    City clerk. The City Clerk of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    City council, mayor and council. The Mayor and Council of the City of Jonesboro. 
    City manager. The City Manager of the City of Jonesboro, or his designee. 
    Clinic. A building or part of a building used for medical, dental, chiropractic, surgical, therapeutic or other examination or treatment of patients who are not lodged overnight, and excluding hospitals or professional offices of a doctor occupying a portion of a dwelling. 
    Club or lodge. Buildings or facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for social, educational or recreational purposes, but not primarily for profit or to render a service customarily carried on as a business. 
    Code enforcement officer. The individual designated by the city manager whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or his designee. 
    Comprehensive plan. The Comprehensive Plan for the City of Jonesboro prepared, adopted and as amended in accordance with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act. 
    Conditional use. A use not automatically permitted by right, but may be permitted within a zoning district, subject to requirements specified in this chapter or imposed by the mayor and council. 
    Conditional zoning. The granting of zoning for a property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, project design or timing of development stipulated by the Jonesboro City Council to mitigate adverse impacts that could be expected in the absence of such restrictions. 
    Condominium. A building, or group of buildings, in which each unit is independently owned and financed by the occupant, but in which all lands are owned in common on a proportional, undivided basis. 
    Condominium, commercial. A building or buildings used for offices, businesses, professional services or other commercial enterprise are organized, owned and maintained as a condominium. 
    Construction trailer. A manufactured unit designed and used for on-site office space associated with a development project, including new construction and renovation. 
    Construction vehicle. Any vehicle used commercially for the purpose of land development and construction such as loaders, backhoes and dump trucks. 
    Convenience store. Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items and other goods that may or may not sell gasoline. 
    Covenant. A private, legal restriction on the use of land or structures contained in the property deed or otherwise formally recorded. 
    Cul-de-sac. A local street with only one outlet terminating in a vehicular turnaround. 
    Curb cut. An opening along the curb line of a public right-of-way through which vehicles may enter or exit the roadway. 
    Day care center. Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group, wherein are received for pay, for group care for fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, 19 or more children under 18 years of age. 
    Day care, family. A private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, at least three, but not more than six children under 18 years of age who are not related to such person and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. 
    Day care, group. Any place operated by any person or group wherein are received for pay not less than seven nor more than 18 children under 18 years of age for care and supervision for less than 24 hours per day. 
    Decision date. The date upon which an officer of the city renders a final determination on an application. 
    Dedication. The legal transfer of property and/or public improvements from private to public ownership. 
    Deed restrictions or covenants. Private stipulations or legal restrictions assigned to the use of land, contained in the deed to the property or otherwise formally recorded. 
    Density. The number of dwelling units per acre. The standard for calculating gross density shall be the number of dwelling units divided by the entire acreage of the lot. Net density shall be based on the lot acreage minus the area comprising the network of streets and sidewalks, together with any required reservation of open space. 
    Development. Any project involving construction of streets, utilities, buildings or other improvements made to property to accommodate specific uses such as dwellings, office buildings, warehouses, an apartment complex, a store or shopping center; also any alteration to improved or unimproved property, including, but not limited to, construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, dredging, excavation, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, permanent storage of materials or other land disturbance; and any use or extension of a use of land; also the act of constructing or implementing a land development project, including the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
    Development permit. The authorization necessary to initiate and conduct a land-disturbing activity and to conduct the planned development of land and structures. 
    Display case. A case, cabinet or other device having a window of glass or other transparent material, or other opening, access to which is made from other than within the structure or building of which it is a part or attached. 
    District. A geographic section of the city within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
    Domestic animals. Small animals, including fish or fowl, permitted in a private residence or yard and kept as pets such as dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds and fish, but excluding swine, livestock and exotic animals. 
    Drive-in establishment. A commercial operation designed to provide, either wholly or in part, service to customers while in their automobile parked on the premises. 
    Drive-in theater. An open lot with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures or other prerecorded productions to patrons seated in automobiles. 
    Driveway. A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other structure. 
    Dwelling. A building or portion of a building designed, arranged and used exclusively for residential occupancy, including single family, two-family (duplex) and multifamily dwellings, but not hotels, motels, boarding houses, and rooming houses or like facilities. 
    Dwelling, multifamily. A building or portion thereof used exclusively for residential occupancy by three or more families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other and containing three or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, quadraplex. Four attached dwellings in one structure in which each unit has two outdoor exposures and shares one or two walls with an adjoining unit or units. 
    Dwelling, single family attached. A residential building in which the dwelling units are held in fee simple title and adjoin one another only at the vertical walls and no dwelling unit may be located above another. The term excludes duplexes, triplexes and quadraplexes. 
    Dwelling, single family detached. A dwelling, whether site-built or a manufactured home or an industrialized building, designed for occupancy by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. 
Single family detached dwelling units must conform to the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Minimum width of the unit shall be 24 feet. 
(2)  Minimum floor area shall be as indicated in the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(3)  The roof pitch shall be equal to or greater than the average pitch on the roofs of all single family dwellings located on lots within four lots adjoining the lot in question, including lots across public streets. In no event shall roof pitch be less than three inches in rise to 12 feet in run. The roof shall have a surface of wood, shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or other materials approved by the city manager. 
(4)  The unit must be attached to a permanent foundation as approved by the city manager. 
(5)  The unit must be constructed according to the standards established by the state minimum standard codes, as amended from time to time, the Standard Building Code, the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, or the State of Georgia Industrialized Buildings Act. 
(6)  The unit must have a roof overhang for soffit equal to or greater than the average overhang for soffit on the single-family dwellings located on lots within four lots adjoining the lot in question, including lots across public streets. In no event shall the overhang for soffit be less than 16 inches to insure adequate ventilation. 
(7)  All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
(8)  A landing having a minimum of dimension of 36 inches by 36 inches shall be provided at all access doors. 
    Dwelling, triplex. A building divided into only three dwelling units each of which has an independent entrance either directly or through a common vestibule and used by not more than three families. 
    Dwelling, two family or duplex. A building that is divided horizontally into two dwelling units each of which has an independent entrance either directly or through a common vestibule and used by not more than two families. 
    Easement. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee simple owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lot or lots. 
    Eave. The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
    Erosion. The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Facade. The face of a building fronting along a street. 
    Family. A person, or group of persons, immediately related by blood, marriage, or adoption living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive of household servants; also, a group of not more than three persons, or a group of not more than eight disabled persons not necessarily related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Fence. Any structure used to restrict access or obstruct vision. 
    Fireworks shops. Any building or structure that meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Consumer fireworks retail sales facility. A permanent or temporary building or structure, consumer fireworks retail sales stand, tent, canopy, or membrane structure that is used primarily for the retail display and sale of consumer fireworks to the public. The definition of consumer fireworks retail sales facility shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 and National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124 should that definition differ from the definition in this subsection. 
(2)  Consumer fireworks retail sales stand. A permanent or temporary building or structure that has a floor area of not greater than 800 feet 2 (74m 2 ), other than tents, canopies, or membrane structures, that is used primarily for the retail display and sale of consumer fireworks to the public. The definition of consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 and National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124 should that definition differ from the definition in this subsection. 
    Floodplain. An area identified by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other surveying agencies as subject to inundation by surface waters once every 100 years and deemed necessary for the unrestricted flow of floodwaters. 
    Floor. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement, for example, the top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles or storage, or the floor area of an attic used exclusively for storage. 
    Floor area. For residential uses, the total of all floors of a building as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls, or from the centerline of walls or partitions separating dwelling units, including halls, stairwells, elevator shafts, and excluding unfinished basements, cellars, storage areas, garages, uncovered porches, terraces, decks and balconies. For non-residential uses, floor area shall include all floors, lofts, balconies, mezzanines, cellars, basements, halls, stairwells, elevator shafts and all other interior spaces. 
    Floor area, gross. The sum of the horizontal areas of floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or, if appropriate, from the centerline of dividing walls. 
    Floor area ratio. A mathematical expression determined by dividing the total floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located. 
    Fraternity or sorority house. A dwelling maintained exclusively for members affiliated with an academic college or university or other recognized professional institutions of higher learning. 
    Funeral home. A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
    Future land use map. A map contained in the comprehensive plan depicting the desired pattern of development by activity. This map is referenced in zoning decisions. 
    Garage commercial. A commercial structure or any portion thereof, in which one or more automobiles are housed, stored or repaired, not including exhibition, showing or storage of cars for sale. 
    Garage, parking. A building or portion thereof designed or used for storage of motor-driven vehicles. 
    Garage, private. An accessory building or a portion of the principal dwelling designed or used for storage of motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building. 
    Grade. The average elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building. 
    Greenspace. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment. 
    Gross acreage. The total acreage of a lot prior to making site improvements. 
    Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    Guest house. An accessory use to a dwelling designed and intended for the temporary housing of visitors to a property at the behest of the property residents for no fee or other consideration. 
    Halfway house. A temporary residential living arrangement for persons leaving an institutional setting and in need of a supportive living arrangement in order to readjust to living outside the institution. Such persons may be receiving therapy and counseling from support staff present when residents are present, for the following purposes: (1) recuperation from the effects of drug or alcohol addiction; (2) re-entry to society while housed under supervision as an alternative to imprisonment including, but not limited to, pre-release, work release, or probationary programs; or (3) adjustment to family or school problems that require specialized attention and care in order to achieve personal independence. 
    Health department. The Clayton County Health Department. 
    Health practitioner. A doctor, dentist or chiropractor, but excluding veterinarians. 
    Height. The vertical distance measured from the mean elevation of the proposed finished grade to the highest point of a structure, sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher. 
    Historic district. A district consisting of various zones that have substantial historic, architectural or cultural significance. 
    Historic structure. Any structure (1) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (2) certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (3) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or (4) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified. 
    Hobby. A pursuit outside ones regular occupation engaged in for relaxation and not as a commercial venture. 
    Home occupation. An activity conducted for profit as an accessory use within a dwelling or accessory building. 
    Homeless shelter. Any building in which meals and/or lodging is provided at nominal or no cost to no more than 40 persons who are homeless or indigent. 
    Hospital. A building or portion thereof designed or used for therapeutic treatment of bed patients who are physically or mentally ill. 
    Hotel. A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for transient guests, and offered to the public for compensation and which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. 
    Household. An individual living alone or a group of individuals living together in a single dwelling unit, sharing common use of and access to all living and eating areas, bathrooms, and food preparation areas, who combine their mutual efforts and share responsibilities for domestic chores such as child rearing, cleaning and cooking in a permanent and long-term relationship, as contrasted to individuals in a transient relationship who pay for lodging such as a boarder. 
    Improvement. Any man-made object that becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to real estate. 
    Industrialized home. A home manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act and the Rules of the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs issued pursuant thereto. State approved buildings meet the state building and construction codes and bear an insignia of approval issued by the DCA Commissioner. 
    Industrial park. A tract of land that has been planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, including warehousing and distribution, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics and compatibility. 
    Impervious surface. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so as to render the surface highly resistant to infiltration by water including streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar structures. 
    Junk. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition. 
    Junk vehicles. Any wrecked or inoperable automobile, truck or other vehicle that does not bear a current license plate, has not been capable of operating under its own power for a period exceeding 30 days, or from which parts have been or are to be removed for reuse or sale. 
    Junk yard. A parcel of land or building on which junk, waste, or used materials or junked vehicles or other machinery, or parts thereof, are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, collected, processed, dismantled or otherwise handled for the purpose of salvage for sale or conversion to economic use. 
    Kennel. Any location where boarding, caring for and keeping of more than a total of four dogs or cats or other animals or combination thereof, with the exception of a litter of animals less than six months old, is conducted; also raising of show or hunting dogs. 
    Kitchen. Any room or portion of a room within a building designed and intended to be used for cooking or preparation of food. 
    Laboratory. A facility dedicated to experimental study such as testing and analyzing. Excluding product manufacturing. 
    Landscaping. Actual plant materials or installation such materials consisting of trees, shrubs, vines, turf, ground cover and other natural landscape materials utilized to enhance the aesthetic and functional qualities of a site. 
    Laundromat. A business that provides washing, drying and ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises. 
    Livestock. Poultry, cattle, swine, horses, mink, rabbits, sheep, goats or similar classes of animals excluding domestic animal kept as pets. 
    Loading space. A space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks. 
    Lot. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a single, principal building or use, or group of buildings devoted to a common use, and any accessory building and use, containing the minimum area required by the zoning district in which it is located, and accessed by a public or private street; also an area of land having one continuous boundary held by one owner and recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clayton County. 
LOT 
    Lot area. The total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
    Lot, corner. A parcel of land bounded on two or more adjacent sides by street right-of-way lines at their intersection. 
    Lot, double frontage, also through lot. A lot having a frontage of two non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot depth. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the direction of the side lot lines; also the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and midpoint of the rear lot line. 
    Lot, flag. A lot having less frontage on a public street than normally required. The lot panhandle servers as an access corridor to the bulk of the lot, which is located behind lots with normally required street frontages. 
    Lot, front. The front of a lot shall be that boundary of the lot along a public street having the least dimension. 
BACK TO BACK LOTS 
    Lot frontage. The length of any property line of a lot that abuts a public street right-of-way. 
    Lot, interior. A lot having frontage on only one street. 
    Lot line. The boundary dividing a given lot from the street or adjacent lots; the boundary defining the limit of ownership of a property. 
    Lot of record. A lot for which a plat has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clayton County. 
    Lot, substandard. A lot that does not comply with the minimum standards of the district in which the lot is located, such as minimum lot size or lot width. 
    Lot width. The distance measured along the front building setback line between the side lot lines. 
    Manufactured home. A building or dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home and Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445, as amended. 
    Manufactured home park. A lot under single ownership on which two or more manufactured homes are to be located or intended to be located for purposes of residential occupancy. 
    Manufactured home sales lot. A premises on which manufactured homes are displayed for sale. 
    Materials recovery facility. A solid waste handling facility that provides for extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
    Maximum lot coverage. The percentage of the gross acreage of a lot that may be occupied by a structure or structures. In calculating maximum lot coverage, gross acreage shall not include floodplains or slopes in excess of 30 percent. 
    Median. A paved or landscaped strip dividing any public or private right of way, road or highway into lanes and running parallel to the direction of travel. 
    Minimum building separation. A required open space between any two buildings on the same lot that are used for attached single family or multifamily purposes. 
    Mini-warehouse. A building containing separate spaces for the storage or wares, goods or personal property of varying sizes leased or rented on a individual basis. 
    Mobile home. A structure transportable in one or more sections and built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and contains the necessary plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. Such unit must bear a HUD certificate. 
    Modular building. A building or dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, which complies with the definition of the term "industrialized home." 
    Modular home. A factory built, transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes having been built to state construction codes. 
    Motel. A building in which lodging or board and lodging is provided for transient guests and offered to the public for compensation with access to each unit directly from the outside. 
    Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    Non-combustible material. Any material that will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
    Non-conforming use, building or lot. A legal use, building or lot established prior to adoption of this chapter that fails to comply with one or more provisions of this chapter, either at the effective date of the ordinance, or as a result of subsequent amendments. 
    Nursing home. A home for aged or ill persons licensed by the State of Georgia as such in which persons three or more persons not related to the operator are provided food, shelter and medical care for compensation for 24 hours per day, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and treatment. 
    Occupant. The individual or individuals in actual possession of a premises. 
    Official thoroughfare map. The Thoroughfare Map of the City of Jonesboro as adopted and amended. 
    Official zoning map. A legally adopted map that conclusively shows the location and boundaries of zoned districts. 
    Off-street parking space. A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle, and which is not located within a dedicated street right-of-way. 
    Open space. An area free of buildings, parking, paved areas and other uses, the purpose of which is to provide a balanced relationship between buildable area and lot size, to provide areas for public or private use and to preserve permeable areas essential to surface water drainage and aquifer recharge. 
    Outdoor storage. The keeping, in an unroofed or otherwise unenclosed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise or vehicles on the same lot for more than 24 hours. 
    Outparcel. A lot deeded separately from a larger tract intended for individual development, but generally sharing access with the larger tract. Outparcels are most generally associated with shopping centers. 
    Owner. An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation having sufficient vested legal property rights for which they seek an action under this chapter. 
    Parcel. An area of land having one continuous boundary held by one owner and recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clayton County; also a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a single, principal building or use, or group of buildings devoted to a common use, and any accessory building and use, containing the minimum area required by the zoning district in which it is located, and accessed by a public or private street. 
    Parking area, private. An open area for the parking of privately owned automobiles and not for public use. 
    Parking lot. Any public or private area used for the express purpose of temporary, storage of motor vehicles at grade otherwise in operation for personal or business use. 
    Parking space. Any area for the exclusive and temporary storage of a single vehicle. 
    Pavement. An area of brick, stone, concrete or asphalt placed on the surface of land sufficient for vehicular use; also that portion of a street right-of-way having an improved surface. 
    Permitted use. An activity conducted on a lot that is among those activities allowed as a matter of right under the zoning district of this chapter in which the lot is located, subject to applicable regulations of the district. 
    Permit. Written governmental permission issued by an authorized official, empowering the holder thereof to conduct such activity not forbidden by law, but not allowed without such authorization. 
    Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Personal care home. A facility, whether operated for profit or not, licensed by the State of Georgia for the transitional residency of two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage who are incapable of independent living, within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services, personal services, transportation services and routine social and medical appointments and counseling. 
    Personal care services. Individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing and toileting. 
    Place of assembly. A structure, portion of a structure, or area, either indoor or outdoor, including, but not limited to, movie theaters, concert halls, stadiums, amusement parks, carnivals, places of worship, funeral homes, elementary, middle, high, secondary and post graduate schools, day care centers, private commercial schools, such as material arts or dance studios, clubs, lodges and arenas, designed primarily for the public to gather to observe or participate in a single event or series of events, including but not limited to the presentation of a motion picture, a concert, an educational presentation, a sermon, an inspirational presentation, a rally, a lecture, a dramatic dance, musical, or other live performance, or a sporting event. 
    Place of worship. A building in which individuals assemble for the purpose of religious worship or ceremony. 
    Planned center. A single office, commercial, or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately owned and have no corporate relationship. 
    Planned development. A tract of land developed based on a plan, which allows for flexibility of design not available under normal zoning district requirements. 
    Plat. A drawing representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and streets. 
    Plat, preliminary. An initial plan for the subdivision of land as defined in the land development regulations, indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision. 
    Plat, final. The permanent plan documenting the approved subdivision of land as defined in the land development regulations, indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision, together with all site improvements. 
    P.O.D.S. A metal container designed for temporary, on-site storage of goods or long term storage of goods in an off-site facility; also portable on-demand storage. 
    Primary facade. The exterior wall of a building fronting the street on which primary access to the building is gained. 
    Principal building. A building on a lot in which is conducted the primary use. 
    Principal use. The specific, primary purpose for which land or a building on a lot is used, as distinguished from a secondary or accessory use. 
    Public improvement. The construction, enlargement, extension or other construction of a facility intended for dedication to the public, including but not limited to a street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, cross drain, catch basin, traffic control and street name sign, or other roadway appurtenance other than a driveway apron connection; domestic water supply system main, fire hydrant, valve or other appurtenance other than a supply line to a building; or sanitary sewerage main or outfall, lift station, force main, manhole or other appurtenance other than a drain line from a building. 
    Public notice. Information conveyed to the general public concerning any provision of this chapter or its application to real property in the city posted on affected property or in a newspaper of general circulation. Such notices are used primarily to announce the time, place and purpose of a public hearing during which city officials will decide such matters. 
    Recovery materials processing facility. A facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such term shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste. 
    Recreational vehicle. A motorized camper, converted bus, tent trailer, motor home or other similar vehicular or portable structure used or designed for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation or other recreational trip and provided with sleeping accommodations. 
    Recreational vehicle dealer. The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used recreational vehicles, and which may include any repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
    Restaurant. Any facility or establishment merchandising or dispensing food or drink, which is located on a permanent foundation and contains a minimum floor area of 400 square feet at which the customer is served. 
    Restaurant, drive-thru or drive-in. An establishment that serves food and beverages directly to customers in motor vehicles, regardless of whether it also serves food and beverages to customers who are not in motor vehicles, for consumption on or off the premises. 
    Right-of-way. An area of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation specifically designated for use as a public street or sidewalk; utility, railroad, interstate or transmission corridor; landscaping and street furnishings; or other public purpose. 
    Roof line. The highest continuous horizontal line of a roof. On a sloping roof, the roofline is the principal ridgeline, or the highest line common to one or more principal slopes of roof. On a flat roof, the roofline is the highest continuous line of the roof or parapet, whichever is the higher. 
    Satellite dish. A round, parabolic antenna designed to receive signals from orbiting satellites. Noncommercial dish antennas are defined as being less than four meters in diameter. 
    School. State, county, city church or other schools, public or private, as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges and post-high school learning centers. 
    Secondary facade. Any exterior wall of a building that is not the primary facade. 
    Service station. Any building or land used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any automotive fuels, oils or accessories and in connection with which is performed general automotive servicing such as dispensing gas, changing oil, lubrication, checking tire pressure, fixing flats, replacing plugs, and adjusting or regulating parts, as distinguished from repairing or replacing mechanical parts, or major engine or transmission overhaul, major body work or automobile painting. 
    Setback. The required horizontal distance between property line and a building. 
SETBACK 
    Shopping center. A group of commercial establishments planned, developed and managed as a unit with individual vendors housed in one building that provides customer access, amenities and protection from the elements and features common, on-site parking. 
    Sign. A structure or device designed to attract attention or convey information to the public in written or graphic form. 
    Site plan. A development plan for one or more lots depicting the existing and proposed conditions, including topography, structures, building setback lines, vegetation, drainage, utilities, access, flood plains, wetlands, open space, walkways, landscaping, signs, lighting, buffers, fences, and any other information that may be reasonable to enable the approving authority to render an informed decision. 
    Story. For buildings with more than one story, the space between the surface of two successive floors; for one-story buildings, the space between the floor and the ceiling or underside of the roof framing. 
    Street. A public way for vehicle traffic that provides the primary means of access to abutting properties. 
    Structural alteration. Any change in the supporting member of a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls or bearing partitions, columns, beams, girders, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls. 
    Structure. Any object constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground. For the purpose of enforcing building setbacks, pavement, fences and walkways are not considered structures. 
    Subdivider. A person, firm or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance or proceedings to subdivide such land under this article, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under these regulations. 
    Subdivision. The division of a property or tract of land into two or more tracts or lots; a land development project in which two or more lots are created, along with the streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots. 
    Submission date. The date stamped on an application indicating the date the application was actually received in the office of the city clerk. 
    Swale. A depression in the ground that channels runoff. 
    Tenant. One who possesses or occupies land or buildings by title, under a lease, or through payment of rent; a resident, occupant or inhabitant of a place. 
    Thoroughfare plan. The official document that classifies the streets within the city limits of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia according to such characteristics as capacity, design speed and function. 
    Tract. An area, parcel, piece of land, or property, that is the subject of a development application. 
    Trailer. Any vehicle or structure constructed so as to permit occupancy thereof as sleeping or living quarters, or the conduct of any business, trade or occupation, or use as selling or advertising device, or use of storage or conveyance for tools, equipment or machinery, and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways and streets propelled on its own or drawn by a vehicle. 
    Trailer, camping. Shall mean any portable structure or vehicle designed for highway travel at legal speed limits without special permit, which is intended for temporary living. 
    Use. The purpose for which land or a building is designed or arranged, or for which it is occupied. 
    Variance. A mechanism use to grant a property owner relief from specific provisions of the zoning ordinance when strict compliance would result in a particular hardship. 
    Vehicle. Any automobile or other vehicle propelled by its own motor and operating on public roadways; the term includes passenger cars, trucks, motorcycles and motor scooters. 
    Warehouse. A building in which materials, goods or equipment are stored, as before distribution to retailers, or kept in reserve. 
    Yard. An open space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings located to the front, rear, or side of a building extending to the nearest lot line. 

REQUIRED YARDS 
    Yard, front. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the front building setback. The front yard of a corner lot shall be the yard parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
    Yard rear. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the rear building setback. 
    Yard side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building between the side building line and the side lot line. 
    Zoning. Partitioning of land by map designations into districts reserved for specific purposes, the use of which is governed by the zoning ordinance. 
    Zero lot line. A form of development that locates a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building walls and foundations are coincident with a lot line. 
    Zoning district. A geographic area within the city within which specific regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
    Zoning change. An amendment to the official zoning map (re-zoning), approval of a conditional use, or approval of a change in the conditions of approval assigned with a re-zoning. 
    Zoning ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia as adopted and amended. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(3.02), 8-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 8-10-2015; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 2-8-2016 ) 
Secs. 86-63-86-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 86-71. - Relationship of zoning districts to the comprehensive plan. 
    The City of Jonesboro Comprehensive Plan and Future Land Use Map designate land uses for broad areas of the city. These designations serve as a general guide to land use and development intensity that are more precisely determined by the zoning districts of this section. The zoning ordinance and its application to individual properties implements public policy goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan and, together with the city's land development regulations, shape the character of development and use of property in Jonesboro. Land use designations are associated with actual zoning districts as identified in the table below. 
Zoning Districts and Corresponding Land Uses 
Zoning District Land Use R-2 single family residential district Single family residential R-4 single family residential district Single family residential R-C cluster residential district Medium density residential R-A single family attached residential Medium density residential R-M multifamily residential district Multifamily residential H-1 historic district Office/business; public/institution H-2 historic district Office/residential MX mixed use district Mixed use and office/residential O-I office and institutional district Office/business; public/institution C-1 neighborhood commercial district Commercial C-2 highway commercial district Commercial M-1 light industrial district Light industrial Tara Boulevard Overlay Commercial Assembly overlay Public/institution/commercial Historic residential overlay Residential/commercial  
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(4.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-72. - Establishment of districts. 
    The following zoning districts are established for the purpose of regulating land use and development intensity: 
(1)  R-2 single family residential district; 
(2)  R-4 single family residential district; 
(3)  R-C cluster residential district; 
(4)  R-A single family attached residential district; 
(5)  R-M multifamily residential district; 
(6)  H-1 historic district; 
(7)  H-2 historic district; 
(8)  MX mixed use district; 
(9)  O-I office and institutional district; 
(10)  C-1 neighborhood commercial district; 
(11)  C-2 highway commercial district; 
(12)  M-1 light industrial district; 
(13)  Tara Boulevard Overlay; 
(14)  Assembly Overlay; 
(15)  Historic Residential Overlay. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(4.02), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-73. - Official zoning map adopted. 
    The land area of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia is hereby divided into zoning districts, as provided herein and as indicated on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory notations, references and other information indicated thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be an integral part of this chapter. The zoning map, as adopted and as may be amended thereafter by mayor and city council from time to time, establishes the boundaries and location of all zoning districts in the city. The map is prepared by the geographic information services specialist, and is compiled from aerial photography, deed records, plats, and other imagery, data and public records. The primary public information sources should be consulted for verification of information contained on the map. 
    The official zoning map as adopted at the time of adoption of this zoning ordinance shall be identified as that map bearing the signature of the Mayor of Jonesboro serving at the time of adoption, and attested by the City Clerk of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia, and bear the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in this Section of Ordinance 05-08 of the City of Jonesboro, Georgia," together with the date of adoption of this ordinance. A certified copy of the official zoning map as originally adopted shall be maintained on file as a public record in the office of the city clerk for public inspection and review. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(4.03), 8-15-05; Ord. No. 05-11, Art. 1, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-74. - Amendments to the official zoning map. 
    Should changes be made to district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and state law, a notation shall be made on the map, indicating such changes promptly following adoption of the implementing ordinance accompanying the map amendment that accomplished such change by the city council. Such amendments shall be recorded in the minutes of the mayor and council and shall be available for public inspection. mayor and council are encouraged to re-adopt the official zoning map periodically, incorporating such notations of map changes as have been accomplished in the past year. 
    The official zoning map, as adopted by the mayor and city council and amended from time to time by action of that governing body, shall be maintained and available in the office of the city clerk. All zoning district boundary changes and amendments to the zoning map shall be noted on the map maintained in the office of the city clerk with the date of the zoning change or amendment and reference to the implementing ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(4.04), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-75. - Unauthorized alteration of official zoning map constitutes a violation. 
    No alteration of any nature shall be made to the official zoning map or matter shown thereon, except in conformance with procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change to the official zoning map of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this chapter, punishable as provided under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(4.05), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-76. - Replacement of official zoning map. 
    In the event the original official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed or lost, the city council may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede all previous such maps. The new official zoning map may be used to correct errors or omissions in the original official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. Unless the original official zoning map has been lost or wholly destroyed, the original map or any remaining significant portions thereof shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(4.06), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-77. - Determination of zoning district boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map shall be determined on the basis of legal descriptions or boundary surveys associated with approved zoning applications or, lacking such legal descriptions or surveys, on the basis of the location of the boundaries depicted on the official zoning map. 
    All property located in the city limits is assigned a zoning district as indicated on the official zoning map, and no property shall be used except in accordance with the zoning district designations on the zoning map and the provisions of this chapter. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any zoning district shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
    Where a zoning district boundary is shown as approximately following the centerline of a street, alley, or public right-of-way; land lot line; corporate limit line; railroad right-of-way; militia district line; or a property boundary; or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary. 
    Where a zoning district boundary is shown as being set back from a public street or a railroad right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such zoning district boundary shall be construed as being the noted distance, or in the absence of such a note, the scaled distance from the centerline of the public street or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto. 
    Where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the noted distance, or in the absence of such a note, the scaled distance from the lot lines. In such instances, and where the lot was held in single ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the city manager may approve application of the standards and provisions of the zoning district in which the greater portion of the lot is located to the remaining portion of the lot; however, such application shall not encompass any part of such a lot that lies more than 35 feet beyond the zoning district boundary. 
    Where a double-frontage or through lot fronting on two different streets is divided by a zoning district boundary approximately paralleling the two streets, the standards and provisions of the zoning districts controlling development along each respective street on which the frontage of the lot is located shall apply to that portion of the lot so divided. 
    Where a zoning district boundary remains in doubt in particular instances following application of the above rules, the mayor and council shall determine the location of the district boundary. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(4.07), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-78-86-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISTRICT STANDARDS AND PERMITTED USES 

Sec. 86-91. - Conditions of previous zoning approvals retained. 
    All conditions imposed as conditions of rezoning of property prior to adoption of the official zoning map are hereby retained and reaffirmed, and shall continue in full force and effect until such time as the property is rezoned or the prior zoning action of the mayor and city council is amended through the rezoning process established by article XII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-92. - District standards. 
    Each zoning district contains uses that are permitted "by right," without the need for further zoning approval. Site plan approval or building permit issuance may be required prior to establishment of a use on the property. Accessory uses, that is, uses customarily incidental to the principal use may also be permitted, usually subject to certain restrictions. Conditional uses may be approved in particular zoning districts, subject to certain conditions enforced through the rezoning process. Finally, specific uses are prohibited in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.02), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-93. - Permitted uses and accessory uses. 
    Principal uses that are permitted by right in each zoning district are indicated in section 86-204, Table of uses allowed by zoning district. Accessory uses customarily incidental to principal uses are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.03), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-94. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses that may be permitted in each zoning district are also indicated in section 86-204, Table of uses allowed by zoning district. Conditions automatically assigned to certain uses are found in article VI, Conditional uses. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.04), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-95. - Prohibited uses. 
    Certain uses are specifically prohibited in all zoning districts. These are indicated in section 86-204, Table of uses allowed by zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.05), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-96. - Identification of uses. 
    Uses regulated under this chapter are primarily identified in the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS), United States, 2002, published by the Executive Office of the President Office of Management and Budget. Uses not listed in section 86-204, Table of uses allowed by zoning district, may be approved following an interpretation by the city manager as provided in article II. The NAICS establishes a numbering system for a diverse range of activities. These numbers and the activities referenced are indicated in the tables for each zoning district. The NAICS numbering system is used for reference and interpretation, only; the NAICS is not adopted as part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.06), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-97. - R-2 single family residential district regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. The R-2 single family residential district is established to provide for single family detached dwellings on individual lots having a minimum area of one-half acre. The district is intended to create and preserve a neighborhood setting free of non-residential uses as well as higher density residential uses. Public and institutional uses traditionally found in low density neighborhoods are compatible with the R-2 district. Such development is typically served by a network of local streets to minimize traffic impacts on the neighborhood. 
(b)  Development standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in the R-2 district shall conform to the following development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 21,780 square feet (1/2-acre) 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet 1 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 35 feet 2 
(4)  Minimum side yard: 15 feet 3 
(5)  Minimum rear yard: 35 feet 
(6)  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 1,600 square feet 
(7)  Maximum building height: Two stories and 35 feet 
(8)  Maximum lot coverage: 35 percent 
1 Measured at the building line. 
2 The required front yard on any street classified as a collector or above shall be 40 feet. 
3 The minimum side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be 25 feet. 
(c)  Design standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in an R-2 district shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in article XIII of this chapter. 
(2)  Buffers shall be provided as specified in article XV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.07), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-98. - R-4 single family residential district regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. The R-4 single family residential district is established to provide for single family detached dwellings on individual lots having a minimum area of one-quarter acre. The district is intended to create and preserve a neighborhood setting in which smaller lots are desired. While the R-4 district is primarily free of non-residential uses as well as higher density residential uses, the district may adjoin such districts and may be located near the downtown. Public and institutional uses traditionally found in relatively low density neighborhoods are compatible with the R-4 district. Such development is also typically served by a network of local streets to minimize traffic impacts on the neighborhood. 
(b)  Development standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in the R-4 district shall conform to the following development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 10,480 square feet (1/4-acre) 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 75 feet 1 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 25 feet 2 
(4)  Minimum side yard: 12 feet 3 
(5)  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet 
(6)  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 1,600 square feet 
(7)  Maximum building height: Two stories and 35 feet 
(8)  Maximum lot coverage: 35 percent 
1 Measured at the building line. 
2 The required front yard on any street classified as a collector or above shall be 30 feet. 
3 The minimum side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be 20 feet. 
(c)  Design standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in an R-4 district shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in article XIII of this chapter. 
(2)  Buffers shall be provided as specified in article XV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.08), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-99. - R-C cluster residential district regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. The R-C cluster residential district is established to provide for single family dwellings on relatively small, individual lots having a minimum area of 4,000 square feet. The district is intended to accommodate lifestyles featuring common greenspace adjoining privately owned yards where greenspace amenities are desired. The R-C district is particularly suited to development tracts containing sensitive natural resources such as floodplains, steep slopes or wetlands and promotes preservation of such resources in exchange for somewhat higher lot yields (in the range of 4-6 units per acre) and reduced utility and street lengths. Cluster residential developments are compatible with walkable, neighborhood commercial districts established in close proximity or within the cluster development. 
(b)  Development standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in the R-C district shall conform to the following development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 4,000 square feet 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 40 feet 1 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 20 feet 2 
(4)  Minimum side yard: Seven feet 
(5)  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet 
(6)  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 1,400 square feet 
(7)  Maximum building height: Two stories and 35 feet 
(8)  Maximum density: Six units/acre 
(9)  Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent 
(10)  Minimum greenspace: 20 percent of gross acreage 
1 Measured at the building line. 
2 The required front yard on any street classified as a collector or above shall be 25 feet. 
(c)  Design standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in an R-C district shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in article XIII of this chapter. 
(2)  Buffers shall be provided as specified in article XV of this chapter. 
(3)  A minimum of 50 percent of building lots must adjoin greenspace. 
(4)  A homeowners association shall be mandatory with covenants subject to approval by the city manager. 
(5)  Greenspace shall be improved with walking trails and an amenity area having a minimum area of 400 square feet with equipment and facilities appropriate to the market served. Greenspace shall have a minimum width of 100 feet; trail connections between greenspace areas shall have a minimum width of 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.09), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-100. - R-A single family attached residential district regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. The R-A single family attached residential district is established to provide for single family attached dwellings on individual lots on development tracts having a minimum area of two acres. The district is intended to foster housing options for households seeking high quality home ownership in park like setting featuring attractive architectural styles and building materials. As such, developments facilitated by establishment of the district are restricted to a maximum number of units to limit scale and encourage manageable homeowner associations. The R-A district is compatible with walkable, neighborhood commercial districts and low intensity office and commercial districts and is suited to locations along collector streets. 
(b)  Development standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in the R-A district shall conform to the following development standards: 
(1)  Minimum tract size: 87,120 square feet (two acres) 
(2)  Minimum lot area per unit: 2,400 square feet 
(3)  Minimum tract width: 150 feet 1 
(4)  Minimum front yard: 20 feet 2 
(5)  Minimum side yard at perimeter of tract: 25 feet 
(6)  Minimum rear yard: 35 feet 
(7)  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 1,200 square feet 
(8)  Maximum building height: Two stories and 35 feet 
(9)  Maximum number of units per building: Eight 
(10)  Maximum number of units per development: 64 
(11)  Maximum density: Eight units per acre 
(12)  Minimum greenspace: 15 percent of gross acreage 
(13)  Minimum building separation: 
Front to Front 40 feet Front to Rear 40 feet Front to Side 35 feet Rear to Rear 40 feet Rear to Side 35 feet Side to Side 25 feet  
1 Measured at the building line. 
2 The required front yard on any street classified as a collector or above shall be 25 feet. 
(c)  Design standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in an R-A district shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in article XIII of this chapter. 
(2)  Buffers shall be provided as specified in article XV of this chapter. 
(3)  A homeowners association accompanied by recorded covenants shall be mandatory for all townhouse or condominium developments, subject to approval by the city manager. 
(4)  Minimum width of townhouse units shall be 24 feet. 
(5)  Townhouse building facades shall visually differentiate individual units through the use of architectural materials; a minimum of 50 percent of the front elevation shall consist of brick or stone. 
(6)  All townhouse units shall be accessed via rear alleys. 
(7)  Greenspace shall be improved with walking trails and an amenity area having a minimum area of 400 square feet with equipment and facilities appropriate to the needs of residents. Greenspace shall have a minimum width of 100 feet; trail connections between greenspace areas shall have a minimum width of 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.10), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-101. - R-M multifamily residential district. 
(a)  Purpose. The R-M multifamily residential district is established to provide for multifamily dwellings on properties having a minimum area of two acres. The district accommodates residential development at a maximum density of eight units per acre and is intended to serve a rental market in which attached units are available in a setting with common amenities and greenspace. R-M districts are expected to develop near public transit and along transportation corridors. Such developments may be established at the margin of neighborhood commercial districts, community shopping districts and employment centers, and represent a transition from office and commercial uses to lower density neighborhoods. 
(b)  Development standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in the R-M district shall conform to the following development standards: 
(1)  Minimum tract area: 87,120 square feet (two acres) 
(2)  Minimum lot area per unit: 
a.  Duplex: 4,000 square feet 
b.  Triplex: 4,000 square feet 
c.  Quadraplex: 4,000 square feet 
(3)  Minimum development tract width: 150 feet 1 
(4)  Minimum front yard: 25 feet 2 
(5)  Minimum side yard: 25 feet 
(6)  Minimum rear yard: 35 feet 
(7)  Minimum floor area for all individual dwelling units: 
a.  One-bedroom units: 900 square feet 
b.  Two-bedroom units: 1,200 square feet 
c.  Three-bedroom units: 1,400 square feet 
(8)  Maximum building height: Three-story and 40 feet 
(9)  Maximum number of units per building: 12 
(10)  Maximum density: 12 units per acre 
(11)  Minimum greenspace: 20 percent of gross acreage 
(12)  Minimum building separation: 
Front to Front 40 feet Front to Rear 40 feet Front to Side 35 feet Rear to Rear 40 feet Rear to Side 35 feet Side to Side 25 feet  
1 Measured at the building line. 
2 The required front yard on any street classified as a collector or above shall be 35 feet. 
(c)  Design standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in an R-M district shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in article XIII of this chapter. 
(2)  Buffers shall be provided as specified in article XV of this chapter. 
(3)  A homeowners association accompanied by recorded covenants shall be mandatory for all townhouse or condominium developments, subject to approval by the city manager. 
(4)  Minimum width of townhouse units shall be 24 feet. 
(5)  Townhouse building facades shall visually differentiate individual units through the use of architectural materials; a minimum of 50 percent of the front elevation shall consist of brick or stone. 
(6)  All townhouse units shall be accessed via rear alleys. 
(7)  Greenspace shall be improved with walking trails and an amenity area having a minimum area of 400 square feet for every 24 units, with equipment and facilities appropriate to the needs of residents. Greenspace shall have a minimum width of 75 feet; trail connections between greenspace areas shall have a minimum width of 25 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.11), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-102. - H-1 historic district. 
(a)  Purpose of district. The purpose of the H-1 historic district is to provide for retail and residential uses that benefit from close proximity to each other and that will generate pedestrian activity in the city's traditional downtown core. Development and redevelopment in this district is intended to preserve and enhance the historic character of the area while promoting the goals of the Livable Centers Initiative Study. 
(b)  Delineation of historic district. The historic district is delineated and duly designated on the official zoning map of the city. Areas located within the historic district must comply with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Required review of exterior changes. Following designation of the H-1 district, no exterior portion of any building or other structure that can be viewed from the public right-of-way (including stone walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant features) nor an aboveground utility structure, nor any permanent sign shall be erected, altered, restored or moved within such H-1 district until an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior architectural features and signage has been submitted to and approved by the historic preservation commission. All proposed changes requiring a certificate of appropriateness shall comply with the H-1 design standards found in subsection (l) herein. 
(d)  Application for certificate of appropriateness. Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made by the owner or owner's agent to the director of downtown development for the city, and the certificate of appropriateness form shall be completed by the director of downtown development within 30 days and presented for review and approval by the historic preservation commission at their scheduled meeting(s). The commission shall vote to approve or deny the certificate upon review of the application, which shall be duly signed by the commission chairperson. 
(e)  Exterior architectural feature defined. For purposes of this section, exterior architectural features shall include architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the color, the kind and texture of the building material, and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant features. In the case of outdoor advertising signs, exterior architectural features shall be construed to mean the style, material, and location of all such signs. The commission shall not consider interior arrangement and shall take no action under this section except for the purpose of preventing the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or moving of buildings, structures, appurtenant features, or outdoor advertising signs in the historic district that would be incongruous with the historic aspects of the district. 
(f)  Certain changes not prohibited. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of a structure in the historic district which does not involve a change in design, material, color, or outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or demolition of any such feature which the code enforcement officer or fire marshall shall certify is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. Such a determination by the code enforcement officer or fire marshall shall be made and documented after an examination of all alternative actions intended to result in the preservation of any feature are exhausted. 
(g)  Delay in demolition of historic buildings. Following designation of an historic district, no building or structure therein shall be demolished or otherwise removed until the owner thereof shall have given the historic preservation commission via the director of downtown development's office 120 days' written notice of his proposed action. Upon receiving written notice, the city shall erect a sign on the property to indicate that the building or structure is proposed for demolition. During such 120-day period the historic preservation commission may negotiate with the owner and with any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the building. Should the historic preservation commission find that the building involved has no particular historic significance or value toward maintaining the character of the district, it may waive all or part of such 120-day period and authorize earlier demolition or removal. In making a determination of a building's particular historic significance, the historic preservation commission shall refer to the most recent inventory of historic buildings kept on file at the office of downtown development. 
(h)  Permitted uses. The following general use classifications are permitted; refer to section 86-204, Table of uses allowed by zoning district, for actual permitted uses: 
(1)  Retail uses; 
(2)  Commercial services; 
(3)  Arts, entertainment and recreation uses; 
(4)  Office uses; 
(5)  Residential uses. 
Uses similar to the above listed permitted uses, as determined by the city manager, may be permitted unless listed elsewhere as a prohibited use. 
(i)  Conditional uses. Uses that may be allowed upon finding by the Jonesboro City Council that the proposed location and use will not disrupt the desired smaller-scale retail, pedestrian-oriented environment are found in section 86-204, Table of uses allowed by zoning district. Uses designated as conditional uses in section 86-204, Table of uses allowed by zoning district, may be permitted, subject to conditions assigned by this chapter or the city council. 
(j)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: None 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 20 feet 
(3)  Setbacks: 
Front: Minimum and maximum setbacks shall be zero. 
Side: Minimum and maximum setbacks shall be zero, except on corner lots, whereby the setback shall be no less than 20 feet to accommodate pedestrian amenities. Such amenities are required on corner lots and include decorative planters, benches, landscaping, patios, knee walls, or other architectural features that are compatible with the historic and pedestrian character of the district. The proposed number, type, and arrangement of amenities shall be reviewed and approved by the director of downtown development. 
Rear: Zero, except when abutting a residential zoning district where there is no intervening right-of-way, the setback is 20 feet. 
(4)  Maximum height: Three stories or 35 feet. 
(5)  Minimum height: Two stories. 
(6)  Minimum floor area: None for non-office uses; minimum floor area for office uses shall be 1,000 square feet. 
(7)  Maximum floor area: 3,500 square feet. 
(k)  Existing uses. Any use or structure existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance that would no longer be permitted or be in compliance with the current regulations shall be allowed to continue operation as is but shall be classified as a non-conforming use and subject to all applicable requirements of article X of this chapter. 
(l)  Design standards. In order to preserve the physical character of existing historic structures in the H-1 historic district, every effort shall be made to adapt the property in a manner that complements the historic character of the area when making exterior alterations to the existing building, site, or environment. 
(1)  Existing structures. Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship that characterize a building, structure, or site shall be retained. 
a.  Storefront design. 
1.  Historic details, doors, window configurations and dimensions, and entryways may not be removed or altered. 
2.  The addition of architectural details where none existed before is discouraged. 
3.  The use of shutters, residential doors, or the replacement of original display windows with smaller-scale window components or wall surface is prohibited. 
4.  Obscuring original transom windows with plywood, paint, or other materials is prohibited. 
5.  New windows on side and rear elevations shall be compatible with historic windows in terms of material, size and design. 
6.  Storm windows must match the color of the window frame and obscure the window as little as possible. 
7.  Infilling or painting windows is prohibited. 
8.  Replacing windows with tinted or highly reflective glass is prohibited. All windows must be transparent. 
b.  Roof. 
1.  The existing pitch and shape of the roof as seen from public view shall be maintained, although changes hidden by existing parapets, or changes that would restore the roof to its original design, may be allowed. 
2.  Replacement of existing roofing materials that can be seen from the public view shall be made with the same type of roofing materials. 
3.  Ornamental roof features shall be retained. 
c.  Building materials. 
1.  Historic building materials shall be maintained. 
2.  Unpainted brick facades shall remain unpainted. 
3.  Damaged exterior materials shall be treated with materials that will not cause further deterioration, including the use of a historic mortar mix of an appropriate color when repointing brick. 
d.  Awnings. 
1.  Awnings shall match the shape and dimensions of the door opening or window and shall fit the frame of the window or doorway without covering architectural details. 
2.  Canvas awnings are preferred; Metal, rigid plastic, shingle, and internally lit awnings are generally prohibited. 
3.  The use of a continuous awning across two buildings to join them as one business is prohibited. 
e.  Building color. 
1.  Color shades and patterns shall complement the color schemes that are found in the district. Reference materials on appropriate color palettes will be available for review at the office of downtown development at city hall. 
2.  The use of neon colors is prohibited. 
f.  Lighting. Lighting fixtures and wattage shall be compatible with the historic character of the district. 
g.  Fences and walls. 
1.  Historic fences and retaining walls shall be maintained and not removed. 
2.  New fences and screening walls shall be constructed of traditional materials, typically wood for fencing and brick, stone or granite for walls. 
h.  Equipment. 
1.  Mechanical systems shall be placed behind the building and out of public view; any systems that must be located on the roof shall be placed to the rear of the roof. 
2.  Utility meters and security lighting shall be placed unobtrusively. 
3.  Dumpsters shall be placed to the rear of buildings and shall be screened from public view by fencing or walls utilizing traditional materials (see subsection (1)g.2 above. 
i.  Parking. 
1.  Off-street parking areas, not located in a parking deck, shall be placed to the rear of buildings and screened from public view by a wall by fencing, or by vegetation comprised of a minimum eight-foot high landscape buffer of trees and shrubbery or a minimum four-foot high continuous hedge. 
2.  New surface parking, not located in a parking deck, is encouraged to use concrete or stone pavers; asphalt is also permitted in the district. 
(2)  Additions. Alterations to existing properties are permitted when such alteration and additions do not destroy significant architectural or historical material. The design shall be compatible with the size, scale, color, material and character of the property and downtown area. 
a.  Additions shall be placed away from public view on the rear elevation for buildings having frontage on Main and McDonough Streets, or on a rear or side elevation for all other buildings in the district. 
b.  The form, orientation, and symmetry of the original structure shall be maintained. 
c.  Matching or similar materials, elements (e.g., windows), and ornamentation as those found on the original structure shall be used. 
(3)  New construction. New buildings shall be compatible with surrounding historic structures and shall contribute to the character to the area. Contemporary design for new construction is not discouraged when such design is complimentary to surrounding architectural styles. 
a.  Placement. 
1.  New buildings shall be placed at a setback equal to (for buildings fronting Main or McDonough Streets) or within ten feet of that of nearby similar historic buildings or similar buildings within the district. 
2.  Orientation shall be toward the same street as nearby historic buildings. 
3.  Buildings shall be placed centrally on a lot with equal spacing on each side (zero side setbacks for buildings fronting Main or McDonough Streets). 
b.  Scale. 
1.  Buildings shall be approximately the same width and depth as historic buildings of similar form within the district. 
2.  Buildings shall be either two stories or three stories depending on the uniformity of height displayed by nearby historic buildings; building height shall not exceed 35 feet unless topography and site location allow for up to four stories. This increase in height shall require a variance request for review and approval by city council. 
c.  Form. 
1.  New buildings shall respect the existing form found among historic buildings in the district. 
2.  Roof shapes, pitches and parapets shall be compatible with those found on nearby historic buildings. 
3.  Buildings shall be comprised of a single main block rather than several secondary blocks (e.g., wings, projections, or porches). 
4.  Foundations shall be compatible with the height and pattern found on similar historic buildings. 
d.  Openings (windows and doors). 
1.  New buildings shall use openings of similar dimensions and shape as those of nearby historic buildings. 
2.  Placement or distribution of openings shall be symmetrical and in a manner similar to that of nearby historic buildings or similar buildings within the district. 
e.  Materials. 
1.  New buildings fronting Main and McDonough Streets are required to use brick. New buildings elsewhere in the district are required to use brick as the predominant exterior material, with stone and stucco allowed to a lesser degree and upon approval by the historic preservation commission. Synthetic stucco, variegated brick, and concrete block are prohibited throughout the district. 
2.  Ornamentation shall be compatible with nearby historic buildings and shall not be used to a greater extent than nearby historic buildings. 
(4)  Signs. Chapter 52 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.12), 8-15-05) 
Cross reference- Historical preservation, ch. 42. 
Sec. 86-103. - H-2 historic district. 
(a)  Purpose of district. The purpose of the H-2 historic district is to provide for office and commercial uses having a minimal impact on existing residential uses. Development and redevelopment in this district is intended to enhance and preserve the historic character of the area, to encourage thoughtful reuse of historic structures for non-residential purposes, to protect existing low-density residential uses in the district, and to promote the goals of the Livable Centers Initiative Study. 
(b)  Delineation of historic district. The historic district is delineated and duly designated on the official zoning map of the city. Areas located within the historic district must comply with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Required review of exterior changes. From and after the designation of the H-2 district, no exterior portion of any building or other structure that can be viewed from the public right-of-way (including stone walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant features) nor an aboveground utility structure, nor any type of permanent sign shall be erected, altered, restored or moved within such H-2 district until an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior architectural features and signage has been submitted to and approved by the historic preservation commission. All proposed changes requiring a certificate of appropriateness shall comply with the H-2 design standards found in subsection (l) herein. 
(d)  Application for certificate of appropriateness. Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made by the owner or owner's agent to the director of downtown development for the city, and the certificate of appropriateness form shall be completed by the director of downtown development within 30 days and presented for review and approval by the historic preservation commission at their scheduled meeting(s). The commission shall vote to approve or deny the certificate upon review of the application, which shall be duly signed by the commission chairperson. 
(e)  Exterior architectural feature defined. For purposes of this section, exterior architectural features shall include architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the color, the kind and texture of the building material, and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant features. In the case of outdoor advertising signs, exterior architectural features shall be construed to mean the style, material, and location of all such signs. The commission shall not consider interior arrangement and shall take no action under this section except for the purpose of preventing the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or moving of buildings, structures, appurtenant features, or outdoor advertising signs in the historic district that would be incongruous with the historic aspects of the district. 
(f)  Certain changes not prohibited. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of a structure in the historic district which does not involve a change in design, material, color, or outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or demolition of any such feature which the code enforcement officer or fire marshall shall certify is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. Such a determination by the code enforcement officer or fire marshall shall be made and documented after an examination of all alternative actions intended to result in the preservation of any feature are exhausted. 
(g)  Delay in demolition of historic buildings. From and after the designation of a historic district, no building or structure therein shall be demolished or otherwise removed until the owner thereof shall have given the historic preservation commission via the director of downtown development's office 120 days' written notice of his proposed action. Upon receiving written notice, the city shall erect a sign on the property to indicate that the building or structure is proposed for demolition. During such 120-day period the historic preservation commission may negotiate with the owner and with any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the building. Should the historic preservation commission find that the building involved has no particular historic significance or value toward maintaining the character of the district, it may waive all or part of such 90-day period and authorize earlier demolition or removal. In making a determination of a building's particular historic significance, the historic preservation commission shall refer to the most recent inventory of historic buildings kept on file at the office of downtown development. 
(h)  Permitted uses. The following general use classifications are permitted; refer to section 86-204, Table of uses allowed by zoning district, for actual permitted uses: 
(1)  Office uses 
(2)  Residential uses 
Uses similar to the above listed permitted uses, as determined by the city manager and provided in section 86-96, may be permitted unless listed elsewhere as a prohibited use. 
(i)  Conditional uses. Uses that may be allowed upon finding by Jonesboro City Council that the proposed location and use will not disrupt the desired smaller-scale office and residential environment of the district, and provided the proposed floor area does not exceed 3,500 square feet, are found in section 86-204, Table of uses allowed by zoning district. 
(j)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: None 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 50 feet 
(3)  Minimum setbacks: 
Front: Building setbacks that have been established over time by historic structures, as listed on the most recent inventory of historic buildings kept on file at the office of downtown development, shall establish the minimum front setback. 
Side: Five feet, except when abutting a residential zoning district where there is no intervening right-of-way, the setback requirement is ten feet. 
Rear: 20 feet 
(4)  Maximum height: Three stories or 35 feet 
(5)  Minimum height: Two stories 
(k)  Existing uses. Any use or structure existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance that would no longer be permitted or be in compliance with the current regulations shall be allowed to continue operation as is but shall be classified as a non-conforming use and subject to all applicable requirements of article X of this chapter. 
(l)  Design standards. In order to preserve the physical character of existing historic structures in the H-2 historic district, every effort shall be made to adapt the property in a manner that complements the historic character of the area when making exterior alterations to the existing building, site, or environment. New construction shall also be appropriate for the district in design, placement, and scale. 
(1)  Rehabilitation. Maintaining the existing historic design, materials, and details of structures in the H-2 district is encouraged. Rehabilitative efforts shall include the use of materials that are compatible with the architectural style of the historic building (see article VII, Architectural style and scale, for guidance on specific historic styles and building materials traditionally found in Jonesboro.) 
a.  Roofs. 
1.  The existing pitch and shape of the roof shall be maintained. 
2.  The shape, style, and placement of historic dormers shall be maintained. 
3.  The addition of dormers to the front facade where none previously existed is prohibited. 
4.  Existing roof materials shall be replaced with the same type of historic material or with that which closely resembles the existing material. 
5.  Decorative brackets, cornices, and eaves shall be maintained. 
6.  Historic chimneys shall be maintained. 
7.  New chimneys shall use traditional design and materials, and their placement shall be appropriate for the architectural style of the structure. 
b.  Building materials. 
1.  Historic building materials shall be maintained. 
2.  Unpainted brick facades shall remain unpainted. 
3.  Damaged exterior materials shall be treated with materials that will not cause further deterioration, including the use of a historic mortar mix of an appropriate color when repointing brick. 
4.  Proper maintenance of all building materials shall adhere to the secretary of interior's standards for rehabilitation and other resources on file with the office of downtown development. 
c.  Building color. 
1.  Recommended color shades shall draw from the range of existing color shades and complement the color schemes that already exist in the district. Reference materials on appropriate color palettes will be available for review at the office downtown development at city hall. 
2.  Neon colors are prohibited. 
3.  Primary colors may be acceptable for trim or accents pending review and approval by the director of downtown development. 
4.  Color patterns shall be consistent with the architectural style of the structure and with the overall historic character of the district. 
d.  Foundations. 
1.  The original design and materials of the foundation, open pier foundation and the porch pier foundation shall be maintained. 
2.  Unpainted historic masonry foundations shall not be painted. 
3.  Concrete block shall not be used as a foundation material. 
e.  Details. 
1.  The addition of architectural details where none previously existed is prohibited. 
2.  Replacement of historic details shall be made with matching material, design, and scale versus stock details. 
3.  The removal of details from a structure is prohibited. 
f.  Lighting. 
1.  Lighting fixtures and wattage shall be compatible with the historic character of the structure and the district. 
2.  Lighting placement and wattage shall be configured to prevent glare and to prevent light trespass into residential uses. 
g.  Windows. 
1.  Historic windows and window arrangement shall be maintained. 
2.  Damaged portions of windows, or windows damaged beyond repair, shall be replaced with windows that are comparable in design, size, and materials versus stock windows. 
3.  Flat snap-in muntins, designed to resemble frames that hold panes of glass in a window, are discouraged. 
4.  New windows on side elevations shall be compatible with historic windows in terms of materials, size, and design. 
5.  Storm windows shall match the color of the window frame and obscure the window as little as possible. 
6.  The addition of windows where none previously existed is discouraged. 
7.  The addition of shutters that are not compatible with the window size and shape is discouraged. 
h.  Doors. 
1.  Historic doors and door placement shall be maintained. 
2.  Damaged portions of doors, or doors damaged beyond repair, shall be replaced with doors that are comparable in design, size, and materials versus stock doors. 
3.  New doors on side elevations shall be compatible with historic doors in terms of materials, size, and design. 
4.  Storm doors shall match the color of the doorframe and obscure the door as little as possible. 
5.  The addition of doors, sidelights, transoms, fanlights, or other decorative features where none previously existed is discouraged. 
i.  Porches. 
1.  The design, materials, roof supports and balustrades and roof shape of historic porches shall be maintained. 
2.  The addition of front porches where none previously existed is discouraged. 
3.  The addition of decorative elements, if desired, shall be consistent with the base architectural style of the structure. 
4.  Replacement of historic porch features shall be made with matching material, design, and scale versus stock features. 
5.  Porch floors and foundations shall not be replaced with slab concrete or brick. 
6.  The enclosure of front or side porches shall be prohibited. 
7.  The design and installation of ADA-compliant ramps onto a front porch shall seek to preserve the historic character of the buildings. Section 4.1.7 Accessible Buildings: Historic Preservation of the ADA Accessibility Guidelines, and resources of the office of downtown development, shall be used as resource guides. 
j.  Walls and fences. 
1.  Historic fencing and walls shall be maintained. 
2.  Materials and design of fencing and walls shall be appropriate to the dwelling and to the district. Examples of appropriate materials are wood for fencing and stone for retaining walls. The use of chain link fencing material is prohibited. 
k.  Walks and drives. 
1.  Historic walks and drives shall be maintained. 
2.  New walks and drives shall use traditional placement and materials that are appropriate to the dwelling and to the district. The use of gravel is prohibited. 
3.  Parking shall be located to the rear of the dwelling or to the side behind the facade line of the dwelling. 
l.  Other features. 
1.  Mechanical systems (including but not limited to air conditioning units and satellite dishes), recreational equipment (including but not limited to pools and semi-permanent play structures), and decks shall be placed to the rear of the property so as to minimize visibility from the public view. Any mechanical systems that must be located on the roof shall be placed to the rear of the roof. 
2.  Skylights shall be located to the rear of the roof and shall not be within public view. 
3.  Compatible fencing or vegetation shall be used to screen features that are located to the rear of the property. 
4.  Utility meters shall be placed unobtrusively. 
5.  For commercial or office-zoned properties in the district, dumpsters shall be placed to the rear of buildings and shall be screened from public view by appropriate fencing, vegetation or walls. 
(2)  New construction. New buildings shall be compatible with surrounding historic structures and shall contribute to the character to the area. Prevalent architectural styles in the district shall guide new development. (See article VII, Architectural style and scale, for guidance on specific historic styles and building materials traditionally found in Jonesboro.) 
a.  Scale and form. 
1.  New buildings shall be compatible with the existing scale and form of nearby historic homes in terms of foundation and story heights, roof height, shape and pitch, number of stories, width, and depth. 
2.  The maximum heated floor area of infill development shall not exceed 150 percent of the average heated floor area of single family detached dwellings located on the same street for a distance of 600 feet in either direction. 
3.  The maximum building height for infill development shall be determined by the maximum building height of single family detached dwellings located on the same street for a distance of 600 feet in either direction. 
b.  Materials and color. 
1.  The predominant exterior siding material or a modern material that creates a similar texture or appearance shall be used. 
2.  The use of brick is encouraged for chimneys. 
3.  Prohibited exterior materials include synthetic materials with a false wood grain, vinyl siding, brick veneer, concrete block, and the use of materials that do not complement the architectural or historic style of the structure. 
4.  Brick and paint colors shall be compatible with the style of the structure and with surrounding historic structures. 
5.  Neon colors are prohibited. 
6.  Primary colors may be acceptable for trim or accents pending review and approval by the director of downtown development. 
c.  Doors and windows. 
1.  Window and door placement, shape, and dimensions shall be compatible with the pattern on nearby historic structures. 
2.  Blank wall facades are discouraged. 
d.  Additions. 
1.  Additions shall be placed away from public view on the rear elevation or on a side elevation well behind the facade. 
2.  Additions shall not obscure the form, orientation, or symmetry of the original structure, nor shall they exceed the degree of ornamentation of the original structure. 
3.  Matching or compatible siding and roofing materials shall be used. 
4.  Matching or compatible windows and doors shall be used. 
5.  The removal of a significant portion of original materials to construct an addition is prohibited. 
e.  Accessory structures. 
1.  Historic accessory structures, or outbuildings, shall be maintained in accordance with guidelines for dwellings in the district. 
2.  New accessory structures (including but not limited to carports, garages, and storage sheds) shall be located behind the facade line of the dwelling. 
3.  The design, scale, placement, and materials of new structures within public view shall be compatible with those of the dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.13), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-104. - MX mixed use district. 
(a)  Purpose. MX districts may hereafter be established in accordance with the general procedures and requirements set forth in article XII, Amendments. Such areas are defined as mixed use districts for establishment of complementary groupings of residential, commercial and/or office uses. Such developments as may exist, or may have been previously approved and substantially comply with the intent of these regulations, may be rezoned to MX status and shall thereafter be subject to the regulations of the MX district. 
The intent of the MX district is to provide for establishment of such districts at appropriate locations as may be identified on the Future Land Use Map of the City of Jonesboro Comprehensive Plan and are adequately served by the transportation network, including the C-Tran Bus System, and in accordance with standards set forth herein. Uses within mixed use developments shall be integrated to create walkable settings rather than isolated on individual parcels characterizing such development as could occur by traditional zoning. The MX district affords densities that would not other wise be permitted, and in exchange for such density bonuses, architectural style and site design must yield superior public venues. Accordingly, the district mandates appropriately scaled and balanced residential, commercial and office uses located in a manner that minimizes vehicular traffic congestion by providing housing proximate to principal destinations. Convenient pedestrian networks, supported by such amenities as greenspace, trails and paths, furnishings, pedestrian scale lighting and water features are hallmarks of such developments. Site design shall also serve to minimize the role of automobiles by creating deck parking that features streetfront retail or service uses, courtyard parking located in the interior of parcels and other appropriate site designs. 
(b)  Development standards. Mixed use districts shall be controlled by the following development standards: 
(1)  Site designs and structures shall achieve horizontal and vertical mix of uses. 
(2)  Residential uses shall comprise a minimum of 25 percent of the total floor area of an MX district; similarly commercial uses shall also comprise a minimum of 25 percent of the total floor area of an MX district. 
(3)  Dwelling units shall not be located on "storefront," that is, the ground floor of any fronting a street. 
(4)  Ninety percent of all residential units within a MX district shall be owner-occupied units and such language shall be recorded with the declarations and covenants controlling the development. 
(5)  Minimum floor area for attached dwelling units shall be as follows: 
a.  One-bedroom units: 900 square feet 
b.  Two-bedroom units: 1,200 square feet 
c.  Three-bedroom units: 1,400 square feet 
(6)  Residential uses shall be located away from major streets and other noise generators such as waste disposal facilities and loading areas to preserve privacy and tranquility. 
(7)  Commercial and service uses shall be concentrated for maximum pedestrian convenience and easily accessible to residents of the development as well as employees and visitors. 
(8)  Minimum tract size shall be two acres. 
(9)  Building setbacks and separation and minimum lot area shall be as proposed and approved on the preliminary site plan. 
(10)  A transition from more intense uses as may be located in an MX district to surrounding districts shall be achieved through designs that avoid siting mid and high rise structures or surface parking at the periphery of such developments. Greenspace and low or medium density residential uses shall be situated along common boundaries with any adjacent low density residential uses. 
(11)  Landscape buffering may be used when non-residential uses abut residential uses at a common boundary in lieu of siting residential uses at the periphery of the development. Such buffer shall conform to planting standards of article XV and be a minimum of 15 feet in horizontal width; however, shall be increased in width a dimension of ten feet for each story proposed that is greater than the height of residential structures bordering the MX district. 
(12)  All outside storage areas shall be located in the rear yard and shall be screened by a solid fence, wall or evergreen landscaping each having a minimum height of eight feet. 
(13)  A maximum of 25 percent of the required parking area may front on a public right-of-ways. Site design shall serve to reduce the visibility of these areas and apparent size from public right-of-ways. 
(14)  Signs shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any adjacent residential district and oriented away from such districts. 
(c)  Permitted principal uses and structures. Uses permitted in the MX district are presented in section 86-204, Table of uses allowed by zoning district. 
(d)  Permitted accessory uses. Uses customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted principal uses and structures shall be permitted in this district and are presented in section 86-204, Table of uses allowed by zoning district. Devices used for electrical power generation, such as solar panels, wind generators and similar devices, are also allowed. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the MX District are presented in section 86-204, Table of uses allowed by zoning district. No building or structure height or mass greater than that of the Clayton County Courthouse shall be permitted. 
(f)  Residential density permitted. Residential density in mixed use structures shall not exceed 24 dwelling units per acre. Density for single family attached structures shall not exceed 12 dwelling units per acre and density for single family detached structures shall not exceed six dwelling units per acre. 
(g)  Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in Article XIII of this chapter. Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Residential uses: Two spaces per dwelling unit for single family detached and single family attached structures; 11/2 spaces per dwelling unit for dwellings in mixed use structures. 
(2)  Recreational establishments: One per 400 square feet of floor area. 
(3)  Restaurants: One per 100 square feet of floor area available to the public. 
(4)  Retail uses: One per 300 square feet of floor area available to the public. 
(5)  Office uses: One per 250 square feet of floor area. 
(6)  Accessory outdoor dining: One per 200 square feet of dining area. 
(h)  Site planning. In addition to the standards of review of the ordinance contained in article XII, the following criteria shall be used to evaluate the merits of proposals for MX district zoning. 
(1)  Compatibility of the MX district with surrounding context. MX districts may be appropriate at the margin of single family detached neighborhoods; however, the district is not contemplated for locations within such neighborhoods. Development standards in rendering the proposed development compatible with the context. 
(2)  Consistency with the comprehensive plan. The future land use map identifies appropriate locations for mixed use development. This document will guide the approval of any MX district application. 
(3)  Architectural style and quality. The MX district conveys site design and development intensity not available in traditional zoning districts. Architectural style and the quality of building materials are expected to be superior to projects that may not enjoy such development rights. Construction consistent with high-quality environments seen in the region's premier mixed use locales will be sought in the MX district. 
(4)  Integration of uses. Atlanta Regional Commission has defined mixed use as "a mix of uses is the practice of providing a number of uses in proximity to create lifestyle or transportation benefits through increasing the opportunities for walking, biking or using transit." The MX district is established to promote walkable developments where residential uses are incorporated with commercial uses in a manner that invites use of nearby and facilities and services. Designs and development scale that reinforce such integration are preferable to those that isolate residential uses from convenience services and employment opportunities. At the same time, retail and service establishments should be grouped for maximum pedestrian convenience in locations uninterrupted by residential or office occupancies. Such objectives may also be achieved by vertical separation of residential and office uses from retail and service areas to preserve the street level tradition of the latter uses. 
(5)  Appropriate relationships of uses. MX site plans shall provide for the safe, efficient, convenient and harmonious grouping of structures, uses, facilities and greenspace. Such provisions shall facilitate pedestrian travel among major destinations within and adjacent to the district with a minimum of conflicts with vehicles. 
(6)  Pedestrian and greenspace network. Pedestrian ways through buildings shall relate to a network of greenspaces reserved for pedestrian use. Interior and exterior pedestrian ways shall be scaled appropriately to the anticipated foot traffic volumes and form a convenient network linking major concentrations of uses within the district, and shall connect to C-Tran transit stops, both within and at the edge of the district. 
(7)  Streets, parking facilities and service areas. Streets, parking facilities and service areas shall be located and designed to segregate vehicles from pedestrian focal points and gathering areas. Such segregation may be horizontal, with vehicular areas grouped in logical locations or locations at edge of the MX district and adjacent to major streets, or achieved vertically in decks above the street level. 
(i)  Procedure for establishment of an MX district. Preliminary site plan, architecturals and project description. The owner or owners of the entire tract of land proposed to be included in the MX district shall file an application for rezoning. In addition to the City of Jonesboro rezoning application, the application shall consist of a preliminary site plan, architecturals and project description as described below; 10 copies of the application shall be submitted. 
(1)  Preliminary site plan. The boundaries of the tract, the computed area and the legal description thereof, the topography (two-foot interval) and other salient features of the tract by reference to a plat of survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor. The preliminary site plan shall contain the following additional information: 
a.  Location, type, height and floor area of all existing buildings and structures proposed to be retained or removed. 
b.  Approximate location of proposed buildings and structures and an indication of the use proposed for each building. 
NOTE: Broad categories of uses proposed, referencing the NAICS text, and identification of any uses proposed for prohibition, is also required. (Such information will be referenced by the city clerk in subsequent issuance of occupational tax permits throughout the life of the development). 
c.  Site access, interior streets and alleys, if any, as well as parking and loading areas. 
d.  Location and width of existing and proposed public rights-of-way, easements and water and drainage courses adjoining and within the tract. 
e.  Interior and exterior pedestrian ways and linkages to all destinations within and adjacent to the development. 
f.  Minimum standards for lot development, including lot area, building setbacks and building separation. 
g.  Dwelling unit density calculated by unit type. 
h.  Location of acreage planned as greenspace or recreation areas; calculation of impervious ratio. 
i.  Public transportation provisions (developments served by C-Tran) 
(2)  Architecturals. Full architectural plans are not required for rezoning to an MX district. Renderings, photos or other graphic depiction of the proposed structures sufficient to convey the architectural style, building mass, and exterior finish materials for all structures shall be submitted, together with the following information: 
a.  Maximum floor area and ratios designated for each use. 
b.  Minimum heated floor area for all dwelling units. 
c.  Proposed building heights. 
NOTE: Representations made at the time of rezoning as concerns the architectural information shall be referenced by the code enforcement officer in assessing the compliance of the full architectural plans. Plans that, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, depict styles, materials or building heights not encompassed in these representations shall not be approved. 
(3)  Project description. Written text describing the proposed development shall be submitted, including the following information: 
a.  Proposed uses, including broad categories of uses proposed, referencing the NAICS text, and identification of any uses proposed for prohibition. (Such information will be referenced by the city clerk in subsequent issuance of occupational tax permits throughout the life of the development) 
b.  A statement describing how integration of proposed uses will be achieved as well as other key provisions of subsection 86-102(a). 
c.  The character of development sought. 
d.  The relationship of the proposed development to the surrounding context, and approaches employed in site planning, including building and facility siting and buffering, and site access proposed to mitigate potentially adverse impacts. 
e.  Site planning criteria. 
(j)  Approval of an MX district. Approval of an application for an MX district shall convey to the applicant all rights associated with an approved preliminary plat. Subsequent to any required preliminary plat approval and all project improvements being installed, a final site plan shall be reviewed by mayor and council. If approved, construction shall be permitted in any portion of the MX district tract upon final plat approval by city council and issuance of building permits. The final site plan shall include all information contained on the preliminary site plan, but is not limited to, the following additional information: 
a.  Greenspace and recreation area provisions, active and passive. 
b.  Detailed landscaping plan, including any tree save proposed. 
c.  Information concerning interior and exterior pedestrian ways and linkages as to sidewalk widths and materials, protective measures such as speed tables and pedestrian and cyclists furnishings. 
d.  Detailed lighting plan, including intensity of all lighting and fixtures style of pedestrian scale lighting. 
e.  Detailed information concerning parking space quantity, size, parking for disabled individuals and loading areas. 
(k)  Expiration of zoning approval of an MX district. Approval of any MX district shall expire within six months of the date of adoption of the ordinance approving an amendment to the official zoning map should the applicant fail to file a final site plan that is complete, consistent with the preliminary site plan and responsive to any other conditions of zoning approval and thereby accepted by the city. Any zoning approval associated with such ordinance shall be deemed invalid and rendered of no force or effect. An extension of up to a maximum of 60 days may be granted at the sole discretion of mayor and council upon written request to the city manager documenting sound reasons for any failure to present a final site plan as described above. Such request must be received by the city manager 30 days prior to expiration of the zoning approval. 
(l)  MX district site plan amendments. Site plans may be amended pursuant to the same procedures and subject to the same limitations by which such plans were approved and amendments to the official zoning map adopted. Minor changes, such as adjustments to the location of structures and other improvements, and use intensity and residential density (not to exceed ten percent in either instance) may be approved by mayor and council in conjunction with consideration of the final site plan. District standards shall be as approved on the site plan submitted as a condition of zoning. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.14), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-105. - O-I office and institutional district. 
(a)  Purpose. The O-I office and institutional district is established to promote development of professional and business uses in park like settings. The O-I district is intended as a transitional district, buffering single family development in particular from encroachment of more intense non-residential uses. Proximity to a variety of residential districts is also intended to enhance economic opportunity for businesses and improve resident access to business services and institutions. In order to protect the desired character of the district, residential uses and more intense uses which may adversely affect the character of this district, such as those reserved for Jonesboro's commercial and industrial, are prohibited. In a similar manner, the O-I district is limited to professional and institutional uses, and does not encompass activities involving the retail sale, storage or processing of merchandise. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet (one acre) 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 80 feet 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 20 feet 
(4)  Minimum side yard: 20 feet, when adjoining a residential use, otherwise zero 
(5)  Minimum rear yard: 30 feet, when adjoining a residential use, otherwise zero 
(6)  Maximum building floor area per story: 4,000 square feet 
(7)  Maximum building height: 40 feet 
(8)  Minimum building separation: per building codes 
(9)  Maximum lot coverage: 60 percent 
(c)  Design standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in an O-I district shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in article XIII of this chapter. 
(2)  Buffers shall be provided as specified in article XV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.15), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-106. - C-1 neighborhood commercial district. 
(a)  Purpose. The C-1 neighborhood commercial district is established to promote development of limited commercial and service establishments in close proximity to the neighborhoods they are intended to serve. Beyond limiting the range of permitted uses and the scale of individual buildings, the extent of the neighborhood commercial district itself is to be limited to ensure that consumer demand is not generated from outside the immediate neighborhood and that commercial encroachment into the neighborhood does not occur. Parking standards are relaxed to encourage walking, and pedestrian amenities are required to create and enhance a neighborhood atmosphere. The C-1 district is envisioned as a destination environment in which shoppers may access a variety of goods and services, particularly entertainment services such as restaurants. Uses that foster "one-stop" shopping such as auto parts stores are prohibited as are site plans that feature extensive parking along the right-of-way. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet (one acre) 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 80 feet 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 20 feet, when adjoining a residential use, otherwise zero 
(4)  Minimum side yard: 25 feet, when adjoining a residential use, otherwise zero 
(5)  Minimum rear yard: 35 feet, when adjoining a residential use, otherwise zero 
(6)  Maximum building floor area per story: 4,000 square feet 
(7)  Maximum building height: 40 feet 
(8)  Minimum building separation: per building codes 
(9)  Maximum lot coverage: 70 percent 
(c)  Design standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in a C-1 district shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in article XIII of this chapter. 
(2)  Buffers shall be provided as specified in article XV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.16), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-107. - C-2 highway commercial district. 
(a)  Purpose. The C-2 highway commercial district is established to accommodate intense retail and service commercial uses along Jonesboro's arterial highways. A broad range of such uses anticipates traffic from surrounding areas traveling through the city and affords a broad segment of the business community access to the large customer volumes associated with such locations. The automobile is the principal means of transit for shoppers in this district, and convenient on-premises parking is a primary concern. Given the value of arterial locations intended to capture heavy retail traffic, such industrial uses as manufacturing, distribution and processing are prohibited in order to reserve high visibility and enhanced access locations for highway commercial uses. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet (one acre) 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 40 feet 
(4)  Minimum side yard: 30 feet, when adjoining a residential use, otherwise zero 
(5)  Minimum rear yard: 40 feet, when adjoining a residential use, otherwise zero 
(6)  Maximum building floor area per story: none 
(7)  Maximum building height: 40 feet 
(8)  Minimum building separation: per building codes 
(9)  Maximum lot coverage: 80 percent 
(c)  Design standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in a C-2 district shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in article XIII of this chapter. 
(2)  Buffers shall be provided as specified in article XV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.17), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-108. - M-1 light industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose. The M-1 light industrial district is established to provide for manufacturing uses having a minimal impact on the environment and surrounding land uses. The district is intended to attract a complementary mix of assembly, fabricating, distribution and warehousing, service and wholesale operations. A goal of the light industrial district is to provide architectural and site design standards that encourage development of such uses in a park setting; office components are encouraged through development incentives. 
Uses that require significant infrastructure and transportation systems or substantial outdoor storage; create products in large unit sizes; utilize heavy equipment and massive production facilities; or are associated with hazardous materials, significant noise, heat, vibration or refuse generation are prohibited. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 87,120 square feet (two acres) 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 40 feet 1 
(4)  Minimum side yard: 50 feet, when adjoining a residential use, otherwise zero 
(5)  Minimum rear yard: 50 feet, when adjoining a residential use, otherwise zero 
(6)  Maximum building floor area per story: none 
(7)  Maximum building height: 20 feet 2 
(8)  Minimum building separation: per building codes 
(9)  Maximum lot coverage: 80 percent 
1 Front yard may be reduced to 25 feet when 25 percent of the floor area located at the front of the building is designated as office use. 
2 Building height may be increased to 40 feet when 25 percent of the floor area located at the front of the building is designated as office use. 
(c)  Design standards. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, uses permitted in an M-1 district shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in article XIII of this chapter. 
(2)  Buffers shall be provided as specified in article XV of this chapter. 
New Development Standards 
District Minimum Lot Size Area regulations Floor Area Height Area Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Minimum Maximum R-2 single family residential district 1/2-acre (21,780 sf) 100 feet 40 feet 15 feet 35 feet 1,600 square feet 35 feet R-4 single family residential district 1/4-acre (10,480 sf) 75 feet 30 feet 12 feet 25 feet 1,400 square feet 35 feet R-C cluster residential district 4,000 sf 40 feet 20 feet 7 feet 20 feet 1,400 square feet 35 feet R-A single family attached residential district 1, 2 2 acres/tract 
2,400 sf/unit 150 feet 20 feet 25 feet 35 feet 1,200 square feet 35 feet R-M multifamily residential district 2 2 acres/tract 150 feet 25 feet 25 feet 35 feet 3 bdrm 1,400 sf 
2 bdrm 1,200 sf 
1 bdrm 900 sf 40 feet H-1 historic district NONE 20 feet 0 feet 0 feet 0 feet Offices: 1,000 sf 
Max: 3,500 sf 3 stories/35 feet; 2 story minimum H-2 historic district NONE 50 feet See Sec. 5.13.10 5 feet 20 feet No minimum or maximum 3 stories/35 feet; 2 story min MX mixed use district 5 acre 200 feet N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A O-I office and institutional district 1 acre 80 feet 20 feet 0 feet 0 feet N/A 40 feet C-1 neighborhood commercial district 1 acre 80 feet 0 feet 0 feet 0 feet N/A 40 feet C-2 highway commercial district 1 acre 100 feet 40 feet 0 feet 0 feet N/A 40 feet M-1 light industrial district 2 acre 100 feet 40 feet 0 feet 0 feet N/A 20 feet  
1 A maximum of 64 units are permitted in a single development in the R-A District. 
2 A maximum of eight units per building is permitted in the R-A District; a maximum of 12 units per building is permitted in the R-M District. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.18), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-109. - Tara Boulevard Overlay. 
(a)  Tara Boulevard Overlay Districts-Purpose. The purpose of the Tara Boulevard Overlay District is to implement the policies of the mayor and council as adopted in the City of Jonesboro Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Intent. The intent of the Tara Boulevard Overlay District is to: 
(1)  Enhance the quality and compatibility of development in the overlay district; 
(2)  Encourage appropriate redevelopment of vacant and underutilized properties; 
(3)  Create developments that are aesthetically pleasing, architecturally distinct and environmentally sustainable; 
(4)  Encourage a balance of uses for living, working, shopping and recreating that are conveniently accessible; 
(5)  Promote safe and efficient movement for all persons using various travel modes within the overlay district including motorized vehicles, bicycles, walking and public transit; 
(6)  Encourage innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, open space, architectural design and public amenities; 
(7)  Establish consistent and relational design standards for public improvements and private property development within the overlay in order to create a distinctive visual quality for the designated overlay district; 
(8)  Protect and enhance the value of properties in the overlay by ensuring that surrounding properties are developed harmoniously and consistently; and 
(9)  Promote tourism within the overlay district by creating distinct and aesthetically pleasing commercial corridors. 
(c)  Application of the Tara Boulevard Overlay District. 
(1)  Overlay districts are supplemental to the underlying zoning districts established in the City of Jonesboro Zoning Ordinance ("zoning ordinance") that governs all properties within the city limits of Jonesboro. These overlay district regulations shall be overlaid upon areas mapped as the Tara Boulevard Overlay District in this article and shall be imposed in addition to stated underlying zoning regulations. 
(2)  The standards and requirements of the overlay district shall govern in any case where those standards and requirements conflict with those of the underlying zoning district or other provisions of the zoning ordinance, including but not limited to the subdivision regulations. 
(3)  Any parcel of land that is wholly or partly within the boundary shall be included in the Tara Boulevard Overlay District. 
(4)  The provisions of the Tara Boulevard Overlay District shall apply to all applications for property rezonings, conditional use permits and site development plans, construction plans, preliminary plats, final plats and building permits for all property and rights-of-way within the boundaries of the Tara Boulevard Overlay District. 
(5)  Uses permitted in the Tara Boulevard Overlay District shall be as allowed in the underlying zoning district, and any use prohibited or subject to conditional use approval in the underlying zoning district is similarly prohibited or subject to conditional use approval in the overlay, except as specified below: 
a.  The following uses shall be prohibited in the Tara Boulevard Overlay District: 
1.  522298 Pawn shop, including title pawn, both as defined in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130(5); 
2.  522390 Check cashing services in which such services are the primary use of the property; 
3.  812990 Bail bonding; 
4.  561320 Temporary help services; 
5.  561491 Repossession services; 
6.  44112 Used car dealers; 
7.  48841 Motor vehicle towing and storage; 
8.  81219 Tattoo parlors; 
9.  713990 Billiard halls; 
10.  Adult entertainment; 
11.  5321 Automotive equipment rental and leasing; 
12.  Palm readers and astrologers; 
13.  Modeling agencies; 
14.  Massage parlors; 
15.  Hypnotists; 
16.  Video game parlors; 
17.  Flea markets. 
(6)  All state and county road and utility projects shall be exempt from all requirements of the overlay district. 
(d)  Overlay District Boundary Map. 
(1)  Boundary map. The boundaries of the Tara Boulevard Overlay District as shown on the official zoning map, attached hereto, are hereby incorporated into section 86-73 of the zoning ordinance and made part of this overlay district. A copy of the official zoning map depicting the Tara Boulevard Overlay District is available for inspection during normal business hours in the office of city clerk. This map, dated February 24, 2014 and prepared by Dr. William H. Bailey, designates the area and boundaries of the Tara Boulevard Overlay District. 
(2)  Map amendment. No change in the boundary of the overlay district shall be authorized except by the mayor and council pursuant to procedures in article XII, Amendments of the zoning ordinance. 
(e)  Procedures. 
(1)  Procedures for zoning amendment process. Zoning amendment, a rezoning of property, procedures for property located within the overlay district shall be as provided in article XII, Amendments of the zoning ordinance with the following modifications: 
a.  Multi-modal access plan. An access plan shall be submitted showing connections from the system of streets, alleys, sidewalks and multi-use paths shown in the Clayton County conceptual transportation plan to the entrances of all occupied buildings within the property proposed for rezoning. Convenient pedestrian connections from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including designated pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development, shall be indicated in the multi-modal access plan. Where an existing or planned public transportation station or stop is located within 1,000 feet of any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall indicate a safe and convenient means for pedestrians traveling from such station or stop to the entrance of buildings on the subject property. Where an existing or planned multi-use path is located within 1,320 feet from any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall indicate how safe, continuous and convenient bicycle and pedestrian access will be provided to the subject property. The method of measurement shall be the straight line distance measured from the entrance of the station or stop. 
b.  Shared parking analysis. A shared parking analysis for use of shared parking shall be submitted, if applicable. Shared parking shall meet the requirements of the overlay design standards listed in section 4.18 of the [county] zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Procedures for review and approval of land development requiring subdivision. Land development within the Tara Boulevard Overlay District that requires subdivision shall be as accomplished as provided in the subdivision ordinance of the City of Jonesboro, chapter 62, with the following modifications. 
a.  Multi-modal access plan. An access plan shall be submitted showing connections from the system of streets, alleys, sidewalks and multi-use paths shown in the Clayton County conceptual transportation plan to the entrances of all occupied buildings within the subject property. Convenient pedestrian ways shall be shown from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including designated pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. Where an existing or planned public transportation station or stop is within 1,000 feet (straight line distance measured from the entrance of the station or stop) from any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how pedestrians may travel safely and conveniently from such station or stop to the entrance of buildings on the subject property. Where an existing or planned multi-use path is located within 1,320 feet (straight line distance) from any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how safe, continuous and convenient bicycle and pedestrian access may be provided to the subject property. 
b.  Traffic impact study. A traffic impact study shall be submitted for residential developments with more than 120 dwelling units and for any non-residential developments deemed likely by the department of transportation and development to generate 100 or more p.m. peak hour trips. The traffic impact study shall follow procedures established by the most recent edition of the ITE Transportation Impact Analysis for Site Development. 
c.  Shared parking analysis. A shared parking analysis for use of shared parking shall be submitted, if applicable. Shared parking shall meet the requirements of the Overlay design standards listed in section 4.18 of the [county] zoning ordinance. 
d.  Sign master plan. For all multi-tenant or multi-owner developments other than single-family residential subdivisions, a sign master plan shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. The sign master plan shall contain the following information on the preliminary plat: 
1.  The location, type, height and area of all proposed and existing signs. 
2.  A computation of the maximum permitted number of signs, maximum permitted total sign area, and maximum permitted area for individual signs permitted under chapter 52, Signs. 
(3)  Procedures for review and approval of land development not requiring a subdivision. Land development within the overlay district that does not require subdivision shall be as provided in article VIII, Site plan procedures and requirements, with the following modifications. However, single-family lots of record are exempt from these requirements, pursuant to section 4.25 [of the county zoning ordinance], below. 
(f)  Public improvement standards. Public rights-of-way within the overlay district shall be improved in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Street standards. Street standards shall be designed in accordance with the department of transportation and development's land disturbance and right-of-way construction guidelines. 
(2)  Multi-use paths. 
a.  No motorized vehicles 
b.  Maximum grade of six percent. 
c.  20 feet wide dedicated easement. 
d.  12 feet wide and concrete construction. 
e.  Shoulder width variable, based on topography. 
f.  Five feet flare at street intersections, with ramp to street and removable bollards spaced six feet apart to block motorized traffic. The sight visibility standards of the City of Jonesboro Thoroughfare Plan must be maintained. 
g.  Multi-use paths shall be located outside all required buffers, except that a required buffer may contain one or more crossings of a multi-use path provided that such crossing may be characterized as follows: 
1.  Part of an approved multi-modal access plan required in section 4.11 of the [county] zoning ordinance. 
2.  Approximately perpendicular to the required buffer. 
3.  Designed to have the least disruption to the intended screening provided by the required buffer. 
h.  Multi-use paths shall be required in order to facilitate pedestrian access from residential and non-residential developments to schools, parks, playgrounds and other city and county amenities via the multi-use path system. If, at the time of conceptual approval, there are no completed multi-use paths to which the multi-use paths of the proposed developer can be linked, the developer may, at its option, and only with the approval of the zoning administrator, in lieu of installing the multi-use paths, dedicate the easements and deposit a cash payment with the mayor and council equal to the cost of installing the multi-use paths. This cost shall be determined by the city engineer. Such deposit shall be placed in a multi-use path construction fund to be established by the mayor and council. When the multi-use system is extended to the boundary of the development, the mayor and council will use the deposit to construct the multi-use paths in the development. 
(3)  Sidewalks. 
a.  All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet along all roads in residentially zoned or used areas and six feet in all commercial, industrial and mixed use development areas as defined within the department of transportation and development's land disturbance and right-of-way construction guidelines. 
b.  Continuous sidewalks must be provided to connect building entrances to required sidewalks along street frontage. 
(4)  Street trees. 
a.  Street trees shall be provided in medians and required landscaped strips adjacent to all streets rights-of-way. 
b.  Landscape strips along any collector and arterial roadways shall be a minimum of ten feet wide. 
c.  Street trees shall have a minimum two and one-half-inch caliper and 12 feet in height at the time of planting and be warranted by the developer for a period of two years from the date of acceptance by the City of Jonesboro. 
d.  Street trees shall be spaced a minimum of 30 feet on center. 
e.  Spacing of street trees and streetlight standards may be adjusted to account for driveways, utility poles, fire hydrants and other obstructions and to provide adequate visual clearance for intersections, driveways and traffic control devices. 
f.  No street tree or streetlight standard shall be placed within ten feet of another tree, streetlight standard, utility pole or within five feet of a fire hydrant. 
g.  Appropriate street tree species include: 
1.  European hornbeam. 
2.  Red maple. 
3.  Hedge maple. 
4.  Amur maple. 
5.  Willow oak. 
6.  Ginkgo. 
7.  Honeylocust (hornless variety/cultivar). 
8.  Foster's holly. 
9.  Savannah holly. 
10.  Chinese juniper. 
11.  Eastern red cedar. 
12.  Golden raintree. 
13.  Southern magnolia. 
14.  Sweetbay magnolia. 
15.  Sawtooth oak. 
16.  English oak. 
17.  Littleleaf linden. 
18.  Lacebark elm. 
19.  Japanese zelkova. 
h.  Other trees having similar characteristics to the above species and suitable for urban pedestrian environments, upon approval of the city arborist or his/her designee. 
1.  No more than 25 percent of the total number of the trees installed may be of any one genus. 
(5)  Landscaping. 
a.  Medians and landscaped strips shall be planted with grass and a variety of low, hardy shrubbery and flowering plants, and/or flowering trees with mulched beds. Areas of exposed soil shall not be allowed. Landscaping shall be approved by the city arborist or his/her designees. 
b.  Maintenance. All landscape materials required by this article or other article of the zoning ordinance shall be maintained by the property owner or property owners' association. Such maintenance shall maintain landscape materials in a healthy, neat and orderly manner, free of litter and debris. Landscape materials that do not survive or that, in the opinion of the city arborist or his/her designee are diseased, shall be replaced by the property owner or property owners' association. This maintenance schedule shall be perpetual. 
(6)  Buffer. 
a.  Where a lot on the external boundary of the Tara Boulevard Overlay District adjoins any property zoned in any residential zoning classification or in residential use, a buffer not less than 50 feet wide shall be provided. The buffer may be maintained in a natural state or landscaped so as to maintain an effective visual screen. 
b.  Where a lot on the external boundary of the Tara Boulevard Overlay District adjoins the boundary of any property outside the delineated overlay district that is zoned for any non-residential zoning classification and/or non-residential use, a buffer shall be planted as identified within article XV, Landscaping and buffers. 
c.  Said buffer shall not be paved and shall not be used for parking, loading, storage or any other use, except where necessary to grade or modify a portion of the buffer for installation of utilities necessitated by the development. Stormwater detention ponds shall not be located within a buffer. No trees, other than dead or diseased trees, shall be removed from a buffer; additional trees and plant material may be added to the buffer. 
(7)  Street and pedestrian lighting. 
a.  Streetlights of a decorative design, consistent with Clayton County Department of Transportation and Development standards shall be provided on all roadways. 
b.  Additional lighting of a decorative design approved by the zoning administrator shall be provided for pedestrians and cyclists along all public streets and multi-use trails. These lights shall be a maximum of 15 feet in height with average spacing not to exceed 40 feet. When design standards call for pedestrian lighting in proximity to streetlights required in this subsection, a streetlight may substitute for pedestrian lighting that would otherwise be required at approximately the same location. 
(8)  Underground utilities. 
a.  Utilities along public streets must be placed underground for all new construction and redevelopment. 
b.  All utilities except for major electric transmission lines and substations are required to be placed underground within a development except where the zoning administrator determines that underground utilities are not feasible due to pre-existing physical conditions, such as conflicting underground structures or utilities, shallow rock, high water table or other similar geologic or hydrologic conditions. 
(g)  Development standards. 
(1)  Property development standards. Property within the Tara Boulevard Overlay District shall be developed in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Density. Maximum permitted density shall be as provided in the underlying zoning district, except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection. 
b.  Density and height bonus. Provided all requirements within this article are met, the developer of the property shall be entitled to additional intensity of use for uses authorized in the applicable zoning district and in accordance with the following tables: 
Zoning District Bonus Per Acre Dedicated & Constructed Height Bonus (over base height) (O-I) Office and Institutional District 21,000 square feet of any authorized use +25 feet (C-2) Highway Commercial District 7,000 square feet of any authorized use +18 feet (MX) Mixed Use District 4 additional dwelling units per acre +18 feet  
(2)  Any property abutting a residentially zoned district or a residential use shall have a maximum building height no greater than 35 feet for any structure located within 40 feet of the buffer to ensure transition of the height, bulk and density of structures within the Tara Boulevard Overlay District and the properties adjacent to the overlay boundary. This requirement shall apply to the entire structure if any portion encroaches into the 40-foot zone. 
(h)  Access management standards. Access management standards shall be designed and constructed in accordance with section 44-160, Curb cuts and access specifications, with the following modifications. 
    Vehicular access points. Minimum required points of access shall be constructed in accordance with the Table of Vehicular Access Points listed below: 
Type of Development Minimum Number of Curb Cuts on Public Streets Residential, < 100 units 1 Residential, 100 units or more 2 Non-residential, less than 50 parking spaces 1 Non-residential, 50-299 required parking spaces 2 Non-residential, 300-999 required parking spaces 3 Non-residential, 1,000 or more required parking spaces 4 or more  
(i)  Lot standards. District standards as identified within article V, District standards and permitted uses of the underlying zoning district shall govern, subject to the following modifications. 
(1)  Lot width. The minimum lot width for commercial property shall be 100 feet at the right-of-way line. 
a.  Reduced front setbacks. For mixed use properties in the mixed use district, the front yard setbacks may be reduced from the underlying zoning district dimensions to zero feet. 
b.  Reduced side setbacks. Setbacks may vary from the underlying zoning district dimensions, provided that 15 feet exists between the exterior walls of buildings located interior to the same lot. 
(j)  Open space standards. Open space requirements of the underlying zoning districts shall govern the percentage of open space required, subject to the following modifications. 
(1)  Categories of open space. Open space required in the designated overlay district shall be held under unitary ownership or control and shall consist of any of the following three categories of land: 
a.  Primary conservation area. This category includes streams; wetlands designated by the national wetlands inventory; 100-year floodplain, as identified on federal insurance rate maps; steep slopes exceeding 25 percent; areas of exposed rock; and private cemeteries and burial grounds. These areas shall be left in a natural and undisturbed state, except for the fewest possible perpendicular crossings of essential access roads and utility lines. 
b.  Secondary conservation area. This category includes land in water supply watersheds; aquifer recharge areas identified in the City of Jonesboro Comprehensive Plan; riparian and wetland buffers that are over 25 feet in width; significant habitat areas, as identified in the City of Jonesboro Comprehensive Plan; areas containing archaeologically or historically significant structures or sites, as identified in the City of Jonesboro Comprehensive Plan; and related contextual areas, soils unsuitable for septic tanks, prime agricultural soils, mature hardwood forest, meadows, farm fields, pastures and other areas with scenic views. 
c.  Outdoor recreation area. This category includes greenways, trails, bikeways, paths, tennis courts, ball fields, playfields, courts, golf courses, swimming pools, clubhouses, bicycle facilities, equestrian facilities, beaches, docks, seating areas, amphitheaters, stages, band shells, community buildings, fountains, plazas, patios, decks, lawns, picnic shelters and picnic areas, landscaping and other land containing outdoor recreation structures and facilities. Lakes and ponds are allowed in outdoor recreation areas, but their surface area shall not be counted as open space. 
(2)  Impervious areas. Parking lots, drives, walks, buildings and other impervious surfaces may be included in required open space, provided that they constitute no more than ten percent of the total required open space. 
(3)  Accessibility of open space. Open space shall be designed and located for the convenient access and enjoyment of all users of the property. Access to open space shall be within 1,000 feet of all occupied buildings in the development. All occupied buildings shall be connected to the open space by improved pathways or sidewalks. 
(4)  Contiguous open space. Not less than 50 percent of required open space shall be in a contiguous tract. 
(5)  Interconnected open space network. It is the intent of this section that the protected conservation areas, open spaces, greenways, bikeways, trails, sidewalks and outdoor recreation areas within a development that provides open space be continuous with compatible areas containing similar features on abutting property. The design of developments shall provide for maximum connections, providing pedestrian and bike access to off-site and on-site attractions such as public trails, paths, parks, and wildlife refuges; public facilities such as community centers, schools, libraries, fire and police stations, senior centers, railroad right-of-way, and utility easements; and institutions such as universities, churches, museums and other cultural facilities. 
(6)  Ownership, maintenance, and control of open space. Common open space within a development shall be held in unitary ownership or control and perpetually administered and maintained by any of the following methods, either individually or in combination, and subject to approval by the city: 
a.  Fee-simple dedication. Open space or common areas within developments may be offered for dedication to the public at the time of application. Dedication shall take the form of a fee simple ownership and be accepted by the mayor and council. The city may, but shall not be required to, accept undivided open space, provided that: 
1.  The size, location, type of development, cost of development or maintenance of such open space or common area or the availability of public open space would make public use desirable or necessary. 
2.  Such land is accessible to the public. 
3.  No cost shall be incurred by the city. 
4.  The developer conveys to the city a copy of the deed of conveyance and a title certificate or, at the request of the zoning administrator, a commitment for a policy of title insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia assuring unencumbered title for all lands proposed to be conveyed to the city, other appropriate governmental agency or other organization, including a nonprofit organization. 
b.  Property owners association. The undivided open space and associated facilities may be held in common ownership in perpetuity by a property owners' association established in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia. The association shall be formed and operated under the following additional provisions: 
1.  The developer shall provide a description of the association, including its bylaws and methods for maintaining open space. 
2.  The association shall be organized by the developer and shall be operated by the developer until the sale of two-thirds of the lots within the development. 
3.  Membership in the association is mandatory for all purchasers of property and their successors. 
4.  The association shall be responsible for perpetual maintenance of insurance and taxes on undivided open space, enforceable by liens placed by the city or any homeowner on the association. 
c.  Private conservation organization. The owner of open space may transfer casements to a private, non-profit organization among whose purposes it is to perpetually conserve open space, provided that: 
1.  The organization is a conservation organization with perpetual existence. 
2.  The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper reversion or retransfer, in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions. 
3.  A perpetual maintenance agreement acceptable to the city is entered into by the developer and the organization subject to the provisions of the subdivision regulations. 
4.  Prior to dedication or conveyance of open space, the following documents shall be submitted to and approved by the city and such approval shall be obtained before any final plat is recorded or final site plan is approved. Such documents, once approved, shall become part of the recorded subdivision plat or approved site plan. 
i.  Specification of the ownership of the common open space. 
ii.  The articles of incorporation or other organizational documentation for the nonprofit organization. 
iii.  The bylaws of the non-profit organization. The covenants or restrictions related to the use of common property, including the system and amounts of assessments for perpetuation and maintenance. 
iv.  The covenants or restrictions related to the use of common property, including the system and amounts of assessments for perpetuation and maintenance. 
v.  A document granting the right-of-entry upon such common property to the city law enforcement officers, rescue squad personnel and fire fighting personnel while in the pursuit of their duties, and, in the case of private streets and common driveways, permitting the enforcement of cleared emergency vehicle access. 
vi.  A specification of methods of maintenance, responsibilities of maintenance, and a recommended time schedule for the maintenance of major facilities, including streets, street signs, pools, sidewalks, parking areas and buildings. 
vii.  A guarantee that any association formed to own and maintain open space will not be dissolved without notice to the city. 
viii.  A copy of the proposed notice that will be given to prospective buyers regarding the organization, assessments and fiscal program. 
ix.  A specification of compulsory membership and compulsory assessment provisions. 
(7)  Liens by the City of Jonesboro. In the event that the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city reserves the right to seek a court order allowing it to enter the property, take corrective action, and receive a judgment for the costs of corrective action as well as attorney's fees for bringing the action. 
(k)  Architectural standards. The following architectural standards shall apply: 
(1)  Minimum facade height. A minimum facade height of 18 feet shall be maintained on arterial and collector roadways. 
(2)  Street orientation. Principal building entrances shall be oriented to public streets wherever possible. When approved by the zoning administrator, a principal building entrance may be oriented to a side yard provided said entrance is not more than 100 feet from the right-of-way of an adjacent street and directly connected to the adjacent street frontage by a continuous sidewalk not less than five feet in width. 
(3)  Building materials. Buildings materials for all exterior wall facades shall be constructed of brick, stone, textured concrete masonry units, stucco, or glass. Single-family dwelling facades shall be constructed with brick, stone, stucco, cement fiber board, wood siding or similar material approved by the zoning administrator. 
(4)  Color. All materials shall be earth-tone in color, as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(5)  Prohibited materials. Metal siding, vinyl siding, metal canopies and smooth faced concrete masonry units are prohibited. 
(6)  Exceptions. Vinyl products shall only be used for soffits, eaves, and fascia of residential structures. 
(7)  Customer entrances for non-residential uses. All customer entrances located along the front façade, shall feature a combination of three or more of the following features: 
a.  Canopies and porticos. 
b.  Overhangs. 
c.  Recesses or projections. 
d.  Arcades. 
e.  Raised, corniced parapets. 
f.  Peaked roof forms. 
g.  Arches. 
h.  Display windows. 
i.  Architectural details, such as tile work and moldings which are incorporated into the building structure and design. 
(8)  Single-family residential. Each single-family attached and/or detached dwelling unit shall utilize at least four of the following architectural design features: 
a.  Dormers. 
b.  Bay or bow windows. 
c.  Garage setback at least 20 feet behind the facade of the principal structure. 
d.  Side- or rear-entry garage. 
e.  Covered porch entry (covered front porch). 
f.  Transoms and sidelights. 
g.  Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum two feet). 
h.  A roof with a pitch greater than 8:12 and a minimum overhang of 12 inches on all sides. 
i.  Columns, pillars, or posts on facade. 
j.  Shutters and other window decorations. 
k.  Arched or Palladian windows. 
l.  Hip and gable roof lines. 
(9)  Accessory structures. Building materials, architectural features and colors of exterior finishes of accessory structures shall be consistent with the principal structure. 
(10)  Massing and modulation. The massing of building facades oriented to public streets shall incorporate either modulation, defined here as a wave in the exterior wall, with horizontal breaks at least every 100 feet. Front facade design shall provide varying wall offsets and other architectural features to create horizontal (wall) and vertical building articulation. 
(11)  Fenestration. At least 40 percent of non-residential facades facing arterial and collector roadways must be clear glass. 
(12)  Roof features. Rooflines shall incorporate roof features (extensions, and/or projections such as a gable, parapet, dormers or others) that achieve visual interest through variation of the roofline. These features shall conform to the following specifications: 
a.  Roof features shall not exceed the average height of the supporting walls. 
b.  The average height of parapets shall not exceed 15 percent of the height of the supporting wall. Parapets shall feature three dimensional cornice treatments. 
c.  Cornices shall have perceptible projection or overhanging eaves that extend past the supporting walls. 
d.  The roof pitch of sloped roofs shall be a minimum of 4:12 (vertical to horizontal). 
(13)  Rooftop equipment. All rooftop equipment shall be screened from public view by parapets, dormers or other screens. 
(14)  Fencing. Chain link fencing shall not be visible from any public street. 
(l)  Parking standards. Off-street parking shall be required as in article XIII, Parking, loading and interior circulation of the zoning ordinance, except as provided below. 
(1)  Location. No more than 50 percent of the required number of parking spaces for a non-residential zoning district and/or use shall be located in the front yard. 
(2)  Screening. Where a parking lot is adjacent to a street or public right-of-way, the parking lot shall be screened from the right-of-way by a minimum landscape strip of ten feet wide having a variety of hardy shrubbery, flowering plants, and flowering/shade trees, as approved by the city arborist, or his/her designee. 
(3)  Lighting. Parking lots with more than 25 spaces must be illuminated. Lighting fixtures must minimize the diffusion of light to other properties in accordance with section 44-161, Street lighting, with the following modifications: 
a.  All lighting poles and fixtures shall be decorative, as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(4)  Bicycle parking. All uses that are required to provide off-street parking spaces for motorized vehicles shall also provide bicycle parking space. Uses that require up to 25 off-street parking spaces for motorized vehicles shall provide at least one bicycle space, plus a minimum of one more bicycle space for each additional 50 parking spaces required for motorized vehicles. 
(5)  Shared parking. The following standards shall apply for shared parking. 
a.  The zoning administrator may approve a reduction of up to 25 percent in the number of parking spaces required for a specific use where inter-parcel access is provided and a shared parking analysis, approved by the zoning administrator, demonstrates that adequate parking will be provided. 
b.  A shared parking calculation projection applying the table below shall be provided that demonstrates that each use will have adequate parking provisions at all times. The process for determining the minimum parking requirements for a mixed use development or for contiguous properties containing multiple uses is: 
1.  Determine the minimum number of parking spaces required for each use category from article XIII, Parking, loading and interior circulation of the zoning ordinance. 
2.  Multiply each parking requirement by the corresponding percentage for each of the time periods shown on the table below. 
3.  Total the number of parking spaces for each of the time periods (add together the numbers in each column). 
4.  The largest column total is the minimum shared parking requirement for the development or collectively for the contiguous properties. 
5.  In no case shall parking spaces that are farther than 1,000 feet from a building entrance be allowed to satisfy off street parking requirements for a use or be counted towards shared parking requirements. 
c.  The combined parking requirements for two or more uses participating in a cooperative parking arrangement may be partially reduced by the zoning administrator, provided that the uses will not conflict in time of operation or need for the parking spaces and provided that the parking needs of each use at a given time of day may be adequately met through the parking arrangements. 
Use Weekdays Weekends Daytime 6:00 AM to 5:00 PM Evening 5:00 PM to 1:00 AM Daytime 6:00 AMto 5:00 PM Evening 5:00 PM to 1:00 AM Office 100% 10% 20% 5% Retail 100% 10% 20% 5% Hotel 100% 10% 20% 5% Restaurant 100% 10% 20% 5% Entertainment 100% 10% 20% 5% Place of Worship 100% 10% 20% 5%  
(m)  Parking lot landscaping standards. 
(1)  Parking lot landscaping shall be required as in article XV, Landscaping and buffers, of the zoning ordinance, except as provided below. 
(2)  Trees shall be distributed evenly throughout the parking area. In parking areas, islands shall be located every 12 spaces. 
(n)  Loading standards. 
(1)  Off-street loading shall be required as in article XIII, Parking, loading and interior circulation, of the zoning ordinance, except as provided below. 
(2)  Off-street loading shall be limited to the area between the rear of the principal structure and the rear lot setback line, or between the side of the principal building and the side lot setback line. 
(o)  Dumpster standards. Dumpster and other refuse areas shall be required as in section 54-60 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(p)  Service station standards. Gasoline pump islands shall be separated from abutting residential property by a minimum 25 feet wide landscaped buffer and an opaque fence or wall that is a minimum of six feet in height. See section 86-454 of the Code of Ordinances, Buffer regulations, for standards. 
(q)  Drive-through standards. The following drive-through windows standards shall apply: 
1.  Drive-through windows shall be screened from view from any dedicated rights-of-way and from adjacent residentially zoned property and/or any existing residential use. 
2.  No outdoor speakers shall be used on property adjacent to residentially zoned property or any existing residential use. 
(r)  Sign standards. Sign plans are required for all land development within the overlay district, as required in chapter 52, Signs. 
(s)  Exceptions and exemptions from overlay districts. Applications for land disturbance permits, site development plan review, plat approval, sign permits, and building permits for properties within the designated overlay district shall meet all of the requirements of the base zoning district in which the parcel is located and all provisions of the designated overlay district unless such application meets one of the following exceptions: 
(1)  Alterations to existing single-family dwellings located within a subdivision of record zoned R-2, R-4, R-C or R-A with a final plat approved prior to enactment of this section shall not be subject to the provisions of this overlay district, provided that such alterations are limited to the following actions: 
a.  Additions of heated floor area less than 50 percent of the existing floor area. 
b.  Construction of an accessory structure or garage not to exceed 750 square feet in floor area. 
c.  Improvements to outdoor space, such as swimming pools, courts for basketball, tennis or handball, gazebos, trellises, patios, decks, balconies, and similar non-occupied structures, or interior renovations. 
(2)  Construction of a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record zoned R-2, R-4, R-C or R-A within a single-family residential subdivision with a final plat approved prior to enactment of this section shall not be subject to the provisions of this ordinance provided that such new construction shall be of similar floor area, materials and design as the single-family dwellings on adjacent lots in the same subdivision. Similar floor area for the purposes of this subsection means not more than 20 percent greater than the average heated floor area of the structures located on the abutting residential properties. 
(3)  Replacement, reconstruction, restoration, or repair of a single-family dwelling that is destroyed or damaged by fire or other natural occurrence shall not be subject to the provisions of this overlay, provided that such dwelling is located on an existing lot of record zoned for a residential use within a single-family residential subdivision with a final plat approved prior to enactment of this section, and provided that such new construction shall be of similar floor area, materials and design as the single-family dwellings on adjacent lots in the same subdivision. Similar floor area for the purposes of this subsection means not more than 20 percent greater than the average heated floor area of the structures located on the abutting residential properties. 
(4)  Construction, rehabilitation, restoration and repair of a non-residential structure existing prior to the enactment of this section shall not be subject to those provisions of the overlay until such time as the cumulative effect of all permits on a single parcel result in an increase in the total floor area of the existing structure by 50 percent or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
a.  Multi-modal access plan. An access plan shall be submitted showing connections from the system of streets, alleys, sidewalks and multi-use paths shown in the conceptual transportation plan to the entrances of all occupied buildings within the subject property. Convenient pedestrian ways shall be shown from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including designated pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. Where an existing or planned public transportation station or stop is within 1,000 feet (straight line distance measured from the entrance of the station or stop) from any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how pedestrians may travel safely and conveniently from such station or stop to the entrance of buildings on the subject property. Where an existing or planned multi-use path is located within 1,320 feet (straight line distance) from any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how safe, continuous and convenient bicycle and pedestrian access may be provided to the subject property. 
b.  Traffic impact study. A traffic impact study shall be submitted for residential developments with more than 120 dwelling units and for any non-residential developments deemed likely by the department of transportation and development to generate 100 or more p.m. peak hour trips. The traffic impact study shall follow procedures established by the most recent edition of the ITE Transportation Impact Analysis for Site Development. 
c.  Shared parking analysis. A shared parking analysis for use of shared parking shall be submitted, if applicable. Shared parking shall meet the requirements of the overlay design standards listed in article 4, section 4.18 of the Clayton County Zoning Ordinance, incorporated here below. 
d.  Signage master plan. For all multi-tenant or multi-owner developments other than single-family residential subdivisions, a signage master plan shall be submitted at the time of review of the preliminary plat. The signage master plan shall contain the following information on a copy of the preliminary plat: 
1.  Provide a computation for each proposed sign and/or existing sign to remain, except for window signs and temporary signs, indicate the proposed number of signs and the total sign area of such signs, the proposed location, type, height, and sign area of each sign. 
2.  Provide a computation of the maximum permitted number of signs, maximum permitted total sign area, and maximum permitted area for individual signs permitted under chapter 52, Signs. 
(t)  Surety standards. The applicant shall provide a surety, performance guarantee or post performance bonds in a form acceptable to the City of Jonesboro in order to guarantee timely installation of required project improvements such as, but not limited to, streets, utilities, drainage, sidewalks, landscaping, amenity/recreation areas and multi-use trails within the development depicted on the approved preliminary plat, site plan, or final plat and consistent with the Tara Boulevard Overlay Design Guidelines. The surety, performance guarantee or performance bonds shall be provided in accordance with the provision of section 44-127. Subdivision improvement guarantees of the subdivision regulations with the following modification: 
(1)  The surety shall be provided simultaneously with the submittal of construction drawings and prior to issuance of a grading and soil erosion and sedimentation control permit. 
(u)  Appeals. Appeals of final decisions of the zoning administrator by aggrieved persons shall be filed in accordance with article II of the zoning ordinance, Administration, appeals, enforcement and penalties. Furthermore, appeals of this ordinance may be heard by the mayor and council in accordance with article XI of the zoning ordinance, Appeals and variances. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.19), 8-15-05; Ord. No. 2014-002, § 1, 2-10-2014; Ord. No. 2015-008b, § 1, 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 86-110. - Assembly overlay. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the assembly overlay is to accommodate the beneficial development of "places of assembly" as defined in section 86-62, Definitions, and appropriately regulate such uses in a non-discriminatory manner. The express intention of mayor and council in the event of any ambiguity in the language of this section mandates that the administration and city staff interpret this section in a manner that best complies with all applicable federal laws, including, but not limited to, 42 U.S.C.A. § 2000cc et seq. 
(b)  Applicability. The assembly overlay establishes the parameters within which places of assembly may be established and operated. The assembly overlay supplements zoning regulations set forth by the underlying or base zoning assigned to properties on the official zoning map that control the use and development of those properties. Unless otherwise provided, the legal use of property as defined by the underlying zoning district may continue. Standards set forth in this section shall control over any underlying district regulations. Development regulations not addressed in this section as provided by the underlying zoning classification shall control unless modified by mayor and council as a condition of assignment of the assembly overlay to a particular property. 
(c)  Geography. Assignment of the assembly overlay is as depicted graphically on the official zoning map. Properties included in the assembly overlay shall be shown on this map and shall include any property subsequently so designated by mayor and council. 
(d)  Administrative approval of compliant places of assembly. Applications for establishment of places of assembly that comply with the regulations set forth in this section may be approved administratively by the code enforcement officer. In considering the appropriateness of an approval of a place of assembly, the code enforcement officer shall apply the standards contained in article XII, section 86-374. Standards of review for map amendments of the Jonesboro Zoning Ordinance and the potential impacts on surrounding development, operating schedule, parking demand relative to supply and peak traffic impacts. Applications that do not comply with these regulations may be approved by mayor and council as a conditional use. 
(e)  Mayor and council approval of non-compliant places of assembly. Places of assembly can exert extraordinary demands upon public services and facilities, particularly when established within certain timeframes or in certain locations. Accordingly, applications for places of assembly that do not comply with the assembly overlay regulations may only be established upon approval of a conditional use by mayor and council. The approval process pertaining to places of assembly shall be that assigned conditional uses as described in article VI, Conditional uses. In determining whether an application for such conditional use shall be approved at a particular location, mayor and council shall apply the standards contained in article XII, section 86-374 of the Jonesboro Zoning Ordinance. Mayor and council shall also consider the potential impacts on surrounding development, noise impacts, peak traffic impacts and demand on public services and facilities. Upon a finding that a particular assembly use would conform to the intent and requirements of this section, the application may be approved by mayor and council as a conditional use. Based upon particular circumstances associated with a proposed assembly use at a specific location, mayor and council may attach conditions to the approval that are designed to minimize potential negative impacts and burdens on public facilities and services as well as surrounding properties and travelers on public streets and sidewalks. 
(f)  Characterization of places of assembly as concerns scale. Places of assembly are hereby characterized as either "large places of assembly" or "small places of assembly." This characterization is designed to ensure that proposals for establishment of places of assembly are compatible with the scale, use and intensity of surrounding development and may be accommodated by available public infrastructure and services. For purposes of this section "large places of assembly" are defined as those premises or facilities designed to accommodate 50 or more persons at any given time; "small places of assembly" are defined as those premises or facilities designed to accommodate fewer than 50 at any given time. Capacity shall be as measured by the premises or facility occupancy, including indoor and outdoor spaces available to participants, as determined by the fire marshall. 
(g)  Standards for establishment of all places of assembly. The following development standards shall apply to any place of assembly. 
(1)  Parking and loading regulations. Parking and loading shall be as specified in article XIII, Parking, loading and interior circulation. No parking shall be established within 25 feet of a lot that is zoned residential or containing a residential use. 
(2)  Fire and life safety compliance. No permit for establishment of a place of assembly shall be granted prior to an inspection and approval for compliance with all fire and life safety codes by the fire marshall. 
(3)  Places of assembly may not be established on lots with zero lot line development or parking in common. Because of the potential noise impacts and peak parking demand, places of assembly shall not be established on properties that share a common wall with adjoining tenant spaces or properties. Similarly, because of the peak parking demand associated with such uses, places of assembly shall not be established on properties that share a common parking area. 
(4)  Street network. The potential for creating traffic congestion during peak periods and for excessive on-street parking during peak periods is substantial. Therefore, no assembly use shall be permitted on a lot accessed by a local street as defined by the City of Jonesboro Thoroughfare Plan. Assembly uses shall only be permitted on roadways classified as "major collector street" or roadways having greater capacity as defined by the City of Jonesboro Thoroughfare Plan. 
(5)  Buffers. The potential for adverse visual impacts such as glare and noise impacts on adjoining and nearby residential uses by assembly uses is substantial. Therefore, buffers are required for the protection of adjoining residential properties. A natural or manmade, landscaped buffer in compliance with section 86-457. Landscape strip planting requirements of this chapter and the following schedule shall be maintained along the boundary of any property designated as an assembly overlay that abuts property on which a residential use is established or property zoned for residential use: 
a.  Residential uses or districts. A buffer having a minimum horizontal dimension of 30 feet shall be established, provided such buffer may be reduced to 25 feet where a berm having a minimum height of three feet is created. 
b.  Buffers shall be permanently maintained as indicated on the approved site plan, subject to inspection by the code enforcement officer, and consistent with any other property improvement. The dimension of the buffer shall not be in addition to any other landscaping requirements of this chapter. As the purpose of the buffer is to visually screen and distance uses of the assembly overlay from adjoining uses, one-half of all plant materials shall consist of one or more species that retain foliage throughout the year. Provision of opaque fencing, though desirable, shall not decrease the horizontal dimension of the required buffer. 
(h)  Standards for establishment of large places of assembly. The following development standards shall apply to large places of assembly. 
(1)  Area regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area required for establishment of a large place of assembly shall be two acres. 
b.  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width required for establishment of a large place of assembly shall be 200 feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard. None. 
d.  Minimum rear yard. Ten feet; 30 feet when abutting a residential district or use. 
e.  Minimum side yard on street side of a corner lot. None. 
f.  Minimum side yard. Five feet; 30 feet when abutting a residential district or use. 
g.  Maximum ground coverage by buildings and impervious surfaces. Ninety percent. 
(2)  Height regulations. The maximum height for buildings abutting a residential district or use shall be three stories or 35 feet as measured at any point 30 feet from any common property line. Building height may be increased one foot for every additional foot beyond a distance of 30 feet from any common property line. No building shall exceed a height of 75 feet. 
(i)  Standards for establishment of small places of assembly. The following development standards shall apply to small places of assembly. 
(1)  Area regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area required for establishment of a small place of assembly shall be one-half-acre. 
b.  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width required for establishment of a small place of assembly shall be 100 feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard. The lesser of 25 feet or the average front yard setback of any dwellings within 100 feet of the assembly lot on the same block face. 
d.  Minimum rear yard. Ten feet; 30 feet when abutting a residential district or use. 
e.  Minimum side yard on street side of a corner lot. None. 
f.  Minimum side yard. Five feet; 30 feet when abutting a residential district or use. 
g.  Maximum ground coverage by buildings and impervious surfaces. Seventy percent. 
(2)  Height regulations. The maximum height for buildings abutting a residential district or use shall be three stories or 35 feet as measured at any point 30 feet from any common property line. Building height may be increased one foot for every additional foot beyond a distance of 30 feet from any common property line. No building shall exceed a height of 45 feet. 
(j)  Existing place of assembly uses. No assembly use existing as of the date of adoption of this chapter and designated on the official zoning map shall become a nonconforming use as a result of adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.20), 8-15-05; Ord. No. 2014-003, § 1, 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 86-111. - Historic residential overlay. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the historic residential overlay is to protect and enhance the character of the city's historic neighborhoods by establishing architectural standards for regulation of exterior rehabilitation and new construction. The City of Jonesboro is committed to preserving its historic structures and the special character of the historic neighborhoods. These neighborhoods reflect a variety of architectural styles that have contributed to the city's historic built environment. 
(b)  Applicability. The City of Jonesboro has been organized into several historic property groups, (1) the National Register District shall be subject to the provisions of the H-1 or H-2 zoning districts, as appropriate; (2) historic residential properties located within the historic residential overlay shall be subject to the provisions of the historic residential overlay and the provisions of article VII (3) historic commercial properties located within the historic residential overlay shall be subject to the architectural standards of the H-2 district found in subsection 86-103(l), Design standards; and (4) residential properties found outside the National Register District and the historic residential overlay shall be subject to the provisions of article VII. 
The historic residential overlay supplements zoning regulations that control the use and development of properties in the overlay. These supplemental regulations focus on architectural standards designed to protect and enhance the historic residential structures and character of properties encompassed in the overlay. Land and buildings within the overlay shall continue to be used in accordance with standards of the underlying zoning district. Where any part of this article conflicts with other standards of this zoning ordinance, the more restrictive standard shall control. 
(c)  Geography. The geography of the historic residential overlay is defined as residential properties that have been determined by the city to have historical significance based on architectural style and building age. The overlay is depicted graphically on the official zoning map. 
(d)  Scope. The historic residential overlay shall control all rehabilitation or modification to exterior portions of any building or other structure visible from the public right-of-way (including stone walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features), as well as new construction, including additions to existing buildings. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of a structure in the overlay which does not involve a change in design, material, color, or outer appearance thereof. 
(e)  Required review of exterior changes. No exterior portion of any building or other structure visible from the public right-of-way (including stone walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant features) shall be erected, altered, restored or moved within the overlay until an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior architectural features has been submitted to and approved by the historic preservation commission. The commission shall not consider interior arrangement and shall take no action under this section except for the purpose of preventing the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or moving of buildings, structures, or appurtenant features in the overlay which would be incongruous with its historic aspects. All proposed changes requiring a certificate of appropriateness shall comply with the architectural design standards of subsection (g) below. 
(f)  Application for certificate of appropriateness. Applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made by the owner or owner's agent to the director of downtown development for the city, and the certificate of appropriateness form shall be completed by the director of downtown development within 30 days and presented for review and approval by the historic preservation commission at their scheduled meeting(s). The commission shall vote to approve or deny the certificate upon review of the application, which shall be duly signed by the commission chairperson. 
(g)  Architectural design standards. The following standards shall control renovation, new construction and development in the historic residential overlay: 
(1)  Rehabilitation. Careful maintenance of the existing historic design, materials and details of structures in the overlay is encouraged. Rehabilitative efforts shall include the use of materials compatible with the architectural style of the historic structure (see article VII, Architectural style and scale for guidance on specific historic styles and building materials traditionally found in Jonesboro). 
a.  Roofs. 
1.  The existing pitch and shape of the roof shall be maintained. 
2.  The shape, style, and placement of historic dormers shall be maintained. 
3.  Addition of dormers to the front facade where none previously existed is prohibited. 
4.  Existing roof materials shall be replaced with the same type of historic material or with materials that closely resembles the existing material. 
5.  Decorative brackets, cornices, and eaves shall be maintained. 
6.  Historic chimneys shall be maintained; new chimneys shall use traditional design and materials, and their placement shall be appropriate for the architectural style of the structure. 
b.  Building materials. 
1.  Historic building materials shall be maintained. 
2.  Unpainted brick facades shall remain unpainted. 
3.  Damaged exterior materials shall be treated with materials that will not cause further deterioration, including the use of an historic mortar mix of an appropriate color when repointing brick. 
4.  Maintenance of all building materials shall adhere to the secretary of interior's standards for rehabilitation and other resources on file with the office of downtown development. 
c.  Building color. 
1.  Recommended color shades shall draw from the range of existing color shades and complement the color schemes that already exist in the overlay. Reference materials on appropriate color palettes will be available for review at the office downtown development at city hall. 
2.  Neon colors are prohibited. 
3.  Primary colors may be acceptable for trim or accents pending review and approval by the director of downtown development. 
4.  Color patterns shall be consistent with the architectural style of the structure and with the overall historic character of the overlay. 
d.  Foundations. 
1.  The original design and materials of the foundation, open pier foundation and porch pier foundation shall be maintained. 
2.  Unpainted historic masonry foundations shall not be painted. 
3.  Concrete block is not permitted as a foundation material. 
e.  Details. 
1.  Addition of architectural details where none previously existed is prohibited. 
2.  Replacement of historic details shall be made with matching material, design and scale rather than stock details. 
3.  Removal of details from a structure is prohibited. 
f.  Lighting. 
1.  Lighting fixtures and wattage shall be compatible with the historic character of the structure and the overlay. 
2.  Lighting placement and wattage shall be configured to prevent glare and to prevent light spillage onto residential uses. 
g.  Windows. 
1.  Historic windows and window arrangement shall be maintained. 
2.  Damaged portions of windows, or windows damaged beyond repair, shall be replaced with windows comparable in design, size and materials rather than stock windows. 
3.  Flat snap-in muntins, designed to resemble frames that hold panes of glass in a window, are discouraged. 
4.  New windows on side elevations shall be compatible with historic windows in terms of materials, size and design. 
5.  Storm windows shall match the color of the window frame and obscure the window as little as possible. 
6.  The addition of windows where none previously existed is discouraged. 
7.  The addition of shutters that are incompatible with the window size and shape is discouraged. 
h.  Doors. 
1.  Historic doors and door placement shall be maintained. 
2.  Damaged portions of doors, or doors damaged beyond repair, shall be replaced with doors that are comparable in design, size and materials rather than stock doors. 
3.  New doors on side elevations shall be compatible with historic doors in terms of materials, size and design. 
4.  Storm doors shall match the color of the doorframe and obscure the door as little as possible. The addition of doors, sidelights, transoms, fanlights or other decorative features where none previously existed is discouraged. 
i.  Porches. 
1.  The design, materials, roof supports and balustrades and roof shape of historic porches shall be maintained. 
2.  The addition of front porches where none previously existed is discouraged. 
3.  The addition of decorative elements, if desired, shall be consistent with the base architectural style of the structure. 
4.  Replacement of historic porch features shall be made with matching material, design, and scale rather than stock features. 
5.  Porch floors and foundations shall not be replaced with slab concrete or brick. 
6.  The enclosure of front or side porches shall be prohibited. 
7.  The design and installation of ADA-compliant ramps onto a front porch shall seek to preserve the historic character of the buildings. Section 4.1.7 Accessible Buildings: Historic Preservation of the ADA Accessibility Guidelines, and resources of the office of downtown development, shall be used as resource guides. 
j.  Walls and fences. 
1.  Historic fencing and walls shall be maintained. 
2.  Materials and design of fencing and walls shall be appropriate to the dwelling and the overlay. Examples of appropriate materials are wood for fencing and stone for retaining walls. The use of chain link fencing is prohibited. 
k.  Walks and drives. 
1.  Historic walks and drives shall be maintained. 
2.  New walks and drives shall use traditional placement and materials appropriate to the dwelling and the overlay. The use of gravel is prohibited. 
3.  Parking shall be located to the rear of the dwelling or to the side, behind the facade line of the dwelling. 
l.  Other features. 
1.  Mechanical systems, including, but not limited to air conditioning units and satellite dishes, recreational equipment, including, but not limited to pools and semi-permanent play structures and decks shall be placed to the rear of the property so as to minimize visibility from the public right-of-way. Any mechanical systems that must be located on the roof shall be placed to the rear of the roof. 
2.  Skylights shall be located to the rear of the roof and shall not be within public view. 
3.  Compatible fencing or vegetation shall be used to screen features that are located to the rear of the property. 
4.  Utility meters shall be placed so as to be unobtrusively. 
(2)  New construction. New buildings shall be compatible with surrounding historic structures and shall contribute to the character to the area. Prevalent architectural styles in the overlay shall guide new development. (See article VII, Architectural style and scale for guidance on specific historic styles and building materials traditionally found in Jonesboro.) 
a.  Scale and form. 
1.  New buildings shall be compatible with the existing scale, form and placement of nearby historic homes in terms of foundation and story heights, roofheight, shape and pitch, number of stories, width, depth and building setback. 
2.  The maximum heated floor area of infill development shall not exceed 150 percent of the average heated floor area of single family detached dwellings located on the same street for a distance of 600 feet in either direction. 
3.  The maximum building height for infill development shall be determined by the maximum building height of single family detached dwellings located on the same street for a distance of 600 feet in either direction. 
b.  Materials and color. 
1.  The predominant exterior siding material, or a modern material that creates a similar texture or appearance, shall be used. 
2.  The use of brick is encouraged for chimneys. 
3.  Prohibited exterior materials include synthetic materials with a false wood grain, vinyl siding, brick veneer, concrete block, and the use of materials that do not complement the architectural or historic style of the structure. 
4.  Brick and paint colors shall be compatible with the style of the structure and with surrounding historic structures. 
5.  Neon colors are prohibited. 
6.  Primary colors may be acceptable for trim or accents pending review and approval by the director of downtown development. 
c.  Doors and windows. 
1.  Window and door placement, shape, and dimensions shall be compatible with the pattern on nearby historic structures. 
2.  Blank wall facades are discouraged. 
d.  Additions. 
1.  Additions shall be placed away from public view on the rear elevation or on a side elevation well behind the facade. 
2.  Additions shall not obscure the form, orientation or symmetry of the original structure, nor shall such additions exceed the degree of ornamentation of the original structure. 
3.  Matching or compatible siding and roofing materials shall be used. 
4.  Matching or compatible windows and doors shall be used. 
5.  The removal of a significant portion of original materials to construct an addition is prohibited. 
e.  Accessory structures. 
1.  Historic accessory structures, or outbuildings, shall be maintained in accordance with guidelines for dwellings in the overlay. 
2.  New accessory structures, including, but not limited to carports, garages and storage sheds, shall be located behind the facade line of the dwelling. 
3.  The design, scale, placement and materials of new accessory structures within public view shall be compatible with those of the principal dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(5.21), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-112. - Conservation subdivision/open space development district. 
(a)  Purposes. 
(1)  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(2)  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(3)  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(4)  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(5)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(6)  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(7)  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(8)  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(9)  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(10)  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(11)  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(12)  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(b)  General regulations. 
(1)  Applicability of regulations. This conservation subdivision option is available in the following R-2 and R-4. The conservation subdivision option shall require approval of a special use permit at a public hearing. Applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
(2)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(3)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: 
a.  Calculation: The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
1.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
2.  The 100-year floodplain; 
3.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or, 
5.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
b.  Yield plan: The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(c)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall included the following features: 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
c.  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
d.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in subsection (d)(2) below; 
e.  General vegetation characteristics; 
f.  General soil types; 
g.  The planned location of protected open space; 
h.  Existing roads and structures; and, 
i.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(2)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in subsection (d)(5)b. below, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(3)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in subsection (d)(6)a.2 below, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(4)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying City of Jonesboro Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Open space. 
(1)  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(2)  Standards to determine open space. 
a.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
b.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
1.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
2.  Buffer zones of at least 75-foot width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
3.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
5.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and, 
6.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
c.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
1.  Important historic sites; 
2.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
3.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
4.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
5.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and, 
6.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
d.  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
e.  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
f.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(3)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
a.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
b.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
c.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
d.  Passive recreation areas; 
e.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
f.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
g.  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
h.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
i.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this section. 
(4)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
a.  Golf courses; 
b.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
c.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted Best Management Practices; and, 
d.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(5)  Ownership and management of open space. 
a.  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
b.  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
1.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
2.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
3.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the board of commissioners; and, 
4.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
c.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, [the jurisdiction] may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowner's association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowner's association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(6)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
a.  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
1.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
(i)  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
(ii)  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this section. 
If the entity accepting the easement is not [the jurisdiction], then a third right of enforcement favoring [the jurisdiction] shall be included in the easement; 
2.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or, 
3.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the City of Jonesboro. 
b.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this ordinance, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 86-113. - C-I civic-institutional district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The civic-institutional district provides locations for significant buildings, facilities and services that are essentially non-commercial or not primarily profit motivated and often serve as community landmarks. Examples of land uses and buildings included in this district are community meeting halls, libraries, post offices, schools, child day care centers, religious buildings, significant medical facilities, municipal buildings and facilities, museums and cultural facilities. 
(b)  Principal permitted uses. 
(1)  Community meeting halls. 
(2)  Hospitals, infirmaries, medical clinics. 
(3)  Libraries. 
(4)  Museums, cultural societies, facilities for the visual and performing arts. 
(5)  Public and private colleges and/or universities. 
(6)  Public and private schools, other than private vocational schools. 
(7)  Public buildings and offices. 
(8)  Churches or other places of worship. 
(9)  Parks and recreation areas operated by the city or by other political subdivisions. 
(10)  All other government services operated for the benefit of the community. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. 
(1)  Day care facilities operated as an incidental accessory use by a place of worship, school, hospital or public building. No certificate of occupancy for such day care facility shall be issued until (a) all state day care requirements and health regulations are met, and (b) the provisions of subsection (g) (pertaining to child day care) or subsection (h) (pertaining to adult day care) herein are met. 
(2)  Dormitories for (a) students or (b) nurses and interns (when part of a medical hospital). 
(3)  Cafeterias when associated with a public building, school, college, day care center, museum or medical hospital. 
(4)  Banquet halls when part of a place of worship. 
(5)  Special events as follows, provided all applicable state, county and city laws are met: 
a.  The sale of fruits and/or vegetables between April 1 and September 30; 
b.  Charitable and non-profit events; 
c.  Pumpkin sales between September 15 and October 31; and 
d.  Christmas tree sales between November 1 and December 31. 
e.  Other seasonal or traditional sales. 
(d)  Parking requirements. 
(1)  The parking and loading regulations for the C-I district uses are as specified in article XIII of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(e)  Area regulations. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Forty-three thousand five hundred and sixty square feet (one acre). 
(2)  Minimum lot width: One hundred feet. 
(3)  Maximum building height: No building shall exceed three stories nor 35 feet in height. 
(4)  Minimum front yard: None. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard: Ten feet; 30 feet when abutting a residential district. 
(6)  Minimum side yard on street side of corner: None. 
(7)  Minimum side yard: Five feet; 30 feet when abutting a residential district. 
(8)  Maximum ground coverage by buildings and impervious surfaces: Eighty percent. 
(f)  Buffers. 
(1)  The potential for negative visual impacts on adjoining land uses by assembly district uses is substantial. Therefore, buffers are required for the protection of adjoining uses. 
(2)  A natural or manmade planted buffer shall be maintained along the property boundary of any "C-I" district use which abuts a non-"C-I" district use according to the following schedule: 
a.  Residential uses or districts. A buffer having a minimum horizontal dimension of 30 feet shall be maintained, provided that such buffer may be reduced to 20 feet in depth when a landscaped berm having a minimum height of four feet is established. 
b.  Business park and office park uses. A buffer having a minimum horizontal dimension of 20 feet shall be provided. 
(3)  Buffers shall be permanently maintained as indicated on the approved site plan, subject to inspection by the building inspector, and consistent with any other property improvement. The dimension of the buffer shall not be in addition to any other landscaping requirements of this article. 
(4)  As the purpose of the buffer is to visually screen and distance "C-1" district uses from adjoining uses, one-half of all plant materials shall consist of one or more species that retain foliage throughout the year. Provision of opaque fencing, though desirable, shall not decrease the horizontal dimension of the required buffer. 
(5)  Developments featuring those uses identified as permitted uses in the "C-I" district may utilize the buffer area in computing the landscaping required by article XV of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(g)  Child day care facilities. 
(1)  Every child day care facility shall provide proof of an approved Georgia Department of Human Services registration certificate prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. An on-site outdoor play area equal to 100 square feet of area for each child at play must be provided, and must be located in rear yard areas which provide adequate separation from adjoining uses, properties and streets. The perimeter of outdoor play area shall be enclosed by an opaque or privacy fence having a minimum height of four feet to provide a visual screen from adjoining properties, and public rights-of-way. In lieu of an opaque fence, the outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a non-opaque fence with a minimum height of four feet, provided that the outdoor play area is surrounded by a vegetative screen sufficient to visually screen the outdoor play area from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Off-street parking and/or drop-off space adequate to meet the needs of the proposed facility shall be provided. No on-street parking shall be permitted in conjunction with any child day care facility. Mayor and council may attach conditions to an approval, or may deny approval of a child day care facility upon finding that the proposed facility is within 500 feet of an establishment licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages or within 500 feet of potentially hazardous land uses or activities that present unacceptable risks to operation of a child day care facility. "Potentially hazardous land uses or activities" include, but are not limited to, gasoline service stations, heavy industrial operations, storage of flammable materials, high pressure underground pipelines or truck or rail loading areas. 
Mayor and council may attach conditions to an approval or may deny approval of a child day care facility upon a finding that traffic conditions present unacceptable risks to operation of the facility and/or the safety of children proposed to be served by the facility or that traffic impacts associated with the proposed facility would substantially jeopardize the appropriate use of neighboring properties. 
(h)  Adult day care centers. 
(1)  On-site parking and/or drop-off space adequate to meet the needs of the proposed facility shall be provided. Mayor and council may attach conditions to approval of a facility which have as their purpose protection of the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare, or mayor and council may deny approval of an adult day care facility upon a finding that conditions on or near such proposed facility render it unsuitable for establishment of an adult day care facility. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 1, 6-9-2014) 
Secs. 86-114-86-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 86-121. - Generally. 
    Conditional uses may be permitted upon a finding by mayor and council that the proposed use conforms to the listed conditions and the standards of review of this article. Approval of conditional uses is considered a property rezoning, subject to the procedural requirements of article XII. 
    A conditional use will continue so long as the use thereby allowed is actually being conducted on the property to which it applies or as subsequently modified by the mayor and council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, once activity authorized by a conditional use has been discontinued for a period of 90 days, the conditional use shall expire without further action by the mayor and council and such use may not thereafter be made on premises without reapplication therefore and approval thereof by the mayor and council. In making the decision regarding whether or not a conditional use has been discontinued, the zoning administrator shall base his judgment upon objective criteria gained from observation of the premises. The subjective intent of the owner or lessee of the property shall not be considered. 
    The following conditional uses may be permitted in the zoning districts specified. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(Art. 86-6), 8-15-05; Ord. No. 2012-004, § 1, 11-12-2012) 
Sec. 86-122. - Child day care. 
DAY CARE CENTER 
Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution, or group wherein are received, for pay, for group care for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody 19 or more children under 18 years of age. 
GROUP DAY CARE HOME 
Any place operated by any person or group wherein are received for pay not less than seven nor more than 18 children under 18 years of age for care and supervision for less than 24 hours per day. 
Day care centers and group day care homes may be permitted as a conditional use in an H-2, O&I, C-1, C-2 or MX district, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(3)  Must provide an outdoor play area containing 100 square feet for each child at play. Such play area shall be fenced using a minimum fence height of four feet and established in the rear yard. A stockade type fence shall be installed along any boundary with a residential use. Such fencing shall comply with the building setback of the adjoining residential property, as appropriate, and the area between the fence and the common property line shall be maintained as a buffer in compliance with article XV, Landscaping and buffers. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-123. - Family day care. 
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME 
A private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, at least three, but not more than six children under 18 years of age who are not related to such person and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. 
Family day care homes may be permitted as a conditional use in an R-2, R-4, R-C, R-A or R-M district, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The exterior of the dwelling shall not be altered in a manner inconsistent with dwellings in the immediate neighborhood that are occupied in single-family use. 
(2)  No parking facility shall be installed in the front yard. 
(3)  Must provide an outdoor play area containing a minimum area of 500 square feet. Such play area shall be fenced using a minimum fence height of four feet and established in the rear yard. A stockade type fence shall be installed along any boundary with a residential use. Such fencing shall comply with the building setback of the adjoining residential property, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.02), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-124. - Services for the elderly and persons with disabilities. 
ADULT DAY CARE HOME 
A facility in which for compensation at least three, but not more than six persons 18 years of age or older, who have difficulty in functioning independently, receive care for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody. 
Adult day care homes may be permitted as a conditional use in an R-2, R-4, R-C, R-A or R-M district, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  On-site parking and/or drop-off space adequate to meet the needs of the proposed facility shall be provided. 
(2)  The exterior of the dwelling shall not be altered in a manner inconsistent with dwellings in the immediate neighborhood that are occupied in single-family use. 
(3)  No parking facility shall be installed in the front yard. 
(4)  An outdoor seating area comprised of a porch, deck, gazebo or similar structure suitable for no fewer than four adults must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.03), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-125. - Adult day care center. 
    A facility in which for compensation seven or more persons 18 years of age or older, who have difficulty in functioning independently, receive care for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody. 
    Adult day-care centers may be permitted as a conditional use in an H-2, O&I, C-1 or MX district, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre. 
(3)  On-site parking and/or drop-off space adequate to meet the needs of the proposed facility shall be provided. 
(4)  An outdoor amenity area containing a minimum area of 2,000 square feet and comprised of such furnishings as benches, picnic tables and shelters as well as pedestrian walks to create an amenity suitable for adults must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.04), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-126. - Continuing care retirement communities. 
PERSONAL CARE HOME 
Any dwelling that provides or arranges for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. Personal services include, but are not limited to, individual assistance with and supervision of self-administered medications and essential activities or daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and toileting. 
Personal care homes may be permitted as a conditional use in an H-2, O&I, C-1, C-2 or MX district, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The personal care home shall provide on-site parking and/or drop-off space adequate to meet the needs of the proposed facility; 
(2)  The operator of the personal care home shall provide the Jonesboro Police and Clayton County Fire Departments a current list of residents living in the facility who have disabilities, and information concerning special needs, so as to ensure each resident's safety and evacuation from the premises in the event of a fire or similar emergency. 
(3)  The personal care home shall obtain all required federal and state permits and/or licenses. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.05), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-127. - Other residential care facilities. 
GROUP HOME FOR THE DISABLED 
Any dwelling unit designed for single family occupancy and occupied by no more than eight disabled individuals. Group homes do not include boarding hoses, halfway houses, homeless shelters or similar occupancy, nor shall the term include occupancy by any releases of any penal institution or place for persons convicted of a crime, persons found to be juvenile delinquents or juveniles found to be persons in need of supervision. In addition to disabled individuals, up to two additional occupants acting as house parents or guardians may reside in a group home. 
Group homes may be permitted as a conditional use in an R-2, R-4, R-A or R-M, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No additional parking beyond the existing driveway and garage areas shall be permitted on the property where the group home is located, and vehicles may only be parked in such areas. Should additional parking be required, the operator of the group home may apply for an administrative variance from the city manager; any increase in pavement shall be confined to the rear of the lot. 
(2)  The operator of the group home shall provide the Jonesboro Police Department and Clayton County Fire Department with a current list of residents living in the facility who have disabilities, and information concerning special needs, to ensure each resident's well being and safe evacuation from the premises in the event of a fire or similar emergency. 
(3)  Any modifications to the existing structure shall not increase the square footage of the structure. 
(4)  Any exterior modifications to the existing structure shall be consistent with the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(5)  A group home shall not be established within 1,500 feet of an existing group home. 
(6)  The group home shall not require occupancy of individual bedrooms by more than two individuals. 
(7)  Group homes shall comply with all fire and life safety codes, and obtain all federal and state permits or licenses, as appropriate. 
(8)  The existing structure shall be upgraded and inspected by the city with respect to accommodation and accessibility by disabled individuals. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.06), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-128. - NAICS 51412 Libraries and archives. 
    Libraries may be permitted as a conditional use in an R-2, R-4 or R-C district, subject to the following condition: 
(1)  A landscaped buffer having a minimum horizontal dimension of 20 feet and an average horizontal dimension of 30 feet shall be maintained when abutting a residential use. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.07), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-129. - NAICS 6233 Retirement community. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the R-C, R-A and H-2 districts: 
(1)  A maximum of 90 dwelling units shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.08), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-130. - NAICS 71312 Amusement arcades. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-1 district: 
(1)  Establishments shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 2,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.09), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-131. - NAICS 713990 Billiard and pool halls (all uses permitted except shooting ranges). 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 district: 
(1)  The sale or on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.10), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-132. - NAICS 515 Broadcasting. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I, MX and C-1 districts: 
(1)  No transmission towers may be located on the property. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.11), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-133. - NAICS 512132 Motion picture theaters (except drive-ins). 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I, MX and C-2 district: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.12), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-134. - NAICS 512132 Motion picture theaters: drive ins. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 district: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(3)  No screen shall be visible from any street. 
(4)  No central loudspeaker system shall be permitted. 
(5)  No outdoor theater shall be permitted adjacent to any residential district. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.13), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-135. - NAICS 711130 Musical groups and artist. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I, and C-1 districts: 
(1)  No noise generated by the use shall be perceptible at the property boundary. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.14), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-136. - NAICS 712190 Nature parks and other similar institutions. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the R-2, R-4, R-C, R-A and RM districts: 
(1)  No parking facilities shall be permitted with 50 feet of a residential property. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.15), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-137. - NAICS 51219 Postproduction services and other motion picture and video industries. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I, and C-1 district: 
(1)  No noise generated by the use shall be perceptible at the property boundary. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.16), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-138. - NAICS 5122 Sound recording industries. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I, and C-1 district: 
(1)  No noise generated by the use shall be perceptible at the property boundary. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.17), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-139. - 5221 Banks, credit unions, and saving institutions. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-1 district: 
(1)  No drive-thru teller or drive-thru ATM machines shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.18), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-140. - NAICS 621991 Blood and organ banks. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the O&I district: 
(1)  Blood plasma donor facilities are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.19), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-141. - NAICS 236220 Commercial and institutional building construction. 
    The following condition is assigned in the C-2 district: 
(1)  No outdoor storage of materials is permitted. 
    The following condition is assigned in the M-1 district: 
(1)  Outdoor storage is permitted provided such storage is confined to the rear yard and is screened using fencing or landscaping which completely obscures the view from adjoining properties and public right-of-ways. Such screening shall have a minimum height of eight feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.20), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-142. - NAICS 23 Construction contractors, builders and developers, with outdoor storage. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 district: 
(1)  No outdoor storage of materials is permitted. 
    The following condition is assigned in the M-1 district: 
(1)  Outdoor storage is permitted provided such storage is confined to the rear yard and is screened using fencing or landscaping which completely obscures the view from adjoining properties and public right-of-ways. Such screening shall have a minimum height of eight feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.21), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-143. - NAICS 561320 Temporary help services. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 and M-1 districts: 
(1)  No client of any such facility may report to the facility more than one hour prior to the opening of the business or remain on the premises more than one hour following closing of the business. 
(2)  The building located on the property shall contain sufficient area, either inside or outside, configured in such a way as to prevent potential laborers who have congregated in the building or on the property from being observed from any right-of-way or any adjoining property. 
(3)  The proposed site for a labor pool shall not be located within 1,000 feet of an existing labor pool. 
(4)  The labor pool shall provide a safe area on the property where the day laborers may be picked up and dropped off. Any such area shall not include any right-of-way immediately adjacent to the property or on any adjoining property not owned or leased by the labor pool. 
(5)  The labor pool shall be limited to commercial locations on Tara Boulevard that are zoned C-2. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.22), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-144. - NAICS 54194 Veterinary services including animal hospital. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the O&I district: 
(1)  No outdoor runs shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.23), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-145. - NAICS 812990 All other personal services. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I and C-2 districts: 
(1)  Dating and escort services shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.24), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-146. - NAICS 81222 Cemeteries and crematories. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the R-2, R-4, R-C, R-A, RM, O&I, and C-1 districts: 
(1)  No crematoriums shall be permitted. 
(2)  The lot shall be a minimum of five acres. 
(3)  No dwelling, other than a one-family dwelling for a caretaker, shall be permitted. 
(4)  No building shall be located within 100 feet of any property boundary. 
(5)  The lot shall have direct access to an arterial or major collector road. 
(6)  All gravesites shall be a minimum of (50) 50 feet from any property boundary. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.25), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-147. - NAICS 53229 Consumer goods rental. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-2 and O&I districts: 
(1)  No overnight outdoor storage or display of merchandise or equipment shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.26), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-148. - NAICS 812320 Dry-cleaning and laundry services (except coin operated). 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I, and C-1 districts: 
(1)  No dry cleaning plants shall be permitted. Such establishments shall be limited to customer drop off and pick-up. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.27), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-149. - NAICS 4543 Direct selling establishments, including fuel dealers. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 district: 
(1)  No on-site storage of fuels shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.28), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-150. - NAICS 5323 General rental centers. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, MX and O&I districts: 
(1)  No overnight outdoor storage or display of merchandise or equipment shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.29), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-151. - NAICS 811411 Home and garden equipment repair and maintenance. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 district: 
(1)  No overnight outdoor storage or display of merchandise or equipment shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.30), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-152. - NAICS 48841 Motor vehicle towing and storage. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 and M-2 districts: 
(1)  Vehicle storage shall be limited to a 30-day period. 
(2)  Storage shall be screened utilizing a 10-foot landscaped buffer and opaque fencing having a minimum height of six feet; landscaping as prescribed in Article 86-15 shall be maintained outside the fencing. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.31), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-153. - NAICS 561491 Repossession services. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2 and O&I districts: 
(1)  No outdoor storage of repossessed vehicles, equipment or materials of any sort shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.32), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-154. - NAICS 81142 Re-upholstery and furniture repair. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2 and C-1 districts: 
(1)  No outdoor display or storage of merchandise or materials shall be permitted. 
(2)  Window displays shall not include merchandise in various states of repair or disrepair. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.33), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-155. - NAICS 5617 Services to buildings and dwellings. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2 and O&I districts: 
(1)  No on-site storage of chemicals or other potentially toxic or hazardous materials or supplies shall be permitted. 
(2)  No trucks shall be stored on site for 24-hour periods or overnight. 
(3)  No on-site 24-hour storage of chemical compounds used in the conduct of businesses classified under this NAICS code shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.34), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-156. - NAICS 541380 Testing laboratories. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the O&I, C-2 and M-1 districts: 
(1)  No testing facility shall be permitted which introduces excessive noise, odor, vibration, electrical interference, threat of fire, explosion, or involves hazardous materials or other objectionable activities. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.35), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-157. - NAICS 4542 Vending machine operators. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I, MX and C-2 districts: 
(1)  No on premises vending machine sales shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.36), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-158. - NAICS 6243 Vocational rehabilitation services. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-2 and C-2 districts: 
(1)  No client of any such facility may report to the facility more than one hour prior to the opening of the business or remain on the premises more than one hour following closing of the business. 
(2)  The building located on the property shall contain sufficient area, either inside or outside, configured in such a way as to prevent potential laborers who have congregated in the building or on the property from being observed from any right-of-way or any adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.37), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-159. - NAICS 7224 Bars, taverns, and other drinking places (alcohol). 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-1 district: 
(1)  See chapter 6, Alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.38), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-160. - NAICS 441222 Boat dealers. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 district: 
(1)  No outdoor storage or display of used boats, used trailers or any equipment, motors or accessories shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.39), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-161. - NAICS 444 Building material and garden equipment and supplies dealers. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 district: 
(1)  No overnight outdoor storage or display of merchandise or equipment shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.40), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-162. - NAICS 44419 Building material dealers, lumber yards. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 and M-1 districts: 
(1)  Outdoor storage shall be screened utilizing a ten-foot landscaped buffer and opaque fencing having a minimum height of six feet; landscaping as prescribed in article XV shall be maintained outside the fencing. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.41), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-163. - NAICS 441110/44112 Car dealers, new or used and car dealers, used. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 district: 
(1)  The primary use of the property shall be retail sales of vehicles. 
(2)  All vehicle servicing shall be performed in an entirely enclosed structure. 
(3)  No vehicles that are in a state of disrepair shall be displayed. 
(4)  Automotive repair shall be operated only as an accessory to a new car dealership. 
(5)  No outdoor storage of parts, materials or equipment shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.42), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-163.1. - NAICS 425120 Automobile brokers-Office only. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 districts: 
(1)  Automobile brokers assigned in the C-2 districts shall operate in an "office only" capacity. 
(2)  "Office only" shall mean: 
a.  No vehicle to be brokered for sale, lease, or otherwise, shall be delivered to, displayed, or parked at any time on the premises; 
b.  Vehicles for sale or lease, whether directly or indirectly, shall not be delivered to, displayed, or parked on the premises at any time; 
c.  Maintenance, repair, refurbishing, washing, or detailing of automobiles on the premises is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 2, 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 86-164. - NAICS 4481 Clothing stores. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-1 district: 
(1)  Establishments shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 6,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.43), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-165. - NAICS 44512 Convenience food stores, without fuel pumps. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-1 district: 
(1)  Establishments shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 4,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.44), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-166. - NAICS 442 Furniture and home furnishing stores. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-2 and C-1 districts: 
(1)  Establishments shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 6,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.45), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-167. - NAICS 44299 General merchandise stores. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-1 districts: 
(1)  Establishments shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 6,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.46), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-168. - NAICS 45322 Gift, novelty, and souvenir stores. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-1 district: 
(1)  Establishments shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 4,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.47), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-169. - NAICS 44511 Grocery stores and supermarkets. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-2 and C-1 districts: 
(1)  Establishments shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 20,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.48), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-170. - NAICS 4442 Lawn and garden equipment and supply stores. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-2 and C-1 districts: 
(1)  No overnight outdoor storage or display of merchandise or equipment shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.49), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-171. - NAICS 45321 Office supplies and stationery stores. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, O&I and C-1 districts: 
(1)  Establishments shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 6,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.50), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-172. - NAICS 44613 Optical goods stores. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1 and H-2 districts: 
(1)  Establishments shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 6,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.51), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-173. - NAICS 45391 Pet and pet supplies stores. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2 and MX district: 
(1)  No outdoor runs shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.52), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-174. - NAICS 81291 Pet care, grooming, training, pet sitting, and boarding (except veterinary services). 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, C-1 and MX district: 
(1)  No outdoor runs shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.53), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-175. - NAICS 44611 Pharmacies and drug stores. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1 district: 
(1)  Establishments shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 8,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.54), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-176. - NAICS 45122 Prerecorded tape, compact disc and record stores. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1 and C-1 district: 
(1)  Establishments shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 4,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.55), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-177. - NAICS 53223 Video tape and disc rental. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1 and C-1 district: 
(1)  Establishments shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 4,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.56), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-178. - NAICS 4533 Used merchandise stores. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1 and C-1 districts: 
(1)  No overnight outdoor storage or display of merchandise or equipment shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.57), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-179. - NAICS 4842 Freight trucking, specialized, and including household and office moving. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 district: 
(1)  Trucks shall not be stored in the front yard. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.58), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-180. - NAICS 488991 Packing and crating. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the M-1 district: 
(1)  Pallets shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjacent property and shall be stacked no higher than the screening or ten feet above grade, whichever height is most restrictive. 
(2)  Such screening shall be accomplished utilizing a ten-foot landscaped buffer and opaque fencing having a minimum height of eight feet; landscaping as prescribed in article XV shall be maintained outside the fencing. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.59), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-181. - NAICS 4853 Taxi and limousine service. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the C-2 district: 
(1)  No on-site vehicle maintenance, other than washing, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.60), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-182. - Mixed family, including lofts. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, O&I and C-1 districts: 
(1)  No residential unit shall occupy a street level space. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.61), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-183. - NAICS 8131 Churches and other places of worship. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the R-A, R-M, H-1, H-2, O&I, MX, C-1 and C-2 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.62), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-184. - NAICS 8134 Civic and social organizations. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, MX, C-1 and C-2 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.63), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-185. - NAICS 8134 Civic and social organizations, without private bar or restaurant. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the R-A, R-M, H-1, H-2, O&I, MX, C-1 and C-2 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.64), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-186. - NAICS 6113 Private schools: colleges and universities. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I, MX and C-2 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.65), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-187. - NAICS 6111 Private schools: elementary and secondary. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the R-2, R-4, R-A, RM, H-1, H-2, O&I, MX and C-1 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.66), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-188. - NAICS 6112 Private schools: junior colleges. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I, MX and C-2 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.67), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-189. - NAICS 71399 Community recreation facility (non-profit) including YMCA, senior centers, and city recreational centers. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the R-C, R-A, RM, H-1, H-2, O&I, MX and C-1 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.68), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-190. - NAICS 71391 Golf courses and country clubs. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the R-2, R-4, R-C, R-A, RM, O&I and MX districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.69), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-191. - NAICS 712110 Museums. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the R-A, RM, H-1, H-2, O&I, MX and C-1 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.70), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-192. - NAICS 71399 Neighborhood recreation centers, including parks, playgrounds, tennis, pools and other recreation amenities, with or without accessory food and beverage sales (private). 
    The following conditions are assigned in the R-A, RM, H-2, MX and C-1 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.71), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-193. - NAICS 7111 Performing arts theaters: drama, dance, music. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, MX, C-1 and C-2 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.72), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-194. - NAICS 711211 Stadiums, coliseums, arenas, amphitheaters. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the MX and C-2 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.73), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-195. - NAICS 711110 Theater companies and dinner theaters. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, MX and C-2 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.74), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-196. - NAICS 6114 Business schools and computer and management training. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I, MX and C-2 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.75), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-197. - NAICS 6115 Technical and trade schools. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I, MX, C-2 and M-1 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(3)  Truck driving schools shall be restricted to the M-1 district. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.76), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-198. - NAICS 6116 Other schools and instruction. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I, MX and C-2 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre and a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.77), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-199. - NAICS 5151 Radio and television broadcasting. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-2, O&I and MX districts: 
(1)  No telecommunications structures greater than 20 feet in height, whether ground or building mounted, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.78), 8-15-05) 
Cross reference- Telecommunications, ch. 70. 
Sec. 86-200. - NAICS 516 Internet publishing and broadcasting. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-2, O&I and MX districts: 
(1)  No telecommunications structures greater than 20 feet in height, whether ground or building mounted, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.79), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-201. - NAICS 517 Telecommunications. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-2, O&I and MX districts: 
(1)  No telecommunications structures greater than 20 feet in height, whether ground or building mounted, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.79), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-202. - Townhouses and condominiums. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1 and H-2 districts: 
(1)  The standards of the R-A district shall control development of townhouses and condominiums. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.80), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-203. - Funeral homes and funeral services. 
    The following conditions are assigned in the H-1, H-2, O&I and C-2 districts: 
(1)  Must be located on a street having a classification of collector or greater. 
(2)  Must be established on a lot having a minimum area of one acre. 
(3)  On-site parking and/or drop-off space adequate to meet the needs of the proposed facility shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(6.81), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-204. - Table of uses allowed by zoning district. 
Use is permitted "by right" in the district indicated = P 
Use is permitted as a conditional use (section indicated) = C 
Use is not permitted = N 
NAICS 
Code USES R-2 R-4 R-C R-A RM H-1 H-2 O&I MX C-1 C-2 M-1 Code 
Section Residential Uses Single Family Detached Dwelling, Site-Built P P P N N N P N P N N N Single Family Detached Dwelling, Manufactured, Mobile, or Modular with Permanent Foundation N N N N N N N N N N N N Two-Family Dwelling (Duplex) N N P P P N N N P N N N Single Family Attached (Townhouses and Condominiums) N N N P P C C N P N N N Sec. 86-202 Multifamily N N N N P N N N P N N N Mixed Use Dwelling, including Lofts N N N P P C C C P C N N Sec. 86-182 Recreational Vehicle, Trailer, or Camping Trailer, used as Living Quarters or Dwelling N N N N N N N N N N N N Temporary Building / Manufactured Unit, for Construction Storage P P P P P P P P P P P P Sec. 86-262 Home Occupation P P C N N N C N C N N N Sec. 86-274 Institutional Uses 8139 Business, Professional, Labor, Political and Similar Organizations N N N N N N P P P N N N 8132 Charitable Organization Offices N N N N N P P P P N N N 62411 Child and Youth Services N N N N N P P P N N P N 8131 Churches and Other Places of Worship N N N C C C C C C C C N Sec. 86-183 8134 Civic and Social Organizations N N N N N C C N C C C N Sec. 86-184 8134 Civic and Social Organizations, without Private Bar or Restaurant N N N C C C C C C C C N Sec. 86-185 624210 Community Food Services N N N N N N N N N N P N 51412 Libraries and Archives C C C P P P C P P C C N Sec. 86-128 624410 Nursery school (Child Day Care Services) N N N N N N C C C C C N Sec. 86-122 624410 Family Day Care Home C C C C C N N N N N N N Sec. 86-123 624120 Adult Day Care Home C C C C C N N N N N N N Sec. 86-124 624120 Adult Day Care Center N N N N N N C C C C N N Sec. 86-125 623110 Nursing Care Facilities N N N N N N N P N N N N Sec. 86-129 62149 Other Outpatient Care Centers N N N N N N N N N N P N 622110 General Medical and Surgical Hospitals N N N N N N N N N N P N 6239 Other Residential Care Facilities Care, Personal Care Homes N N N N N N N C C C C N Sec. 86-127 623990 Other Residential Care Facilities Care, Group Homes C C C C C N N N N N N N Sec. 86-127 6113 Colleges, Universities and Professional Schools N N N N N N C C C N C N Sec. 86-186 6111 Elementary and Secondary Schools C C C C C N C C C C N N Sec. 86-187 6112 Junior Colleges N N N N N N C C C N C N Sec. 86-188 6233 Retirement Community N N C C P N C P P N N N Sec. 86-129 8133 Social Advocacy Organizations N N N N N P P P P N N N 6241 Social Services Assistance, including Individual and Family Services N N N N N P P P P N N N Arts, Entertainment and Recreation 711410 Agents and Managers for Artists, Athletes, Entertainers, and Other Public Figures N N N N N P P P P P P N 71312 Amusement Arcades N N N N N C N N P C P N Sec. 86-130, Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 7115 Artist's Studios N N N N N P P P P P P N 71399 Billiard and Pool Halls N N N N N C N N N N C N Sec. 86-131, Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 713950 Bowling Centers N N N N N N N N N N P N 515 Broadcasting N N N N N C C C C C P P Sec. 86-132 71399 Community Recreation Facility (Non-Profit) including YMCA, Senior Centers, and City Recreational Centers N N C C C C C C C C N N Sec. 86-189 711120 Dance Companies, without theaters N N N N N P P P P P P N 713940 Fitness and Recreational Sports Centers, Health Clubs N N N N N C C P P P P N 71391 Golf Courses and Country Clubs C C C C C N N C C N N N Sec. 86-190 713990 Hookah Lounge-(Smoking Bar) N N N N N N N N N N C N 711510 Independent Artist, Writers, and Performers N N N N N P P P P N N N 512131 Motion Picture Theaters (except Drive-Ins) N N N N N C C C C N C N Sec. 86-133 512132 Motion Picture Theaters (Drive-Ins) N N N N N N N N N N C N Sec. 86-134 712110 Museums N N N C C P C C C C N N Sec. 86-191 711130 Musical Groups and Artist N N N N N P C C P C P N Sec. 86-135 712190 Nature Parks and Other Similar Institutions C C C C C N C P P P N N Sec. 86-136 71399 Neighborhood Recreation Centers, including Parks, Playgrounds, Tennis, Pools and Other Recreation Amenities, with or without Accessory Food and Beverage Sales (Private) N N N C C N N N C C N N Sec. 86-192 71399 Parks, Playgrounds and Other Open Space Amenities, including Squares, Greens and Pocket Parks (private) P P P P P P P P P P P P 7111 Performing Arts Theaters: Drama, Dance, Music N N N N N C C N C C C N Sec. 86-193 51219 Postproduction Services and Other Motion Picture and Video Industries N N N N N P C C P C P P Sec. 86-137 711320 Promoters of Performing Arts, Sports, and Similar Events without Facilities N N N N N P P P P N N N 5122 Sound Recording Industries N N N N N C C C P C P P Sec. 86-138 711211 Stadiums, Coliseums, Arenas, Amphitheaters N N N N N N N N C N C N Sec. 86-194 711110 Theater Companies and Dinner Theaters N N N N N C C N C N C N Sec. 86-195 Office Uses 5412 Accounting, Tax Preparation, Bookkeeping, and Payroll Services N N N N N P P P P P P N 926 Administration of Economic Programs N N N N N P P P P N N N 924 Administration of Environmental Quality Programs N N N N N P P P P N N N 925 Administration of Housing Programs, Urban Planning, and Community Development N N N N N P P P P N N N 923 Administration of Human Resource Programs N N N N N P P P P N N N 5418 Advertising and Related Services N N N N N P P P P N N N 621999 All Other Miscellaneous Ambulatory Health Care Services N N N N N P P P P N P N 621498 All Other Outpatient Care Centers N N N N N P P P P N P N 5413 Architectural, Engineering, Land Planning, Surveying and Related Services N N N N N P P P P P P N 5221 Banks, Credit Unions and Savings Institutions N N N N N P P P P C P N Sec. 86-139 621991 Blood and Organ Banks N N N N N N N C N N P N Sec. 86-140 5231 Brokerage for Securities, Commodities and Other Financial Investments N N N N N P P P P N N N 5614 Business Support Services N N N N N P P P P P N N 236220 Commercial and Institutional Building Construction N N N N N P C N N N C C Sec. 86-141 5415 Computer Systems Design and Related Services N N N N N P P P P P P N 23 Construction Contractors, Builders & Developers, office only N N N N N P P P P N P N 23 Construction Contractors, Builders and Developers, with outdoor storage N N N N N N N N N N C C Sec. 86-142 52229 Consumer Lending and Credit N N N N N P P N N N P N 551 Corporate Management Offices N N N N N P P P P N P N 5222 Credit Card Issuing and Sales Financing. N N N N N P P P P N P N 522 Credit Intermediation and Related Activities, excluding pawn shops N N N N N P P P P N P N 522390 Other Activities Related to Credit Intermediation, including Pawn Shops N N N N N P P N P N P N Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 561310 Employment Services N N N N N P P P P P P N 9211 Executive, Legislative, and Other General Government Support N N N N N P P P P N N N 5612 Facilities Support Services N N N N N P P N P N P P 52232 Financial Transactions Processing, Reserve, and Clearinghouse Activities N N N N N P P P P N N N 621493 Freestanding Ambulatory Surgical and Emergency Centers N N N N N N N N N N P N 525 Funds, Trust, and Other Financial Vehicles N N N N N P P P P N N N 621491 HMO Medical Centers N N N N N P P P P N P N 62161 Home Health Care Services N N N N N P N N P N N N 5242 Insurance Agencies, Brokerages, and Other Insurance Related Activities N N N N N P P P P N N N 5241 Insurance Carriers N N N N N P P P P N N N 524 Insurance Carriers and Related Activities N N N N N P P P P N N N 5414 Interior Design, Graphic Design & Specialized Design Services N N N N N P P P P P P N 5239 Investment Advice and Portfolio Management N N N N N P P P P N P N 9221 Justice, Public Order and Safety Activities N N N N N P P P P P P N 621492 Kidney Dialysis Centers N N N N N P P P P N N N 561730 Landscaping Services N N N N N N N N N N N P 5411 Legal Services N N N N N P P P P P P N 531120 Lessors of Nonresidential Building (except Minwarehouses) N N N N N P P P P N P N 9211 Executive, Legislative and other General Government Support N N N N N P P P P N N N 551 Management of Companies and Enterprises N N N N N P P P P N N N 5416 Management, Scientific, and Technical Consulting Services, including Executive Search and Management Consulting N N N N N P P P P N N N 812199 Massage Therapy, Professional N N N N N P P P P P N N Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 6215 Medical and Diagnostic Laboratories N N N N N P P P P N P P 6212 Medical Offices of Dentists N N N N N P P P P P P N 6213 Medical Offices of Health Specialists N N N N N P P P P P P N 6214 Medical Outpatient Care Centers N N N N N P P P P N P N 521 Monetary Authorities-Central Bank N N N N N P P P P N N N 52231 Mortgage and Non-mortgage Loan Brokers N N N N N P P P P N P N 928 National Security and International Affairs N N N N N P P P P N N N 5111 Newspaper, Periodical, Book, and Database Publishers N N N N N P P P P N N N 2362 Nonresidential Building Construction N N N N N P P P N N N N 5611 Office Administrative Services N N N N N P P P P N N N 53132 Offices of Real Estate Appraisers N N N N N P P P P N P N 5419 Other Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services N N N N N P P P P P P N 531 Real Estate N N N N N P P P P P P N 5312 Real Estate Agents and Brokers Offices N N N N N P P P P P P N 5311 Real Estate Leasing Company N N N N N P P P P N P N 53131 Real Estate Property Managers N N N N N P P P P N P N 54171 Research and Develop- 
ment in the Physical, Engineering, and Life Sciences N N N N N P P P P N N N 54172 Research and Develop- 
ment in the Social Sci- 
ences and Humanities N N N N N P P P P N N N 5417 Scientific Research and Development Services N N N N N P P P P N N N 523 Securities, Commodity Contract, and Other Fi- 
nancial Investments and Related Activities N N N N N P P P P N N N 5112 Software Publishers N N N N N P P P P N N N 927 Space Research and Technology N N N N N P P P P N N P 561320 Temporary Help Services, Manpower Pools N N N N N N N N N N C C Sec. 86-143, Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 54194 Veterinary Services, in- 
cluding Animal Hospi- 
tals N N N N N N N C N N P N Sec. 86-144 Commercial Services 5418 Advertising and Public Relations Services N N N N N P P P P N N N 811198 All Other Automotive Re- 
pair and Maintenance N N N N N N N N N N P P 812990 All Other Personal Services N N N N N C C C N N C N Sec. 86-145, Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 721199 All Other Travel Accom- 
modation N N N N P P P P P N P N 62191 Ambulance Services N N N N N N N N N N P P 811412 Appliance Repair and Maintenance N N N N N N N N N N P P 561613 Armored Car Services N N N N N N N N N N P P 811121 Automotive Body, Paint, Interior, and Main- 
tenance N N N N N N N N N N P P 811112 Automotive Exhaust Sys- 
tem Repair N N N N N N N N N N P P 811191 Automotive Glass Re- 
placement Shops N N N N N N N N N N P P 811191 Automotive Oil Change and Lubrication Shops N N N N N N N N N N P P 811111 Automotive Repair, Gen- 
eral, including engine re- 
pair and replacement N N N N N N N N N N P P 811113 Automotive Transmission Repair N N N N N N N N N N P P 812111 Barber Shops N N N N N N N N P P P N 812112 Beauty Salons N N N N N N N P P P P N 721191 Bed-and-Breakfast Inns N N N P P P P N P P N N 6114 Business Schools and Computer and Management Training N N N N N C C C C N C N Sec. 86-196 56143 Business Service Centers, including Copy Shops and Mail Centers N N N N N P P P P N P N 811192 Car Washes N N N N N N N N P N P P 81222 Cemeteries and Crematories C C C C C N N C N C C N Sec. 86-146 81231 Coin-Operated Laundries and Drycleaners, drop-off N N N N N P N N N N P N 56144 Collection Agencies N N N N N P P P P N P N 8113 Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment (except Automotive and Electronic) Repair and Maintenance N N N N N N N N N N P P 53241 Construction, Transportation, Mining, and Forestry Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing N N N N N N N N N N P P 53221 Consumer Electronics and Appliances Rental N N N N N N N N P N P N 5322 Consumer Goods Rental N N N N N N N N N N P N 53229 Consumer Goods Rental, including furniture rental, party supply rentals, sporting goods rental N N N N N N N C P N P N Sec. 86-147 561591 Convention Centers, Convention and Visitors Bureaus N N N N N P P P P N P N 492 Couriers and Messenger Services N N N N N N P P P N P N 561492 Court Reporting and Stenotype Services N N N N N P P P P N N N 56145 Credit Bureaus N N N N N P P P P N P N 518 Internet Service Providers. Web Search Portals and Data Processing Services N N N N N P P P P N P N 6244 Day Care Center and Group Day Care Home, Child N N N N N N C C C C C N Sec. 86-122 6244 Family Day Care Home, Child (6 or fewer children in care) C C C C C N C N N N N N Sec. 86-123 812191 Diet and Weight Reducing Centers N N N N N C C P P N P N 4543 Direct Selling Establishments, including Fuel Dealers N N N N N N N N N N C P Sec. 86-149 812320 Dry-cleaning and Laundry Services (except Coin-Operated) N N N N N C C C P C P N Sec. 86-148 611 Educational Services N N N N N C C P P N N N 8112 Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and Maintenance N N N N N N N N P N P P 4541 Electronic Shopping and Mail-Order Houses N N N N N P P P P N P N 53222 Formal Wear and Costume Rental N N N N N P P N P N P N 81221 Funeral Homes and Funeral Services N N N N N C C C N N C N 5323 General Rental Centers N N N N N N N C C N P P Sec. 86-150 8132 Grant-making and Giving Services N N N N N P P P P N P N 811411 Home and Garden Equipment Repair and Maintenance N N N N N N N N N N C C Sec. 86-151 6216 Home Health Care Services N N N N N P P P P N P N 72111 Hotels (except Casino Hotels) and Motels, including Extended Stay Facilities N N N N N C C C C N C N 56161 Investigation and Security Services N N N N N P P P P N P N 533 Lessors of Non-financial Intangible Assets (not copy-righted works) N N N N N P P P P N N N 812331 Linen N N N N N N N N N N P P 561622 Locksmiths N N N N N P P N P P P N 54191 Marketing Research and Public Opinion Polling N N N N N P P P P N P N 812990 Miscellaneous Personal Services, including Bail Bonding, Dating Services, Shoe-Shine Services, Wedding Planning, Fortunetelling and Similar Uses N N N N N N N C N N C N Sec. 86-145, Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 48841 Motor Vehicle Towing and Storage N N N N N N N N N N C C Sec. 86-152, Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 812113 Nail Salons N N N N N P P P P P P N 51411 News Syndicates N N N N N P P P P N N N 561 Office Administrative and Employment Services N N N N N P P P P P P N 53242 Office Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing N N N N N N N P P N P N 6212 Offices of Dentists N N N N N P P P P P P N 6213 Offices of Other Health Practitioners N N N N N P P P P P P N 6211 Offices of Physicians N N N N N P P P P P P N 812922 One-Hour Photo-finishing N N N N N P P P P P P N 514191 On-Line Information Services N N N N N P P P P P P N 811118 Other Automotive Mechanical and Electrical Repair and Maintenance N N N N N N N N N N P P 519 Other Information Services N N N N N P P P P N N N 81219 Other Personal Care Services N N N N N N N N N N P N Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 81293 Parking Lots and Garages, Commercial N N N N N C N C C N C C Sec. 86-397 92215 Parole Offices and Probation Offices N N N N N N N P N N P N 53211 Passenger Car Rental and Leasing N N N N N N N N N N P N Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 8114 Personal & Household Goods Repair & Maintenance, including jewelry, garments, watches, musical instruments and bicycles N N N N N P P P P P P N 81291 Pet Care, Grooming, Training, Pet Sitting and Boarding (except Veterinary Services) N N N N N N C N C C P P Sec. 86-174 812921 Photo-finishing Laboratories (except One-Hour) N N N N N P P P P N P N 54192 Photographic Services and Studios N N N N N P P P P N P N 6115 Technical and Trade Schools N N N N N N C C C N C C Sec. 86-197 541 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services N N N N N P P P P N N N 813110 Religious Organizations N N N C C C C C C C C N Sec. 86-183 561491 Repossession Services N N N N N N N C N N P N Sec. 86-153, Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 81142 Re-upholstery and Furniture Repair N N N N N C C N N C P N Sec. 86-154 721310 Rooming and Boarding Houses N N N N P N N N N N N N 561612 Security Guards and Patrol Services N N N N N N N P P N P P 561621 Security Systems Services (except Locksmiths) N N N N N P P P P N P P 5617 Services to Buildings and Dwellings, (including Pest Control, Janitorial Services, Landscape Services, Carpet and Upholstery Cleaning, Pool Maintenance, Drain or Gutter Cleaning) N N N N N N N C N C P P Sec. 86-155 81143 Shoe Repair N N N N N P N N P P P N 5414 Specialized Design Services N N N N N P P P P P N N 5619 Support Services, including packaging and labeling, convention and trade show organizers, inventory, traffic control, water conditioning, lumber grading and related services N N N N N N N P P N N N 561422 Telemarketing Bureaus N N N N N P P P P N N N 561421 Telephone Answering Services N N N N N P P P P N P N 541380 Testing Laboratories N N N N N N N C N N C C Sec. 86-156 54193 Translation and Interpretation Services N N N N N P P P P N N N 5615 Travel Agencies and Reservation Services N N N N N P P P P N P N 53212 Truck, Utility Trailer, and RV (Recreational Vehicle) Rental and Leasing N N N N N N N N N N P P Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 4542 Vending Machine Operators N N N N N N C C C N C N Sec. 86-157 53223 Video Tape and Disc Rental N N N N N P N N P C P N Sec. 86-177 6116 Other Schools and Instruction N N N N N C C C C N C N Sec. 86-198 6117 Educational Support Services N N N N N C C P P N N N 6243 Vocational Rehabilitation Services N N N N N N C N N N C N Sec. 86-158 P.O.D.S. Unit, for Construction Hardship N N N N N P P P N P P P Sec. 86-262 Temporary Building / Manufactured Unit, for Construction Storage P P P P P P P P P P P P Sec. 86-262 Retail Uses 44311 Appliance, Television, and Other Electronics Stores N N N N N P N N P N P N 45392 Art Dealers N N N N N P P P P P P N 44131 Automotive Parts and Accessories Stores N N N N N N N N N N P P 7224 Bars, Taverns and Other Drinking Places (Alcoholic Beverages) N N N N N P P N P C P N Sec. 86-159 4453 Beer, Wine and Liquor Stores N N N N N N N N N N P N 441222 Boat Dealers N N N N N N N N N N C N Sec. 86-160 45121 Book Stores and News Dealers N N N N N P P P P P P N 444 Building Material and Garden Equipment and Supplies Dealers, excluding 444120 N N N N N N N N N N C N Sec. 86-161 44419 Building Material Dealers, Lumber Yards N N N N N N N N N N C C Sec. 86-162 722212 Cafeterias N N N N N P N P P N P N 44313 Camera and Photographic Supplies Stores N N N N N P N N P N P N 44111 Car Dealers, New N N N N N N N N N N P N 441110 Car Dealers, New or Used N N N N N N N N N N C N Sec. 86-163 44112 Car Dealers, Used N N N N N N N N N N C N Sec. 86-163, Sec. 86-109 (c)(5) 425120 Automobile Brokers-Office Only N N N N N N N N N N P N 86-163.1 72232 Caterers N N N N N P P P P N P N 4481 Clothing Stores N N N N N P C P P C P N Sec. 86-164 44312 Computer and Software Stores N N N N N C C N P N P N Sec. 86-164 44512 Convenience Food Stores with fuel pumps N N N N N N N N P N P P 44512 Convenience Food Stores without fuel pumps N N N N N P N N P C P P Sec. 86-165 44612 Cosmetics, Beauty Supplies, and Perfume Stores N N N N N P P N P P P N 4521 Department Stores N N N N N C C N P N P N Sec. 86-164 453998 Fireworks Shops (i.e. Permanent Location N N N N N N N N P P P P 4531 Florists N N N N N P P N P P P N 72231 Food Service Contractors N N N N N P P C P N P P 45431 Fuel Dealers N N N N N N N N N N N P 442 Furniture and Home Furnishings Stores N N N N N C C N P C P N Sec. 86-166 337 Furniture and Related Products Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 4471 Gasoline Stations, Full Service N N N N N N N N N N P P 45299 General Merchandise Stores N N N N N P N N P C P N Sec. 86-167 45322 Gift, Novelty and Souvenir Stores N N N N N C C N P C P N Sec. 86-168 44511 Grocery Stores and Supermarkets (except Specialty Food Stores and Convenience Food Stores) N N N N N P N N P C P N Sec. 86-169 44413 Hardware Stores N N N N N P N N P P P N 45112 Hobby, Toy and Game Stores N N N N N P P N P P P N 44411 Home Centers N N N N N P N N P N P N 4483 Jewelry, Luggage, and Leather Goods Stores N N N N N P N N P N P N 4442 Lawn and Garden Equipment and Supplies Stores N N N N N N C N N C P N Sec. 86-170 72221 Limited Service Eating Places N N N N N P C P P C P P 44619 Miscellaneous Health and Personal Care Stores, including Health Foods and Specialty Health Products. N N N N N P P N P P P N 72233 Mobile Food Services N N N N N N N N N N N N ? 441221 Motorcycle Dealers N N N N N N N N N N P P 45114 Musical Instrument and Supplies Stores N N N N N P P N P N P N 454 Non-store Retailers N N N N N P P P P N P N 45321 Office Supplies and Stationery Stores N N N N N P C C P C P N Sec. 86-171 44613 Optical Goods Stores N N N N N P C N P N P N Sec. 86-172 447190 Other Gasoline Stations (includes Truck stop) N N N N N N N N N N N P 4412 Other Motor Vehicles N N N N N N N N N N P N 44412 Paint and Wallpaper Stores N N N N N P P N P N P N 45391 Pet and Pet Supplies Stores N N N N N P C N C N P N Sec. 86-173 44611 Pharmacies and Drug Stores N N N N N P C N P N P N Sec. 86-175 45122 Prerecorded Tape, Compact Disc, and Record Stores N N N N N P C N P C P N Sec. 86-176 44121 Recreational Vehicle Dealers N N N N N N N N N N C N 7221 Restaurants, Full-Service, Family Restaurants N N N N N P P P P P P N 7221 Restaurants, Full-Service, Quality Restaurants N N N N N P P P P P P N 722211 Restaurants, Limited-Service, including Fast Food and Take-Out, with Drive-Through Windows N N N N N N N N N C P P 722211 Restaurants, Limited-Service, including Fast Food and Take-Out, without drive-through windows. N N N N N N N P P P P P 45113 Sewing, Needlework, and Piece Goods Stores N N N N N P P N P N P N 4482 Shoe Stores N N N N N P N N P N P N 722213 Snack and Nonalcoholic Beverage Bars N N N N N P P P P P P P 4452 Specialty Food Stores, including Meat, Fish, Fruit and Vegetable Markets, Candy Stores N N N N N P P N P P P N 45111 Sporting Goods Stores N N N N N P P N P N P N 44132 Tire Dealers N N N N N N N N N N C C 484 Truck Transportation N N N N N N N N N N N P 4533 Used Merchandise Stores, including Thrift Stores N N N N N N N N N C C N Sec. 86-178 45291 Warehouse Clubs and Superstores N N N N N N N N N N P N Manufacturing, Wholesaling and Warehousing 3391 Medical Equipment and Supplies Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 339999 All Other Miscellaneous Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N P N 321999 All Other Miscellaneous Wood Product Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 3159 Apparel Accessories and Other Apparel Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 315 Apparel Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 3121 Beverage Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 339994 Broom, Brush, and Mop Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 3254 Chemical Manufacturing: Pharmaceuticals and Medicine N N N N N N N N N N N P 236220 Commercial and Institutional Building Construction N N N N N N N N N N N P 3333 Commercial and Service Industry Machinery Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 3342 Communications Equipment Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 334 Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 3152 Cut and Sew Apparel Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 321912 Cut Stock, Re-sawing Lumber, and Planning N N N N N N N N N N N P 33221 Cutlery and Hand-tool Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 33993 Doll, Toy, and Game Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 3353 Electrical Equipment Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 3351 Electrical Lighting Equipment Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 321213 Engineered Wood Member (except Truss) Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 3162 Footwear Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 337 Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 339991 Gasket, Packing, and Sealing Device Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 812332 Industrial Launderers N N N N N N N N N N N P 339913 Jewelers' Material and Lapidary Work Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 237210 Land Subdivision N N N N N N N N N N N P 334613 Magnetic and Optical Recording Media Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 53113 Mini-warehouses and Self-Storage Units N N N N N N N N N N N P 339 Miscellaneous Manufacturing (including toys, jewelry, medical equipment and supplies, sporting goods, office supplies, signs, home accessories and similar processing/assembly of products) N N N N N N N N N N N P 512 Motion Picture and Sound Recording Industries N N N N N N N N N N N P 51212 Motion Picture and Video Distribution N N N N N N N N N N N P 51211 Motion Picture and Video Production N N N N N N N N N N N P 339992 Musical Instrument Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 3345 Navigational, Measuring, Electro-medical, and Control Instruments Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 33994 Office Supplies Manufacturing (except paper) N N N N N N N N N N N P 3169 Other Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 322 Paper Manufacturing, except Finished Stationery Products. N N N N N N N N N N N P 32223 Paper Manufacturing: Finished Stationery Products N N N N N N N N N N N P 51219 Postproduction Services and Other Motion Picture and Video Industries N N N N N P P N N N P P 321992 Prefabricated Wood Building Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 334612 Prerecorded Compact Disc (except Software), Tape, and Record Reproducing N N N N N N N N P N P P 323 Printing and Related Support Activities N N N N N C C N N C P P 2361 Residential Building Construction N N N N N N N N N N N P 339950 Sign Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 332994 Small Arms Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 31211 Soft Drink and Ice Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 5122 Sound Recording Industries and Studios N N N N N N N N N N N P 238 Specialty Trade Contractors N N N N N N N N N N N P 33992 Sporting and Athletic Goods Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 321214 Truss Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P 493 Warehousing and Storage N N N N N N N N N N N P 42 Wholesale Trade with Customer Showrooms N N N N N N N N N N N P 42 Wholesale Trade, no Showrooms or Outdoor Storage N N N N N N N N P N N P 32191 Wood Product Manufacturing: Millwork N N N N N N N N N N N P 321911 Wood Window and Door Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N N N P Transportation Communications and Utilities 5132 Cable Networks and Program Distribution N N N N N P P P P N P P 485510 Charter Bus Industry N N N N N N N N N N P N 492110 Couriers N N N N N N N P P N P N 4885 Freight Transportation Arrangement N N N N N N N P P N P P 48411 Freight Trucking, General, Local N N N N N N N N N N N P 48412 Freight Trucking, General, Long-Distance N N N N N N N N N N N P 4842 Freight Trucking, Specialized, including Household and Office Moving N N N N N N N N N N N P Sec. 86-179 492210 Local Messengers and Local Delivery N N N N N N N P N N P N 488991 Packing and Crating N N N N N N N N N N N C Sec. 86-180 5151 Radio and Television Broadcasting N N N N N C C C C N P P Sec. 86-199 516 Internet Publishing and Broadcasting N N N N N C C C C N P P Sec. 86-200 517 Telecommunications (New Cell Towers) N N N N N C C C C N C C Sec. 86-201 4821 Rail Transportation Company Office N N N N N P P P N N P P 487 Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation N N N N N P P N P N N P 485991 Special Needs Transportation N N N N N N N N N N P P 4853 Taxi and Limousine Service N N N N N N N N N N C N Sec. 86-181 485 Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation, except Taxi and Limousine Service N N N N N N N N N N P P Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting 1114 Greenhouse, Plant Nursery, and Floriculture Production N N N N N N N N N N P P  
(Ord. No. 05-08, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 2006-05, § 1, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 2015-10, § 3, 8-10-2015; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 2, 2-8-2016 ; Ord. No. 2017-03 , § 1, 2-13-2017; Ord. No. 2018-001B , § 1, 1-8-2018; Ord. No. 2018-010 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-13-2018) 
Secs. 86-205-86-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ARCHITECTURAL STYLE AND SCALE 

Sec. 86-221. - Purpose. 
    The City of Jonesboro seeks to preserve the character of this historic community. Such character is derived from architectural style, materials, scale and building siting. This ordinance classifies those architectural styles and materials typical of Jonesboro for the purpose of guiding new residential construction and renovation. Building scale and siting on the lot also influence the character of a neighborhood. Standards employed in controlling the scale and bulk of a structure involve maximum floor area and maximum height, and those that control siting, the position of the structure on the lot, concern setback. This article is established to regulate each of these parameters to ensure that the integrity of Jonesboro's established neighborhoods is preserved, to maintain high quality in construction and to protect real estate values. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(7.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-222. - Applicability. 
    These standards shall apply to all new single family detached construction and renovation in the City of Jonesboro. Historic residential properties within the historic residential overlay shall conform to the architectural styles of this section and the provision of the overlay. Historic properties outside the overlay are encouraged to comply with these styles and the guidelines of the overlay. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(7.02), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-223. - Jonesboro architectural styles influencing residential construction. 
    New single family detached construction shall be guided by the architectural styles of this section. Seven traditional dwelling types, or architectural styles, are found throughout Jonesboro's historic neighborhoods and comprise the styles the city deems appropriate for new construction. These seven dwelling types are as follows: 
  Folk Victorian 
  Colonial Revival 
  English Vernacular 
  Greek Revival 
  Queen Anne 
  Bungalow 
  Gabled El 
    These styles, or elements of these styles, shall guide new construction to ensure that residential development reflects the city's architectural history and complements the established character of Jonesboro's neighborhoods. New construction need not mimic the prescribed styles in their entirety; however, distinctive elements shall be reflected in proposed construction. Figures 1 through 7 illustrate each style and their predominant features. Ranch-style houses have been excluded from the acceptable styles for new construction; however, new construction proposed in an established neighborhood comprised primarily of single story, Ranch-style houses may reflect one of the seven acceptable styles or the Ranch style. 
Suggested housing styles: 

FIGURE 1 

FIGURE 2 

FIGURE 3 

FIGURE 4 

FIGURE 5 

FIGURE 6 

FIGURE 7 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(7.03), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-224. - Maximum floor area. 
    Maximum heated floor area of "infill" development shall not exceed 150 percent of the average heated floor area of single family detached dwellings located on the same street for a distance of 600 feet in either direction and situated on both frontages. Such development shall be defined as construction or renovation of single family detached dwellings on lots of record or newly platted lots within a subdivision served by a new street or streets where a majority of the land located within a 600-foot radius of such subdivision is developed in such single family use. 
GUIDELINES/NEW S.F. RES. DEV. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(7.04), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-225. - Maximum building height. 
    The maximum building height for infill development shall be determined by the maximum building height of single family detached dwellings located on the same street for a distance of 600 feet in either direction. That is, infill development in neighborhoods characterized by single story dwellings shall also be single story, and so on. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(7.05), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-226. - Consistent building setbacks. 
    In cases where the front yard setback of single family detached dwellings on the two adjoining lots having frontage on the same street is less than that required in the zoning district, the average setback of the four dwellings shall be used to determine the setback applicable to the lot proposed for infill construction. In no event shall the front yard setback be less than ten feet as measured from the front property boundary. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(7.06), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-227. - Building exterior. 
    All residential and commercial construction shall be brick, concrete stucco, stone, cementitious siding, wood or similar, durable architectural materials. Vinyl siding may be permitted in residential applications, only, provided the grade of vinyl meets or exceeds the Standard Specification for Rigid PVC Siding (ASTM D-3679). All manufacturers' recommendations concerning vinyl siding installation must be closely followed. 
    Vinyl siding is prohibited in the H-1 and H-2 historic districts and the historic overlay. Owners of structures within these districts or the overlay having vinyl siding are not required to replace such siding; however, renovation of or addition to any structure having a construction cost exceeding 50 percent of the assessed market value shall comply with this section. That is, the use of vinyl on the structure being renovated or the addition shall be prohibited. 
    Synthetic stucco may also be permitted, provided the materials and installation fully comply with the standards of this section. "Super" brick, split-faced block, concrete masonry units, cinder blocks and textured block are prohibited with the exception of use in foundation construction. Materials found to be other than durable construction products are specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(7.07), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-228. - Front porches required. 
    All residential construction shall feature a front porch having dimensions appropriate to the scale of the dwelling and consistent with the chosen architectural style. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(7.08), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-229. - Placement of garages. 
    Attached garages shall feature side or rear entry access. Where lot width on a lot of record prevents such access, garages shall be recessed a minimum horizontal distance of four feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(7.09), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-230-86-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SITE PLAN PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 86-241. - Purpose. 
    Siting of structures on individual building lots and the method of development of properties in an urban context such as Jonesboro can have significant impacts on surrounding properties and the community. A site plan review process can ensure that these impacts are considered during development permitting or property rezoning. The purpose of this section is to ensure appropriate development of private property to protect the community from depreciating effects of uncontrolled site development and to mitigate potentially adverse impacts on surrounding properties and public right-of-ways. These purposes will be pursued through implementation of a site plan review process. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(8.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-242. - Applicability. 
    Site plan approval shall be enforced as a condition of zoning approval or development permitting, as appropriate, and shall be applicable to all single family attached development not involving subdivision of land, all multifamily, commercial, industrial development and all other non-residential development. The platting process shall control development on tracts proposed for subdivision and, therefore, such developments are not subject to site plan approval as a condition of zoning. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(8.02), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-243. - Site plan required as a condition of zoning or development permitting. 
    Site plan regulations and procedures as provided in this article are hereby adopted for rezoning of property and development and construction permitting within the city limits of Jonesboro and are established in addition to other provisions of this chapter. Applications for rezoning or development permits in an R-A (condominium development, only), RM, H-1, H-2, O-I, C-1, C-2 and M-1 district shall be accompanied by a site plan. The site plan shall be part of such applications. 
    Certain documents presented at the public hearing at which time the zoning approval was granted shall be made a part of the rezoning ordinance, adopted with the rezoning as an exhibit. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(8.03), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-244. - Site plan specifications. 
    A site plan shall accompany an application proposing the rezoning of property to one of the zoning districts contained in article V that is initiated by an owner of property or his agent. A site plan shall also accompany an application for construction or development on property located within any zoning districts identified in section 86-223. Site plans may be prepared by the applicant, a professional engineer, registered land surveyor, landscape architect, land planner or any other person familiar with land development. The site plan shall be drawn to scale on a certified boundary survey of the property and shall indicate all construction or development proposed on any portion of the site being developed and the following additional information: 
(1)  Name, address and phone number of property owner. 
(2)  Name, address and phone number of the applicant (if different from the owner). 
(3)  Nature of proposed uses, including a statistical summary of development indicators such as density, nonresidential floor area, maximum building heights, number of lots or dwelling units and minimum unit sizes, as appropriate. 
(4)  A graphic indication of the architectural style, building materials and elevations anticipated. 
(5)  Date of survey and source of datum, as appropriate. 
(6)  Date of site plan and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(7)  North arrow and scale, not to exceed one inch equals 50 feet. 
(8)  Location (district and land lot) and size of the property in acres (or square feet if below one acre). 
(9)  Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Sketches shall be at a scale sufficient to clearly indicate the location of the property, but not greater than one inch equals 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
(10)  Proposed zoning classification of the property and zoning of all adjacent properties. 
(11)  Man-made features adjacent to the property, including street right-of-ways and street names, city limits and other significant information such as bridges, water and sanitary sewer mains, storm drainage systems and other features, as appropriate. 
(12)  Location and right-of-way width of all proposed streets. 
(13)  Indication of domestic water supply source. 
(14)  Indication of sanitary sewer service. 
(15)  Approximate location of proposed storm water drainage and detention facilities. 
(16)  Any existing or proposed easements. 
(17)  Location of all improvements, public areas or community facilities proposed for dedication to public use. 
(18)  Proposed lot lines and minimum front, side and rear building setbacks for each lot. 
(19)  Approximate footprint and location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures on and adjacent to the site. 
(20)  All existing and proposed access, driveways, parking and loading areas on or adjacent to the site. 
(21)  Proposed solid waste disposal facilities and outdoor storage areas. 
(22)  Proposed buffers and greenspace. 
(23)  Proposed development schedule. 
The city may require submission of such additional information as may be useful to understanding the proposed use and development of the property. This may include proposed protective covenants or deed restrictions, or both, which would be made applicable to all development within the project for the purpose of regulating such features as architectural style and building materials; limitations on, or identification of, permitted uses; and other controls which have as their purpose guaranteeing high quality, compatible development. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(8.04), 8-15-05) 
Cross reference- Development regulations, ch. 32; landscaping and buffers, § 86-451 et seq. 
Sec. 86-245. - Site plan approval required. 
    Prior to initiation of construction or issuance of any building permit or other permit for development or construction, a site plan complying with the specifications of section 86-224 shall be submitted to the city manager. In rendering a decision as to the appropriateness of a site plan, the city manager shall determine whether such site plan is in compliance with this chapter, any conditions of zoning approval and the land development ordinance. The city manager shall either approve the site plan or notify the applicant in writing of any deficiencies, indicating modifications or revisions necessary to obtain plan approval within 30 calendar days of receipt of a site plan. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(8.05), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-246. - Single-family construction on individual building lots exempted. 
    Single-family development shall be exempt from the requirements of this article as such development is subject to the standards of this chapter and those contained in the land development ordinance. These standards are enforced during the platting process and the purposes of this article may be achieved thereby. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(8.06), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-247. - Failure to comply with the approved site plan. 
    In the event an applicant, developer, builder or his agent fails to comply with any terms, conditions or restrictions upon which the site plan was accepted as a condition of zoning or approved as a condition of development permit issuance, the code enforcement officer shall suspend or revoke any permits which have been issued pursuant to the approved site plan, or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance. Such failure to comply shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, subject to all penalties and remedies provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(8.07), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-248-86-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-261. - Applicability. 
    This section shall apply to all construction, development and use of property located within the city upon adoption of this chapter. The standards of this section are intended to provide inherent and administrative authority to redress exceptional circumstances in a practical manner. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-262. - Temporary buildings. 
    Temporary buildings or manufactured units shall not be permitted in any district except in conjunction with a bona fide construction hardship. Construction hardship is defined as a circumstance created by the loss of commercial, institutional or industrial space associated with structural damage caused by fire, flooding, wind or similar occurrence which has resulted in a need for replacement space. A hardship may also be associated with building renovation or refitting, necessitating the temporary relocation of fixtures, furnishings or equipment. A construction hardship may also be associated with new construction where new space to be provided by such construction is needed on a more immediate basis. 
    A permit for installation of a manufactured unit associated with a construction hardship may be issued under the following circumstances and subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A manufactured unit may be stored and occupied on property in any non-residential zoning district for which a building permit or permits have been issued and the primary function of the unit is temporary offices, storage space or related purposes, subject to approval by the code enforcement officer. Storage of such units on residentially zoned property shall be permitted only in conjunction with site construction. 
(2)  A maximum of one manufactured unit for each acre of land shall be permitted as a temporary structure, provided that a maximum of three such units shall be permitted on any property. 
(3)  Location of all such manufactured units shall comply with the building setbacks of the most restrictive adjoining zoning district. 
(4)  All such manufactured units shall be completely removed from the premises within 30 days of completion of construction and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy pertaining to the building associated with the construction hardship, provided however, that no such unit shall be permitted on the premise for a period exceeding one year. 
A permit for the placement of a P.O.D.S. unit associated with a construction hardship may be issued under the following circumstances and subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A P.O.D.S. unit may be placed on property in any non-residential zoning district for which a building permit or permits have been issued and the primary function of the unit is temporary storage space, subject to approval by the code enforcement officer. Storage of such units on residentially zoned property shall be prohibited. 
(2)  The property owner or contractor shall submit a site plan subject to approval by the code enforcement officer demonstrating compliance with the building setback of the most restrictive adjoining zoning district. 
(3)  All such units shall be removed from the premises within six months of placement on the property and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy pertaining to the building associated with the construction hardship. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.02), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-263. - Requirements for moving a building. 
    No dwelling unit or other permanent structure shall be moved within or into the city without approval of the code enforcement officer who shall verify compliance with all standards of the zoning district in which the structure will be located. The public works director shall represent the city in all matters pertaining to the actual relocation of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.03), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-264. - Fences regulations. 
(a)  Fences of a woven-wire type referred to a "chain link" or hurricane fencing, of ornamental metal, of ornamental masonry, or of wood, not exceeding six feet in height, may be placed within yard areas of any residential zoning district; except, however, such fences located in the front yard, including that portion to the front of the principal dwelling shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(b)  Fences not exceeding eight feet in height may be placed within yard areas of any commercial and industrial zoning district. 
(c)  The use of barbed-wire, razor wire or similar fencing materials is specifically prohibited in all zoning districts; except such fencing materials may be allowed in M-1, light industrial districts upon approval by the code enforcement officer. 
(d)  No fence, building, sign, planting or other obstruction above a height of three feet nor below a height of ten feet shall be established or maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way of two streets, a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way, nor at the intersection of a private driveway and a public right-of-way. 
(e)  Fence construction shall be double-faced or shadow box construction. In no event shall support fencing structure be visible from the right-of-way or adjacent property. 
Any fence may be prohibited if, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer or the chief of police, that fence obstructs the vision of motorists to the public rights-of-way so as to create a dangerous condition, or if for some other reason such fence would endanger the public safety or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.04), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-265. - Storage. 
    Exterior storage yards (excluding vehicles for sale or lease) shall be prohibited in any districts except the C-2 and M-1 districts. Exterior storage yards shall be enclosed by an opaque fence not less than six feet in height (except where otherwise stated and approved by the city manager) to provide visual screening. Such use shall not be located along an arterial roadway and shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The regulations of the applicable zoning district. 
(2)  No open storage of wrecked or inoperable automobiles or trucks. 
(3)  No vehicle parts, equipment or waste materials shall be stored outside any building. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.05), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-266. - Bulk sanitation containers. 
    Bulk sanitation containers shall not be located within a detached single family district. Such installations as are permitted shall be limited to rear or side yards and shall be located in a manner as to be screened from view from the public right-of-way. No bulk container shall be located within 50 feet of a structure utilized for detached, single family residential purposes. The city manager may approve an exemption from the 50-foot requirement when site conditions prohibit reasonable compliance. The property owner or tenant shall submit a plan for approval by the city manager, including provisions for utilizing appropriate screening such as an opaque fence and landscaping to achieve a screen having a minimum height of eight feet and demonstrating compliance with the building setback of the most restrictive adjoining zoning district. 
    Bulk sanitation containers may also be placed on a lot during the period of development or construction. The property owner or contractor shall submit a site plan subject to approval by the city manager demonstrating compliance with the building setback of the most restrictive adjoining zoning district. All such containers shall be removed from the premises within 30 days of completion of construction and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.06), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-267. - Corner lots. 
    The front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. The side yard on the street side of any residential lot may be reduced to a dimension of not less than 50 percent of the required front yard. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.07), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-268. - Double frontage lots. 
    The required front yard of the zoning district shall be provided on each street frontage. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.08), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-269. - More than one building on lot. 
    No lot zoned in a single family classification shall be occupied by more than one principal building. More than one related building may be located upon a lot, except lots established in an R-1, R-2 or R-C district, provided no such building encroaches upon the required yard area of such lot, nor exceeds the lot coverage ratio. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.09), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-270. - Accessory buildings. 
    No accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal dwelling in any residential district, nor shall the combined total area of all accessory buildings on a lot exceed the larger of 800 square feet in area or 25 percent of the floor area of the principal dwelling. Calculation of floor area shall not include basement areas. All accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of 100 percent of the front yard setback for the district; however no accessory building other than a detached garage may be located between the principal dwelling and the public right-of-way. A minimum side yard and rear yard setback of five feet shall apply to accessory building located a distance greater than 20 feet from the principal dwelling; otherwise the building setbacks for the principal dwelling shall apply to the accessory building. 
    All accessory structures established on the street side of a corner lot and located a distance equal to or less than the dimension of the required side yard for principal dwellings in the zoning district in which the lot is situated shall be screened through the installation of landscaping or stockade-type fence. Such screening shall comply with provisions of article XV of this chapter. 
    The exterior finishes and color of all accessory structures shall be identical to the exterior finish and color of the principal dwelling on which the accessory structures are located. For brick construction, only the characteristics of the trimwork shall apply to the accessory buildings. 
    No accessory structure shall be located upon a lot until construction of the principal building has been completed and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
    No plumbing beyond a wash sink shall be permitted in an accessory structure. 
    The number of individual structures accessory to a residential use shall be controlled by the following schedule: 
Lot Size Number of Structures Up to 1 acre 1 Above 1 acre 2  
NOTE: This schedule provides for the indicated number of structures and one detached garage. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.10), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-271. - Ordinary projections. 
    Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky except as authorized elsewhere in this section. Ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features may project a maximum distance of 18 inches into a required yard. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.11), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-272. - Porch, terrace or deck. 
    An unenclosed porch, paved terrace or deck may project into a yard a maximum distance of 50 percent of the required yard. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.12), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-273. - Density calculations. 
    Residential density standards determining the number of dwelling units per unit of land shall be calculated from all the land within the boundaries of the tract being developed, including right-of-ways, wetlands, floodplains and standing bodies of water. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.13), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-274. - Home occupations. 
(a)  A home occupation is considered any occupation or activity carried on within a residence by at least one person residing in said residence. Any person desiring to carry on a home occupation must comply with the requirements set forth in chapter 18, "Businesses" (such as occupation tax registration). Home occupations are permitted in all residential districts, provided conformance to the following standards is maintained: 
(1)  Number of persons. The use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit or an accessory building and only persons living in the dwelling, plus a maximum of two individuals who are not resident on the property, shall be engaged in the home occupation. At least one person engaged in the home occupation must be a resident of said dwelling. 
(2)  Incidental use. Use of the dwelling for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the primary residential use. Such occupations shall be located and conducted in such a manner that the average neighbor under normal circumstances would not be aware of their existence. No exterior alteration of the residence or accessory buildings shall be made, and no sign other than those signs permitted in residential districts shall be erected. No more than 25 percent of the heated floor area, or a maximum area of 500 square feet, shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation. 
(3)  Number of visitors. Group instruction in connection with the home occupation shall be permitted and shall be limited to a maximum of two students on the premises at any given time. Personal service occupations such as a barber shop, beauty shop, hairdresser or similar activities shall be restricted to a maximum of two chair stations, provided a maximum of two clients shall be permitted on the premises at any given time. 
(4)  Retail sales. No product or merchandise of any kind shall be sold on the premises, nor shall marketing based on samples or product display be accomplished. Sales of merchandise by telephone or the internet to be distributed from another location are permitted. 
(5)  Manufacturing. No manufacturing, assembly or fabrication of products shall be conducted on the premises as an occupation or commercial venture. 
(6)  Storage. No materials, goods, equipment or the like shall be stored outside an enclosed building. 
(7)  Limited traffic. No traffic shall be generated in greater volumes than would normally be expected in the neighborhood. No more than one additional vehicle may be permitted in conjunction with the home occupation with a gross vehicle weight of less than 9,000 pounds used exclusively by the resident. Such vehicle shall be parked on a paved driveway or other paved parking area, carport, garage, or rear yard and shall not include a wrecker, dump truck, flatbed truck, tow truck or any truck with more than four wheels or more than two axles, or any van with a capacity of more than 15 people. Any need for parking generated by the home occupation shall be met off-street. 
(8)  Spillover impacts. Any equipment or processes which create noise, dust, vibration, glare, smoke, fumes or odors detectable to the normal senses off the premises shall be prohibited. Any equipment or process which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receiver, or causes fluctuation in electrical line voltage off the premises, shall be prohibited. 
(9)  Deliveries. No delivery or pickup services, including courier services, that would occur at a frequency of more than once daily shall be permitted. 
(10)  Residency. Any person who obtains authorization permitting the conduct of a home occupation shall be a resident of the premises, who shall take substantially all of his lodging at the premises, store substantially all his personal belongings in the dwelling and shall use the address of the premises as his address for legal purposes such as voter registration and obtaining a motor vehicle license. 
(11)  Hours of operation. No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(b)  The following activities and uses shall not be carried out as home occupations: 
(1)  Night clubs. 
(2)  Commercial establishments that dispense alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption such as bars, taverns, and pubs. 
(3)  Gasoline service stations. 
(4)  Ambulance services and/or rescue squad services. 
(5)  Medical offices and blood and/or organ banks. 
(6)  Funeral homes and/or crematories. 
(7)  Taxi services. 
(8)  Amusement parks, arcades, game rooms, or other such commercial recreational activities. 
(9)  Adult entertainment establishments, adult hotels or motels, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult motion picture arcade, adult video store, or any other such sexually oriented businesses regulated by chapter 10, article II. 
(10)  Animal breeding facilities and/or kennels. 
(11)  Veterinary services clinics and/or animal hospitals. 
(12)  Hospitals, clinics, hospices, or other medical treatment centers. 
(13)  Recycling and/or waste-processing facilities. 
(14)  Automobile, motorcycle, and other motor vehicle sales, repair, and/or detailing facilities. 
(15)  Home appliance sales and/or repair facilities. 
(16)  Restaurants. 
(17)  Pawn shops and/or pawnbrokers' places of business. 
(18)  Facilities that manufacture and/or store hazardous materials. 
(19)  Fortunetelling, palm reading, or other such commercial establishments. 
(20)  Any and all uses determined and classified by the zoning administrator to be a nuisance in residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.14), 8-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-002B , § 1, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 86-275. - No building elevation to exceed courthouse. 
    No building shall be erected that would exceed the elevation of the Clayton County Courthouse. Buildings having a height greater than that of the courthouse may be approved, provided that the site elevation will permit such construction to remain below the highest point of the courthouse. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.15), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-276. - Enclosure of porches or garages prohibited. 
    Enclosure of front porches shall be prohibited without compensating construction of a replacement porch of equal or greater dimension. Similarly, enclosure of attached garages shall be prohibited without compensating construction of a replacement garage of equal or greater dimension. Replacement garages may be attached or detached. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.16), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-277. - Architectural design standards for non-residential construction. 
    The architectural design standards of subsection 86-109(e) of the Tara Boulevard Overlay shall be applicable to all non-residential building exterior renovation in excess of 50 percent of the market value of the structure proposed for such renovation, as indicated on the current property tax bill and to all new non-residential construction in the city, regardless of the zoning district assigned to the property. These standards shall also be applicable to all building additions. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.17), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-278-86-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXCEPTIONS TO BUILDING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 86-291. - Height limit exceptions. 
    Height limits established in this chapter pertaining to non-residentially zoned property shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, chimneys, smokestacks, water towers, transmission towers, flag poles, radio and television towers, masts, aerials and similar structures. Bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water tanks and heating and air conditioning units shall also be exempt, provided that such structures shall not cover more than 25 percent of the total roof area of the building on which such structures are located. 
    City council may issue conditional height permit that increases the height limit of a building on a lot in any zoning district, provided: 
(1)  The property owner has applied for a conditional height permit and submitted plans and information identifying the type of development proposed, the maximum proposed structure height, and details of proposed development which guarantee accessibility for firefighting equipment throughout construction and thereafter, including noncombustible stairs and standpipes with water under adequate pressure and flow to every floor. 
(2)  A determination has been made that the proposed development is consistent with the city's comprehensive plan, and that the proposed development is of such character as to be an asset to the immediately surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  The proposed development will not unduly restrict light and air to surrounding properties nor violate any transitional height plane controls established in this chapter for the protection of residential development. 
(4)  The proposed development conforms to all other standards of the zoning district. 
(5)  The side yard, front yard, and rear setbacks shall meet the particular district's requirements as described below: 
The front, side and rear yard setbacks shall comply with the standards of the respective zoning district and conform to the following schedule: 
  Front yard. The front yard shall be increased one foot for every two feet of height above 35 feet. 
  Side yard. The side yard shall be increased one foot for every one foot of height above 35 feet. 
  Rear yard. The rear yard shall be increased one foot for every two feet of height above 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.17), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-292. - Substandard lots of record. 
    When two or more adjacent and undeveloped lots with continuous frontage are held in a single ownership following adoption of this chapter, and the lot width or lot area or both of the individual lots do not comply to the standards of the zoning district in which they are located, such lots shall together be deemed a single lot. Alternately, such lots shall be re-subdivided into several lots complying with the minimum permitted area, and the resulting lot or lots shall be subject to the dimensional requirements of this chapter. 
    A substandard lot of record may be developed according to the zoning district in which it is located, provided all yard requirements are met. No such substandard lot shall be developed prior to approval by the city manager. Variances to these requirements may be considered in individual cases of hardship. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.18), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-293. - Reduction in front yard setback. 
    The minimum front yard setback may be reduced to a dimension equal to the average front yard setbacks of the two developed lots adjoining in either direction, along the same street frontage. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.19), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-294. - Lot width less than required. 
    Where a lot is of record and does meet the lot width required in the respective zoning district, the required side yard may be determined by the average side yards of two developed lots adjoining in either direction, along the same street frontage. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.20), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-295. - Lot area less than required. 
    Where a lot of record contains an area less than the minimum lots area of the zoning district in which it is located, the lot may be developed, subject to the setbacks of the district. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.21), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-296. - Reduction in required minimum floor area. 
    The minimum floor area required for a dwelling may be reduced to an area consistent with the floor area of the majority of dwellings on developed lots within four lots adjoining the lot in question, including lots across public streets, provided such lots are located within the same zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.22), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-297. - Infill development. 
    The minimum lot size required for a residential building lot in sections of the city in which the majority of surrounding land has been developed may be reduced to an area equal to the average size of developed building lots within a 500-foot radius, provided such lots and land proposed for subdivision are located within an R-2 or R-4 zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(9.23), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-298-86-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND BUILDINGS 

Sec. 86-311. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is the eventual elimination of uses that have been deemed incompatible with public policy as evidenced by adoption of this chapter, as amended. The intent of this article to allow such nonconforming uses to continue until removed or otherwise abandoned, but not to encourage their survival. Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with uses permitted in the respective zoning districts. Nonconforming uses that continue may flourish in an environment that prohibits other such uses. As such, public policy objectives may not be achieved over considerable time periods. Accordingly, amortization of nonconforming uses through such means as limitations on repair or reconstruction following damage are deemed appropriate. It is the further intent of this article that such ordinance compliance as may be reasonable shall be enforced and that nonconformance shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor shall nonconformance be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.1), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-312. - Applicability. 
    These regulations apply to the lawful use of a lot or building that does not comply with all of regulations of this chapter governing the use of property at particular locations. Nonconforming use provisions accommodate the continued use of property that was legal at the time the use was established. Such uses may be, and typically are, conducted in a building that is also rendered nonconforming. Property owners may have established vested rights in such instances by investing capital in property in reliance upon adopted ordinances. Zoning laws are not intended to be applied retroactively, or to create individual hardship; however, these laws are adopted to allow the use of land, buildings or structures to continue, subject to restrictions contained in this article. This article is established to prevent such hardships as may be reasonably avoided and not in conflict with the general welfare of the city, or the purposes of this chapter. 
    Importantly, retention of nonconforming status is dependent upon actual and continuous use of property. Temporary or intermittent use of property that is nonconforming may not be permitted under this article, as any hardship on the individual may not be substantial relative to the impact on the general welfare of the city and the purposes of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming uses must comply with environmental laws, building codes and other regulations provided that such compliance does not render the continued use infeasible or uneconomic. Nonconformance also applies to building lots and the prior use of a lot with respect to area, setback and off-street parking facilities and shall also be subject to this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.2), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-313. - Nonconforming uses of land, or land with minor structures only, permitted. 
    The lawful use of land existing at the time of adoption of this chapter that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter may be continued, provided the use remains otherwise lawful and complies with section 86-311 and the following provisions: 
(1)  Nonconforming uses involving no permanent individual structure with a fixed foundation, may be continued for a period of not more than two years following the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter creating the nonconforming status, provided the use remains otherwise lawful and complies with the provisions of this section. 
At the expiration of the above-prescribed two-year period, the nonconforming use of land shall cease, and the land shall thereafter be used only for purposes permitted in the zoning district in which they are located, as established by this chapter. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use of land or land with minor structures shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. For the purposes of this subsection, minor structures shall be defined as structure having a replacement cost of less than $10,000.00. 
(3)  Removal or destruction of a minor structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land and the structure shall not thereafter be re-established. For the purposes of this subsection, "destruction," shall be defined as damage totaling more than 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure at the time of such destruction. 
(4)  Structures incurring damage totaling 50 percent or less of replacement cost may be restored on the same building footprint or to a smaller size; provided however, that restoration shall begin within six months of damage and be diligently advanced to completion; and such nonconforming use may be resumed and continued as before, or on a smaller scale, but shall not be enlarged, nor intensified. Unless restoration is so initiated and completed, the use shall terminate and shall not be resumed. 
(5)  Remodeling of a minor structure shall not be permitted. 
(6)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved wholly or partially onto any portion of a lot other than that portion occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(7)  Cessation of any such nonconforming use of land for any reason for a period exceeding six months, despite the intent of the owner as defined herein, shall comprise a forfeiture of nonconforming status and any subsequent use of land shall conform to the standards of this chapter. 
(8)  No additional nonconforming structure shall be erected or moved to a lot in conjunction with such nonconforming use of land. 
(9)  All nonconforming fences shall be brought into conformance with this chapter within 18 months of the date of adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.3), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-314. - Nonconforming use of major structures or land occupied by major structures permitted. 
    The lawful use of individual structures having a replacement cost of $10,000.00 or more, or land in combination with such structures, existing at the time of adoption of this chapter that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter may be continued, provided the use remains otherwise lawful and complies with the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which the structure is located shall be enlarged, expanded, extended, moved, constructed, reconstructed, structurally altered or otherwise altered except in converting the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zoning district in which the structure is located. 
(2)  Alterations may be made to the interior of a nonconforming building, and cosmetic alterations may be made to the exterior of such a building; however, no alterations or extensions shall be made which increase the exterior dimensions of a nonconforming building. 
(3)  No nonconforming land use may be enlarged, expanded, relocated on the property or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformance. 
(4)  While the general intent to prohibit expansion of nonconforming uses set forth in section 86-311 is reaffirmed, where indefinite continuation of nonconforming uses in major permanent structures with fixed foundations and with replacement costs exceeding $10,000.00 is apparent, such continuation is hereby found to be adverse to the general public interest. 
(5)  A nonconforming use may be extended within the confines of a building manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, provided that such extension in a multi-unit structure shall be confined to the units in use at that time. No such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(6)  Any major structure in or on which a nonconforming use is replaced by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to the standards of the zoning district in which the structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(7)  Cessation of a nonconforming use for any reason for a period exceeding 12 consecutive months or a total of 18 months within a three-year period, despite the intent of the owner as defined herein, shall comprise a forfeiture of nonconforming status. Such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed and any future use shall conform to the standards of the zoning district in which the use is located and other provisions of this chapter. Such restrictions shall not apply to cessation as a direct result of public agency action impeding access to the premises. 
(8)  Removal or destruction of a major structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land and the structure shall not thereafter be re-established. For the purpose of this subsection, "destruction," shall be defined as damage totaling more than 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure at the time of such destruction. 
(9)  A nonconforming building may be restored following damage or destruction by accidental or unintentional fire, flood, wind or other such causes, provided construction costs do not exceed 50 percent of the replacement cost of such building. Such restoration may be on the same building footprint and floor area as the original structure existing immediately prior to such damage or destruction or to a smaller size provided; however, that required permits for such restoration or replacement are secured and restoration or replacement is initiated within a period of one year from the date of the damage or destruction, and provided further that such restoration or replacement complies, to the extent physically feasible, with current building and zoning code structural and dimensional requirements. Restoration shall be diligently carried to completion and such nonconforming use may be resumed and continued as before, or on a smaller scale, but shall not be enlarged, nor intensified. Unless restoration is so initiated and completed, the use shall terminate and not be resumed. Remodeling shall not be deemed removal or destruction, nor shall destruction necessitated by repairs, maintenance or remodeling. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.4), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-315. - Unsafe structures. 
    A structure or portion of a structure declared unsafe by any official charged with protecting public safety may be restored to a safe condition, provided such construction costs do not exceed 50 percent of the replacement cost of such structure. The burden of proof as to cost ratio shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.5), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-316. - Replacement cost. 
    Replacement cost is defined for the purposes of this article as the cost of re-construction of a building as determined by a certified architect or engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. This cost may or may not be comparable to property appraisals or tax assessments made prior to the damage or destruction necessitating repair or re-construction. Determination of replacement cost shall be the sole responsibility of the owner or applicant. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.6), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-317. - Construction approved prior to adoption of this article. 
    To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building for which a building permit has been issued and on which construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, and upon which actual building construction has been diligently advanced. "actual construction" is hereby defined as the placing of construction materials in a permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. excavation, demolition or removal of an existing building which has been substantially begun in preparation for such building or rebuilding shall be deemed actual construction provided that work shall be pursued diligently. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.7), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-318. - Owner intent. 
    The intent of any owner or any occupant of a building or land, and any evidence thereof, as concerns discontinuance or abandonment of a nonconforming use shall be irrelevant in determining whether actual discontinuance or abandonment has occurred. Rather, the determination of such discontinuance or abandonment shall be based solely upon such objective evidence as would lead a reasonable observer of actual use of the building or land to believe that discontinuance or abandonment of the use has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.8), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-319. - Site construction. 
    Construction or reconstruction of a surface parking lot, including access ways and aisles, in excess of 50 percent of the original size of the parking lot shall trigger full compliance with the landscaping provisions of article XV. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.9), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-320. - Conversion to another nonconforming use prohibited. 
    No nonconforming use shall be converted to another nonconforming use. Once converted to a conforming use, no use of land or a building shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.10), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-321. - Enlargement. 
    No nonconforming building, structure or use shall be expanded, enlarged or extended in any manner unless such alteration complies with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.11), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-322. - Zoning district boundary changes. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to any nonconforming uses created by an amendment to the boundaries of a zoning district that assigns a different zoning classification to an individual property. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.12), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-323. - Nonconforming building lot. 
    The regulations and requirements applying to any lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter which does not comply with the minimum standards of the zoning district in which the lot is located shall be as provided below: 
(1)  Any lots of record, including two or more lots, or combinations of lots and portions of lots, held in single ownership and having continuous street frontage, which do not meet the zoning district standards as to lot area or lot width upon adoption of this article shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this article. No such lot or portion of such lot shall be used or sold in a manner that diminishes compliance with these standards, nor shall any division of any lot be made which creates a substandard lot as concerns lot area or lot width. 
A single family dwelling and permitted accessory structures may be erected on a lot of record which has been legally platted as of the date of adoption of this chapter located in any district in which single family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, provided the use is confined to a single family residence. Such a lot must be held in separate ownership and not of continuous street frontage with adjacent lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply notwithstanding the failure of such lot to comply with the applicable zoning district standards as to lot area or lot width, provided further that yard dimensions of the lot and standards other than those applying to lot area or width, or both, shall conform to the standards for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements in such cases shall be obtained only through action of the mayor and council. 
(2)  Any lot that has been reduced in size as the result of land being taken for public purposes and was a legal lot of record at the time of such taking shall be construed as nonconforming. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.13), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-324. - Characteristics of use permitted by variance not to be construed as nonconforming. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, any characteristic of use such as a nonconforming building setback, which has been duly granted by the mayor and council, shall not be deemed nonconforming, but shall without further action be considered conforming. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.14), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-325. - Nonconforming characteristics of use. 
    No change in accessory characteristics of use, such as off-street parking and loading, lighting, or other matters pertaining to the use of land, structures or premises shall be made which increases the degree of nonconformity with the requirements of this chapter involving a use rendered nonconforming by adoption or amendment of this chapter. Changes may be made which result in the same or a lesser degree of nonconformity. In cases where land is taken for public purposes in such a manner as to reduce off-street parking or loading space below that previously existing and required by the regulations for the zoning district, the deficiency thus created shall be construed as a nonconforming characteristic of use. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(10.15), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-326-86-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - APPEALS AND VARIANCES 

Sec. 86-341. - Establishment. 
    This article establishes the process for consideration of minor deviations, that is, variances from the standards of the ordinance as well as appeals of decisions of the code enforcement officer or other official of the city in administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(11.1), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-342. - Organization. 
    The mayor and council shall have the authority to grant variances from certain provisions of this chapter and to decide appeals from a decision of the code enforcement officer or other official of the city. The city clerk shall serve as secretary to the mayor and council. The secretary shall keep minutes of council proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. A written record of all transactions, actions, examinations, votes, abstinences and absences of council members and those who appear before the mayor and council shall be maintained by the city clerk and shall be a public record. 
    The mayor and council shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of public hearings in accordance with the provisions of this article, consistent with state laws and the city code and appropriate to the responsibilities of the mayor and council, including enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Said rules and regulations shall operate uniformly in all cases. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(11.2), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-343. - Powers and duties. 
    mayor and council shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Hear and decide appeals from the decision of the code enforcement officer where an error in any order, interpretation, requirement, decision or determination in the enforcement of this chapter is alleged. The mayor and council may, in compliance with this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination which has been appealed and shall have the authority of code enforcement officer to implement decisions of the mayor and council. 
(2)  Grant variances from the standards of this chapter in instances in which strict application of such standards would result in unnecessary hardship. Such minor deviations from the standards must be in harmony with the spirit and intent of this chapter. All such variances must be based upon evidence submitted before the mayor and council and upon findings, supported by the testimony or by documentary testimony, that such variance shall be required in the following instances: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district. 
b.  The property subject to the variance possesses one or more unique characteristics generally not applicable to similarly situated properties. 
c.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties of the district in which the property is located. 
d.  The grant of the variance will not grant a special privilege to the property owner. 
e.  The applicant can demonstrate that without a variance there can be no reasonable use of the property. 
f.  The grant of the variance is not based solely on economic reasons, nor is the need for the variance the result of actions of the applicant. 
g.  The variance is the minimum necessary to allow reasonable use of the property. 
h.  The grant of the variance will not be injurious to the public health, safety or welfare. 
i.  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(11.3), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-344. - Procedures. 
    Applications for a public hearing and decision on variances and administrative appeals shall be filed with the city clerk on forms provided by the city a minimum of 30 days prior to the hearing at which such applications will be heard. Each application shall contain such information as the city clerk may require sufficient to enable mayor and council to render a decision. No submitted application may be amended following public notice of the application; however, mayor and council may allow such application to be amended during the public hearing. 
    An appeal to mayor and council may be brought by any person having a substantial interest in any decision of the code enforcement officer or by any officer, department, board or agency of the city affected by any decision of the code enforcement officer pursuant to enforcement of this chapter. Such appeal shall be filed within ten business days following notice of the decision being appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the code enforcement officer and specifying the grounds, thereof. The code enforcement officer shall forthwith transmit to the secretary of the mayor and council all the documents related to the decision being appealed. 
    A property owner shall not initiate an appeal affecting a decision of the code enforcement officer within 12 months following a determination by mayor and council. An application for a variance affecting the same property shall not be accepted by the city more than once every 12 months; however, an applicant may petition mayor and council to waive such waiting period by demonstrating that the situation or amount of variance requested which led to denial have materially changed or the request is materially different. 
    A property owner, with the consent of mayor and council, may voluntarily withdraw such owner's appeal once prior to the time such appeal is acted upon by the mayor and council. 
    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying any variances granted. 
(1)  Approved variances shall expire 12 months following the date of the hearing at which such approval was granted unless a building permit is obtained and development or construction initiated. 
(2)  Variances granted by mayor and council shall remain in effect only as long as the property to which such variance applies remains in the same zoning classification such property was in at the time the variance was granted. 
(3)  Variances may not be granted by mayor and council conditioned upon city council approval of an application to amend this chapter or the official zoning map. 
(4)  Every judgment of the mayor and council granting a variance or appeal shall be accompanied by a finding of fact specifying the reasons thereof. In granting any variance under the provisions of this section, the mayor and council may assign such conditions to the approval as will, in its opinion, substantially secure the purposes of this chapter. The mayor and council may designate conditions to be performed or met by the user or property owner, to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the community, including safeguards for the future development of Jonesboro, with respect to light, air, population density and conformance with the adopted comprehensive plan. 
(5)  The existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings or structures in the same or in other districts shall not constitute a reason for approval of a variance. 
(6)  No variance may permit a use of land, buildings or structures not permitted by right in the district involved. 
A copy of the paid in full tax bill or a letter from the city certifying that all taxes have been paid must accompany an application for a variance. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(11.4), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-345. - Public hearings. 
    Variances or appeals shall be considered at a public hearing for the purpose of accepting findings concerning individual applications. Such hearings shall be held only after substantial compliance with all required public notification of the hearing as set forth in this article. 
    The mayor and council shall render a determination with respect to the appeal or application within a period of 60 days from the date said appeal or application is filed. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, or by agent or represented by an attorney-at-law. 
    All hearings of the mayor and council shall be open to the public. 
    The mayor and council shall conduct hearings or convene a meeting for other business at such times as established by or at the call of mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(11.5), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-346. - Notice. 
    The mayor and council shall fix a reasonable time for hearing an appeal or for any application for variance filed pursuant to this article. The code enforcement officer shall post in a conspicuous location on the affected property one or more signs, each of which shall be a minimum of three square feet and contain the time, date, location and purpose of the public hearing and such other information as the code enforcement officer deems appropriate. Such notice shall be provided a minimum of 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The city clerk shall publish a legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a minimum of 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing stating the time, date, location and purpose of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(11.6), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-347. - Decisions. 
    A majority vote of the mayor and council shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the code enforcement officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(11.7), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-348. - Appeals from decisions. 
    Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the mayor and council may, within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the code enforcement officer, but not thereafter, seek review of such decision by a court of record, as specified by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(11.8), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-349. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action or decision being appealed. However, should the code enforcement officer certify to the mayor and council that peril to life or property is imminent in the case of an appeal, such proceedings shall not be stayed. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the mayor and council or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(11.9), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-350. - By-laws. 
    The mayor and council shall adopt rules for its own administration and procedures, including, but not limited to, conflict of interest rules, to ensure that no member is entitled to rule on or adjudicate a matter in which he has a direct or indirect interest. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(11.10), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-351-86-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 86-361. - Initiation of amendments. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, the city has adopted policies and procedures regarding the exercise of zoning authority. These policies and procedures are contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-362. - Amending authorities. 
    The city council may on its own motion or recommendation by the city manager adopt an ordinance amending the regulations contained herein or the boundaries of the official zoning map officially established in relation thereto. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.02), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-363. - Application by individuals. 
    A zoning map amendment, that is, a property rezoning, may be proposed by an individual or entity owning fee simple title to the property proposed for rezoning or an individual or entity presenting written authorization to act on behalf of such an owner. Ownership shall be defined as controlling a 51 percent interest or greater in the property. 
    An application for amendment to the official zoning map or text of the zoning ordinance shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by city council. Such applications shall be filed with the city clerk on a form provided by the city a minimum of 60 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing at which the applicant wishes the application to be considered. The city manager may alter the deadline by up to seven calendar days, provided that the application may be properly advertised for the public hearing before council and all notice requirements may be met. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.03), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-364. - Application requirements. 
    All applications shall include an impact analysis considering each standard of review as provided in sections 86-374 or 86-375, as appropriate, and such other information required by this section or state law. Completed applications, together with any information the applicant deems relevant, shall be filed with the city clerk. 
    An application for a zoning map amendment shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A complete application on forms provided by the city clerk. 
(2)  A legal description of the property proposed for rezoning. 
(3)  A plat showing the dimensions, acreage and location of the property prepared by a registered land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid; surveyor's seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
(4)  A conceptual site plan depicting the proposed use of the property, including: 
a.  An accurate scale and north arrow; 
b.  Proposed land uses; 
c.  Current zoning classification of all adjacent parcels; 
d.  All existing buildings and structures; 
e.  All proposed buildings, including gross square footage; 
f.  All driveways and vehicular access, providing dimensions and indicating traffic flow; 
g.  Off-street parking and loading spaces, including number and size of spaces; 
h.  Building setbacks, providing dimensions; and 
i.  Buffers, identifying existing and proposed vegetation, by size and type. 
(5)  A copy of the recorded warranty deed (or other instrument of title) which vests title to the property in the applicant. 
(6)  A copy of the paid in full tax bill or a letter from the city stating that all taxes on the property have been paid. 
Any communication purporting to be an application for an amendment shall be regarded as mere notice to seek relief until an application is filed in the form required. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.04), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-365. - Certification by city clerk. 
    The city clerk shall review all applications for completeness within five business days of submittal. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant, accompanied by a written notice of the deficiencies therein. A non-refundable fee, as established by mayor and city council, shall accompany all applications. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.05), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-366. - Public notices. 
    Applications for a text amendment or map amendment filed by any person or entity other than the City of Jonesboro shall be governed by all provisions of this section. 
    O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4, and amendments thereof, shall govern public notice procedures associated with text or map amendment proposed by the city. Specifically, the city shall provide for a pubic hearing concerning the proposed zoning decision. The public notice requirements shall be as described in subsection (1) below. 
    Prior to enacting an amendment to this chapter, whether the proposed amendment is an amendment to the text of the zoning ordinance or an amendment to the official zoning map, the city council shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon. The purpose of the public hearing shall be to receive and consider public comment regarding the merits of the proposed amendment. Such hearings shall be held only following substantial compliance with all required public notification of the hearing as set forth in this section. 
(1)  The city shall publish a legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation in Jonesboro no fewer than 15 calendar days nor more than 45 calendar days prior to the required public hearing before council. Such notice shall state the time, date, location and purpose of the hearing as well as the nature of the proposed amendment. The procedures followed in accomplishing city initiated amendments, including text amendments and map amendments, shall comply with the public notice provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4; however, subsection (2) below shall not apply to the city. 
(2)  In addition to the notice requirements of subsection (1) above, proposed amendments to the official zoning map, property rezonings, shall require the city to post a public notice on the property being proposed for rezoning. The public works director shall post one or more signs, as appropriate, on such property, each of which shall be no less than six square feet in area. Such signs shall be erected in a conspicuous place on the property and shall convey the time, date and location of the public hearing as well as the current and proposed zoning applicable to the property and such other information as the city manager deems appropriate. 
In the case of a property proposed for rezoning having no frontage on a public street, an additional sign shall be erected on the right-of-way of the nearest public street providing access to the property. No public hearing shall be held by city council unless such signs have been posted for a minimum period of 15 calendar days. Said signs shall remain posted until a final decision by the city has been rendered. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.06), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-367. - Procedures for public hearings. 
    Public hearings concerning zoning matters shall be accomplished in accordance with the following procedures: 
    At the beginning of the public hearing, the mayor shall indicate that a public hearing has been called for consideration of a zoning decision or decisions. The council shall consider each application individually. 
    The applicant or agent shall be present at the hearing before the council concerning the application. In the event an agent is present, rather than the applicant, such agent must have full authority to act on behalf of the applicant with regard to all matters pertaining to the application. Any person desiring a written record of the hearing proceedings shall so inform the city clerk a minimum of five business days prior to the date of the hearing. The city clerk shall arrange for the services of a stenographer to record the proceedings. The cost of such recording shall be borne by the person requesting such written record. 
    No submitted application may be amended after public notice of the request has been given provided; however, council may allow such application to be amended during the public hearing. 
    Individuals wishing to speak at the public hearing shall register their interest on a "sign up sheet" provided by the city clerk prior to the public hearing. The mayor shall announce the public hearing, explaining the purpose of the hearing and the procedures to be followed during the hearing. The mayor may then request a report from the officers or agents of the city concerning the application. The applicant for a rezoning or text amendment will then be given a maximum of 15 minutes in which to present his application. Individuals in support of the application may then speak, followed by those in opposition to the application. Each side shall be given 15 minutes in which to comment. The applicant shall then be afforded five minutes for rebuttal and final comments. Rebuttal must be limited to points raised by opponents to the application at the hearing. No person in attendance is to address the mayor and council unless first formally recognized by the mayor. Upon coming to the podium to speak, each person recognized shall state his or her full name and home address. This sequence is summarized in the table below. 
Procedure Period Open Public Hearing 10 minutes Staff Report 15 minutes Applicant or Agent 15 minutes Individuals in Support 15 minutes Individuals Against 15 minutes Applicant Rebuttal 5 minutes Close Hearing  
    Once these proceedings have been concluded, the mayor shall formally close the public hearing. Following the closing of the hearing, city council may either vote upon the application, or may continue the hearing to a date certain for the purpose of evaluating additional information, provided that the time, date and location for a decision on the zoning application shall be announced immediately upon the closing of the public hearing. 
    After hearing evidence at the public hearing, city council shall apply the evidence to the standards of review and other general lines of inquiry in making their decision. The council shall not be required to consider every criterion contained in the standards of review, or every standard. The burden of proof that the proposed zoning map amendment promotes the public health, safety, morality and general welfare shall rest with the applicant. 
    Should city council determine from the evidence presented that the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed zoning map amendment promotes the public health, safety, morals and general welfare under the standards of review and other general lines of inquiry, then the application shall be approved and the proposed zoning shall be granted, subject to such reasonable conditions as may be imposed by the council. In the event of a failure of the applicant to so demonstrate, such application shall be denied. 
    In ruling on any application in which the applicant has brought a challenge to the existing zoning classification, the council may impose upon such property any appropriate zoning classification, including appropriate conditions which have as their purpose mitigation of potential impacts on surrounding property and on the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. The council may also approve the application, approve with appropriate conditions or impose any appropriate zoning classification for any portion of the area proposed for rezoning, thus reducing the boundaries of the area rezoned. 
    Applications for a zoning map amendment which do not contain specific site plans carry a rebuttable presumption that such rezoning shall adversely affect the zoning scheme. The applicant shall be allowed to submit renderings, site plans and other exhibits depicting any proposed construction should a map amendment be approved; however, the applicant may be required to develop according to such plans if approved by city council. Any deviation from such approved plans shall require approval of a new rezoning application. The council may also require or attach to any rezoning such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as council may deem advisable so as to improve the quality of life through the prevention of air, land, water and noise pollution and promotion of aesthetic considerations. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.07), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-368. - Zoning decisions. 
    Only the mayor and city council shall render a final zoning decision. Action on a map or text amendment at a public hearing shall be by majority vote of the members of city council. A motion to approve or deny a map or text amendment must be passed by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members voting in order for the motion to be approved. 
    A zoning decision affecting an individual property shall be accompanied by an ordinance describing the rezoning and adopted by mayor and council. This ordinance shall stipulate the conditions of zoning and shall adopt as an exhibit any site plans and other materials tendered by the applicant in defining the conditions of zoning and as provided in article VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.08), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-369. - Withdrawal of applications. 
    Any applicant wishing to withdraw a rezoning application prior to final action by mayor and council shall file a written request for withdrawal with the city manager. Provided such request is received prior to publication of the notice for the public hearing, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the city manager without restriction on the re-filing of a rezoning application concerning the property. An applicant may withdraw a zoning application at any time during a public hearing prior to a vote by mayor and council with or without prejudice, at the discretion of the council; however, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.09), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-370. - Legal recourse of the applicant. 
    A decision of the mayor and city council shall be final and may be appealed only to a court of competent jurisdiction. Such appeal must be taken within 30 days of the decision of the mayor and city council. Reconsideration of a rezoning action under court order shall follow the same procedures of this section as though a new application were being filed. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.10), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-371. - Change in conditions of zoning approval. 
    Any application that proposes a change in the stipulations previously established as conditions of approval by the mayor and city council through action on a rezoning shall be weighed against the standards set forth in section 86-374 for a property rezoning and shall follow the procedures for consideration of a rezoning application by mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.11), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-372. - Effect of zoning approval. 
    A property rezoning shall be in full force and effect upon approval of the zoning application at an advertised public hearing and adoption of an accompanying ordinance by mayor and council. 
    Property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements conformed with this chapter prior to the effective date of a rezoning affecting the property, and was thereby rendered nonconforming, shall be governed by the provisions of article X of this chapter. Similarly, construction of any building, structure or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this chapter prior to the effective date of a rezoning affecting the property may continue to completion in accordance with provisions of section 86-6. Development projects under construction and, upon completion, shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.12), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-373. - Frequency of applications. 
    An application for a map amendment affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months provided; however, that mayor and council may approve a reduction in the waiting period to no less than six months in extenuating circumstances. The waiting period shall be measured from the date of action by mayor and council either approving or denying such a rezoning application. This provision shall not apply to properties affected by an amendment filed by the council, nor shall zoning classifications adopted pursuant to an annexation of property into the city be considered zoning amendments under this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.13), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-374. - Standards of review for map amendments. 
(a)  In ruling on any application for a zoning map amendment, city council shall act in the best interest of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. In so doing, the council shall consider one or more of the following factors as may be relevant to the application; such consideration may be based on reports prepared by the city or its agents: 
(1)  Relationship to the established land use pattern. The city shall assess the use and development of surrounding properties that tend to define the context of the property proposed for rezoning and determine whether the proposal is consistent with this context. 
(2)  Compatibility with comprehensive plan; timing of development. The city shall determine whether the proposal is compatible with the city of Jonesboro Comprehensive Plan, including land uses indicated on the future land use map. The city shall also assess, based on the adopted comprehensive plan, whether the proposal would encourage use or development that is compatible with the timing of development anticipated in such policy guides as the community facilities and services element and the short term work program. 
(3)  Suitability of the zoning proposal. The city shall determine whether the proposed zoning will permit a use of the property that is suitable in view of the zoning and use of adjacent and nearby property. 
(4)  Impact on public facilities and services; referrals to other agencies. The city shall consider the availability of public facilities and services such as schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection, including those provided by other public agencies or authorities, and the impact of the proposal on demand for those public facilities and services. 
(5)  Impact on public financial resources. The city shall assess the budgetary impact of the zoning proposal on the city and other public agencies or authorities in delivery, enhancement, expansion or maintenance of public utilities, schools, streets and other public services. 
(6)  Availability of other land suitable for the proposed use; effect on balance of land uses. The city shall consider the availability of other appropriate land already zoned for the proposed use, generally, and the availability of such land near the property proposed for rezoning. 
(7)  Impact on neighborhood character. The city shall consider whether the proposal is consistent with the architectural style, density, scale and dwelling type prevalent in the surrounding neighborhood. The city shall also assess potential impacts of uses that would be permitted under the proposed zoning on the neighborhood, particularly any substantial adverse impacts on neighborhood quality or stability, or of any tendency of those uses to cause blight or depreciation. 
(8)  Opportunity for economic use of property. The city shall consider whether the property has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned and determine whether substantial factors are present that prevent economic use of the property in accordance with existing regulations. 
(9)  Effect on adjacent property. The city shall consider whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
(10)  Impact on surrounding property values. The city shall determine whether the zoning proposal will be a deterrent to the value or improvement of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations. 
(11)  Circumstances peculiar to the context. The city shall assess conditions or trends affecting the use and development of the property which may not be anticipated by the comprehensive plan or accounted for in the existing zoning of the property and determine whether such factors as may be present support approval or denial of the zoning proposal. 
(12)  Impact on the public interest. The city shall judge whether the proposal reflects a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality or general welfare and the right of individuals to unrestricted use of property. 
(13)  Environmental impact. The city shall consider the possible impacts of the proposal on the environment, including, but not limited to, storm drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality, loss of natural areas and habitat and water quality and quantity. 
(b)  The city council shall also consider the following general lines of inquiry in assessing the appropriateness of a rezoning proposal: 
(1)  Existing uses and zoning of the subject and nearby property; 
(2)  Extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions; 
(3)  Extent to which the destruction of property values, if any, promotes the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the public; 
(4)  Relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship, if any, imposed on the individual property owner; 
(5)  Suitability of subject property for zoned purposes; and 
(6)  Length of time the property, if vacant, has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the areas and the vicinity of the property. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.14), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-375. - Standards of review for text amendments. 
    The text of this chapter may be amended from time to time in whole or in part by mayor and council under the provisions of section 86-366. Such an amendment may be proposed when public necessity, general welfare or sound zoning practice justify such action by mayor and council. In ruling on any application for a text amendment, city council shall act in the best interest of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. In so doing, the council shall consider one or more of the following factors as may be relevant to the application; such consideration may be based on reports prepared by the city or its agents: 
(1)  Relationship to the purposes of the ordinance. The city shall determine whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter as stated in article I. 
(2)  Relationship to the comprehensive plan. The city shall determine whether the proposal is compatible with the City of Jonesboro Comprehensive Plan. 
(3)  Impact of trends and changing conditions. The city shall assess the necessity of the proposed amendment in addressing new trends or changing conditions essential to implementation of the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  Impact on the public interest. The city shall determine whether the proposed amendment reasonably promotes the public health, safety, morality and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.15), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-376. - Effect of text amendment approval. 
    Approval of a text amendment shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the mayor and city council or upon the stated effective date thereof. 
    Approval of a text amendment shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the mayor and city council or upon the stated effective date thereof. Use of property impacted by adoption of such amendments shall be subject to all provisions of section 86-372. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.16), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-377. - Property annexed into the city. 
    All territory which may hereafter be annexed into the city shall be zoned in accordance with the procedures of this article. 
    The city may institute the process for zoning the property to be annexed at any time on or after the date the notice of the proposed annexation is provided to the governing authority of the county as required under O.C.G.A. § 36-36-6. The hearing by mayor and council with respect to the zoning of the property to be annexed shall be conducted prior to the council action that annexes the property into the city. 
    The zoning classification approved by mayor and council following the hearing shall become effective on the latter of the date the zoning is approved by mayor and council or the date the annexation becomes effective pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-26-2. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(12.17), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-378-86-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - PARKING, LOADING AND INTERIOR CIRCULATION 

Sec. 86-391. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for accommodation of passenger vehicles, light trucks and delivery vehicles in the conduct of permitted uses established on private property. Such accommodation pertains to adequate physical space for the storage of individual vehicles, including vehicles used by motorists with a disability, and spaces adequate in number and location to serve individual uses. This article also provides for adequate access to parking and storage facilities as well as circulation within the property. As the parking and storage of vehicles can have adverse impacts on surrounding properties and the traveling public associated with glare, vibration, dust, noise and visual impacts, this article is established to mitigate such impacts through introduction of setbacks, buffering and landscape standards. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-392. - Applicability. 
    The regulations established by this article shall apply to all property in the city limits of Jonesboro. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.02), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-393. - Continuing obligation to provide off-street parking and loading. 
    No existing off-street parking or loading space, or part thereof, and no part of an off-street parking or loading space hereafter provided which meets all or part of the requirement for off-street parking or loading set forth in this article, shall be reduced or eliminated unless no longer required by this article or unless alternate parking or loading space fulfilling this article is otherwise provided. 
    Except as specifically hereinafter provided, no part of a parking or loading space required for any one building or use shall be included as part of the off-street parking or loading space of another building or use in meeting the requirements of this article. No building shall hereafter be erected or altered which reduces off-street parking or loading space below minimums set forth in this article, or which provides more parking or loading space where parking limitations apply. 
    This article also prohibits the use of any property unless vehicle parking and loading space in conformance to this article is provided. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.03), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-394. - Expansion of parking. 
    Any expansion of an existing parking area must be approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.04), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-395. - Location of off-street parking. 
    Off-street parking for single family and two family dwellings shall not be located between the principal dwelling and the public right-of-way, except on a hard surface driveway using asphalt or concrete pavement, or other hard surface as may be approved by the city manager, or in an enclosed garage. 
    Off-street parking or vehicle storage in an R-A or RM zoning district shall be located in either the rear or side yard. No more than 25 percent of the parking required in the O&I district may be located between the building and a public right-of-way. No off-street parking shall be located within 20 feet of any residentially zoned property, nor within 20 feet of the street right-of-way as measured along a driveway. A landscaped buffer having a minimum width of 20 feet shall be established and maintained when parking surfaces abut any residentially zoned property. (See article XV, Landscaping and buffers.) 
    Off-street parking in an R-A, RM, O-I, MX, HD-1, HD-2, C-1, C-2 or M-1 district shall be set back from the front property line a minimum distance of ten feet, and this setback shall be maintained as a buffer. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this article, off-street parking and loading spaces as well as all drives and maneuvering areas shall be located a minimum of five feet from all property lines, and such areas shall be maintained as a landscaped buffer. Where those spaces and areas abut off-street parking and loading spaces or drives and maneuvering areas on adjacent property, no such setback shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.05), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-396. - Off-street vehicle parking may be provided off premises. 
    Off-street vehicle parking or storage space shall be provided on every lot sufficient to accommodate the use thereon or hereafter established. However, in instances in which on-site parking is impractical, the city manager may approve parking provided within 500 feet of the property on which such uses are established upon a finding that such parking may be safely and conveniently accessed by pedestrians. Relief from the off-street vehicle parking requirements of this Article shall not be granted for parking for the disabled. Such off-premises shall be associated with the permitted use, and shall not be hereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. Such off-premises parking may be located within 1,000 feet for uses in the HD-1 or HD-2 district. 
    Off-premises parking used to comply with this section must be located on property having the same or less restrictive zoning as the property the off-premise parking serves. In addition, an easement or other recordable instrument satisfactory to the city attorney dedicating the off-premises parking to the property the spaces serve shall be recorded with the clerk of the superior court and a copy provided to the city manager. The document must survive changes in ownership in perpetuity, unless dissolved with approval of mayor and council. 
    The maximum distances of this section shall be measured from the property on which the use is established along the public right-of-way or public sidewalk to the property supplying such off-premises parking. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.06), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-397. - Design requirements for parking lots and driveways. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to all off-street parking whether the parking serves a particular use or development, or the parking is a principal use on a property and not dedicated to serving a particular development. 
(1)  Curbs required. Concrete curbs shall be provided for all paved areas, and shall be used to separate landscaped areas from pavement. 
(2)  Striping required. Every parking space shall be clearly marked by lines painted on or otherwise applied to the parking lot surface. 
(3)  Paved surface. No vehicle parking of any kind shall be permitted on any lot unless all driveways and parking spaces are comprised of an impervious surface consisting of concrete, asphalt, brick or decorative stone pavers. No gravel shall be used except as subgrade material. 
Except for parcels devoted to single-family detached dwellings, all off-street parking shall be designed to accommodate a turn around area so that motorists are not required to back into a public street to exit the property. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.7), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-398. - Access to parking facilities. 
    All off-street parking facilities shall provide adequate interior passageways, drives and maneuvering areas, as determined by the code enforcement officer, to permit access to each parking space and to connect each space to a public or private street. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.08), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-399. - Maximum driveway width. 
    The maximum width for driveways serving properties occupied or intended to be occupied by a single family detached dwelling shall not exceed nine feet as measured at the right-of-way line. The maximum width for any other property shall not exceed 35 feet as measured at the right-of-way line. For the purpose of this section, driveway width shall be measured to the curb face. 
    Access aisles in parking lots serving spaces perpendicular to the access aisle shall have a minimum width of 24 feet, and provide for two-way traffic. Access aisles serving angled parking spaces shall be one-way and shall have a minimum width of 18 feet for 60 degree angle parking and 13 feet for 45 degree angle parking to the aisle. Angle parking of less than 45 degree to the access aisle is prohibited, except for parallel parking. Interior drives on commercial property shall not exceed 30 feet. 
    Driveway separations. The minimum distance between a private driveway serving one single-family dwelling and a street intersection shall be 20 feet; this minimum distance shall be 50 feet for all other uses. Minimum distance between private driveways serving single-family dwellings along a street right-of-way shall be ten feet; this minimum distance shall be 40 feet for all other uses. 
    The minimum distance between a private driveway serving one single family dwelling and a property line shall be five feet; this minimum distance shall be 20 feet for all other residential uses and 50 feet for all other uses. 
    All distances shall be measured from the back of the driveway curb at the right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.09), 8-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-008b, § 2, 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 86-400. - Proximity of driveways. 
    Vehicular ingress and egress to any property shall be limited to a maximum of one driveway for any property having a frontage of less than 200 feet on any one street. Additional driveways for properties having a frontage in excess of 200 feet may be permitted upon a finding by the city manager that public safety and convenience will not be substantially impaired. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.10), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-401. - Location of driveways. 
    No driveway serving a residentially-zoned property may be constructed within two feet of any property line. No driveway serving any other property may be constructed within five feet of any property line. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.11), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-402. - Inter-parcel access required. 
    The owner of property on which any office, retail sales or services use is established shall grant an access easement as described in this section to each adjoining property that is zoned or used for office, retail sales or services uses. The purpose of the easement is to facilitate movement of motorists from business to business without generating additional turning movements on the public street, thus increasing public safety and convenience. 
    The easement shall permit vehicle access from the adjoining property to driveways and parking areas intended for customer or tenant use; however, parking spaces may be restricted to use by the property owner's customers and tenants, only. 
    The granting of such easement shall be effective only upon the granting of a reciprocal easement by the adjoining property owner. Upon the availability of access to driveways and parking areas of the adjoining property, the pavement or other surfacing of each driveway and parking area shall be extended by each owner to the point of access on the property line. 
    Where the proposed land use is such that any adverse impact of the easement on the use of the property would outweigh the reduced impact on the public street realized by the easement, mayor and city council may waive the requirement for inter-parcel access easements, in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.12), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-403. - Vision clearance. 
    With the exception of signposts and other structures less than eight inches in diameter, structures and landscaping shall not exceed three feet in height within a triangle measuring 15 feet along the edge of a private driveway and 20 feet along the street right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.13), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-404. - Lighting of parking areas. 
    Lighting used to illuminate parking areas shall be designed and located to direct light away from residential uses and to prevent glare on any abutting property or create a hazard for motorists. Parking areas shall not be illuminated between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.; unless the uses on the property are open for business, although temporary activation by motion detectors may be allowed to provide security lighting for periods not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    All commercial, institutional or industrial properties shall achieve a minimum lighting standard of 2.0 foot-candles measured at grade across the entire parking facility. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.14), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-405. - Joint use of required off-street parking spaces. 
    No portion of an off-street parking facility required for any building or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this section shall be considered as part of an off-street parking facility similarly required for another building or use. In instances in which the hours of operation of uses for which a sharing, or joint use, of parking facilities is proposed indicate that the respective parking demands occur at alternating times of the day, city council may grant approval for such joint use of parking facilities. Granting of such approvals shall be based on a finding by the council that the proposed joint use of parking will not generate excessive demand for on-street parking or otherwise adversely impact traffic movement or public safety. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.15), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-406. - Size of parking spaces. 
    For the purpose of this article, the minimum area for a vehicle parking or storage space shall comply with specification noted in the table below. 
Minimum Parking Space Dimensions 
Type of Space Width Length Parallel to curb up to 29 degree angle 8.0 feet 20.0 feet Angle of 45 degrees up to 60 degrees 8.5 feet 18.0 feet Angle of 61 degrees up to 90 degrees 9.0 feet 18.0 feet  

PARKING AREA DIMENSIONS 
    Wheel stops or other effective means shall be used to prevent encroachment of vehicles into any landscaped area, that is, vehicle overhang into landscaping shall be prohibited. Accordingly, no credit toward the depth of the parking space shall be granted for vehicle overhang. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.16), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-407. - Accessible parking. 
    Parking and pedestrian facilities on any development site shall conform to all design standards published in the Code of Federal regulations/28 CFR Part 36 revised as of July 1, 1994/Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability by Public Accommodations and in Commercial Facilities/ADA Standards for Accessible Design. All applicable guidelines of these regulations shall be used in the construction or renovation of buildings and parking and loading zones. 
    Access to buildings shall be provided from rights-of-way in parking areas by means of a paved pathway leading to a minimum of one entrance generally used by the public. Such pathway shall have been cleared of all obstructions relating to construction activity, prior to occupancy of the building. Where curbs exist along such pathway, as between a driveway surface and a sidewalk surface, inclined curb approaches or curb cuts having a gradient of not more than one foot in 12 feet and a width of not less than four feet shall be provided for wheelchair access. 
    The parking area serving such pathway shall have a number of level parking spaces as set forth in the table below, identified by above-grade signs as being reserved for physically handicapped individuals. Each parking space so reserved shall have a minimum width of 12 feet. 
Schedule of Off-street Parking Accessible to Individuals with a Disability 
Total Required Parking Spaces Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces 1 - 25 1 26 - 50 2 51 - 75 3 76 - 100 4 101 - 150 5 151 - 200 6 201 - 300 7 301 - 400 8 401 - 500 9 501 - 1,000 2% of total Over 1,001 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000  
    Accessible parking spaces shall be counted as part of the total number of parking spaces required under this article. Accessible spaces shall have an adjacent aisle four feet wide, with one aisle in every eight serving handicapped spaces being eight feet wide and the space shall be signed "van accessible." Such aisles shall be clearly marked by lines painted on or otherwise applied to the parking lot surface. 
HANDICAPPED SPACES 
    Accessible parking spaces shall be located on a paved surface with a slope not exceeding one vertical foot in 50 horizontal feet (1:50). 
    In addition to the requirements of this section, all accessible parking shall comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Georgia Accessibility Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.17), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-408. - Off-street parking for drive-in establishments. 
    Any property containing a use having a drive-in or drive-through window shall provide adequate on premises queuing space designed to accommodate all anticipated vehicle traffic. Drive-in establishments which serve customers who are occupying vehicles parked on the premises shall provide adequate off-street parking. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.18), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-409. - Use of off-street parking areas. 
    No off-street parking shall be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing or long term storage of any vehicle or equipment unless permitted in the zoning district in which the parking is located. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.19), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-410. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein, areas suitable for parking vehicles in off-street locations shall be required in all zoning districts for any permitted use. Such off-street parking shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this section. These requirements are intended to meet minimum needs. Every property owner must determine his actual needs and provide whatever spaces may be necessary beyond these minimums to remain in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In all instances where no specific parking requirement is applicable, the minimum off-street parking spaces available must be equal to the number required to accommodate all normally anticipated customers, employees and other needs of the establishment. 
    Worker shift change peaking and projected growth must be considered when determining parking requirements. Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Single-family uses shall provide two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(2)  Single family attached and RM district uses shall provide 1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(3)  Mixed-use developments shall provide 1.25 spaces for each attached dwelling unit. 
(4)  Homes for the aged, rest homes, convalescent homes, nursing homes and similar institutions shall provide one space for every three residents or patients, plus one space for every two employees. 
(5)  Rooming houses and boardinghouses shall provide one space for every two bedrooms. 
(6)  Fraternities or sororities shall provide one parking space for every three beds contained in the residence. 
(7)  Tourist homes and motels shall provide one space for each guest room. 
(8)  Hotels and motels of three stories or less in height shall provide one parking space on the same lot for each guest room, plus one space for every two employees on the shift of greatest employment in addition to that parking required by this subsection for each 300 square feet of floor area in a building used for any other commercial purpose permitted in this district. 
(9)  Hotels and motels over three stories in height shall provide one parking space on the same lot for each guest room located on the bottom three floors, and three parking spaces on the same lot for every four guest rooms located above the third floor, plus one space for every two employees on the shift of greatest employment, and in addition shall provide one parking space on the same lot for each 300 square feet of floor area in a building used for any other commercial purpose permitted in this district. 
(10)  Retail and commercial uses shall provide one space for every 200 square feet of enclosed commercial space available to the public. 
(11)  Office uses, including financial and banking institutions, shall provide one space for every 250 square feet of floor area, excluding storage areas. 
(12)  Hospitals, outpatient clinics, and other health care facilities shall provide one space for every one beds, plus one space for every staff or visiting doctor (based on the average number), plus one space for every two other employees on the shift of greatest employment. 
(13)  Dental offices, doctor's offices, veterinary offices, clinics and similar operations shall provide four spaces for each doctor, plus one space for one for every two employees. 
(14)  Research laboratories shall provide one space for every 500 square feet of office area, plus one space for every 1,000 square feet of laboratory area. 
(15)  Restaurants, cafeterias, night clubs, taverns and similar establishments shall provide the larger of one space per 100 square feet of gross floor area or one space for every three seats for customers, plus one space for every two employees on the shift of greatest employment. 
(16)  Personal service establishments such as barber shops and hair salons shall provide two spaces per customer station. 
(17)  Convenience stores shall provide one space for each fuel dispenser and one space for every 200 square feet of retail space. 
(18)  Automobile repair shops shall provide three spaces for each lift or bay. 
(19)  Automobile dealers shall provide one space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
(20)  Automobile service stations shall provide three spaces for each service bay, with a minimum of five spaces required, and those selling fuels shall provide two spaces for each fuel dispenser. 
(21)  One space shall be provided for the larger of every two employees of the largest shift of any industrial use or similar establishment or one space for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area devoted to factory production, plus one space for every 2,000 square feet of gross storage area and one space for each vehicle used directly in the conduct of the business. One space shall also be provided for every 250 square feet of floor space used for incidental accessory uses, e.g., administrative offices. The day shift during peak season shall be used as the computing criterion. 
(22)  One space shall be provided for every 1,500 square feet of floor space used for warehousing or storage. 
(23)  Salvage, storage or junkyards shall provide one space per employee, plus four spaces for each acre of yard. 
(24)  Wholesale establishments shall provide one space per employee, plus adequate spaces to accommodate vehicles used in the conduct of the business. 
(25)  Mini-warehouses shall provide one space per 5,000 square feet of gross storage area, plus one space for every employee. 
(26)  Recycling centers shall provide one space for each 200 square feet of floor area, plus one space for every 500 square feet of lot area. 
(27)  One space shall be provided for the larger of every four seats or for each 25 square feet of floor area available for chairs in the largest assembly room in the auditoriums or stadiums of schools and public buildings, places of worship or other locations of public assembly. Lodges and fraternal or social organizations shall provide one space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
(28)  Theaters, auditoriums, places of worship, libraries, museums, art galleries, funeral homes, gymnasiums, stadiums and other places of assembly shall provide the larger of one space for each four fixed seats or one space for each 25 square feet of floor area available for the accommodation of moveable seats in the largest assembly room, whichever is greater, plus one space for each 150 square feet of ground area used for assembly. 
(29)  Dance schools shall provide one space for each employee, plus one space for every 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
(30)  Colleges, universities, trade and vocational schools shall provide the larger of eight spaces for each classroom or one space for every 200 square foot of classroom, plus one space for every two employees or administrative personnel. 
(31)  Public and private secondary schools shall provide the larger of ten spaces for each classroom or one space for every 35 square feet in largest assembly room, plus one space for every two employees or administrative personnel. 
(32)  Public and private elementary schools shall provide the larger of two spaces for each classroom or one space for every 35 square feet in largest assembly room, plus one space for every two employees or administrative personnel. 
(33)  Kindergarten, day care centers and nursery schools shall provide one space for each employee and one space for every ten students, plus an area sufficient for the safe and convenient loading and unloading of students. 
(34)  Indoor recreation facilities, such as billiard halls, game rooms, video arcade, skating rinks, fitness centers and private clubhouses shall provide one space for every four seats or for each 150 square feet of floor area in a building used for recreation or amusement. 
(35)  Golf courses, neighborhood recreation centers or similar uses shall provide one space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for every ten seats in an assembly area with fixed seats. All such uses shall provide a minimum of 20 spaces. Eighteen-hole golf courses shall provide a minimum of 40 spaces. Other outdoor recreational facilities shall provide parking according to the following schedule: 
a.  Tennis courts: Three spaces per court 
b.  Basketball courts: Four spaces per court 
c.  Playing fields: One space for every 2,000 square feet of playing field 
d.  Driving ranges: Two spaces per tee 
e.  Miniature golf: Ten spaces per 18 holes 
f.  Swimming pools: One for every 100 square feet of water surface area. 
(36)  Outdoor festivals shall provide two spaces for each 1,000 square feet of ground area available to the public. 
(37)  Riding stables shall provide one space for each employee and one space for every three animals that can be accommodated in the stable. 
(38)  One parking space on the lot for each 200 square feet of floor area in a building used for any other purpose permitted in the zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.20), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-411. - General requirements. 
    In all instances, the minimum number of off-street parking spaces provided shall be equal to the number required to accommodate all normally anticipated customers, employees and other needs of the establishment. Off-street parking requirements for properties containing more than one use shall calculate the requirement for each use separately as provided in this section. The total of these calculated requirements shall constitute the parking requirement for that property. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.21), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-412. - Pedestrian travel in off-street parking lots. 
    The design of large off-street parking lots in which parking bays containing more than 20 parking spaces are provided shall incorporate raised sidewalks to assure pedestrian safety. Such sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet wide extending across the entire parking bay for the length of the parking spaces and also extend across the vehicle travel lane as a "speed table" to the sidewalk along the building they serve. The sidewalks be constructed on a raised surface with handicapped accessible approaches, as appropriate, and provide safe pedestrian access to accommodate motorists and their passengers from the four adjacent bays. Landscaped islands shall adjoin the sidewalk on either side for the purpose of complying with landscape requirements and separating parked vehicles from the sidewalk. 
OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.22), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-413. - Conditional use permit required for nonresidential parking in a residential district. 
(a)  [ Required; application; fee. ] Land located in any residential zoned district shall not be used for parking or storage of vehicles other than vehicles customarily associated with a residential use unless such non-resident parking or storage is permitted by city council through the granting of a conditional use permit. Applications for such a conditional use permit shall be filed with the city clerk, together with a filing fee in an amount established by the city. Such applications must be signed by the owner of the property for which the use is requested and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and phone number of the property owner. 
(2)  Legal description of the property, together with a property survey indicating the metes and bounds of the property and location in relation to any public right-of-way or alley. 
(3)  Characteristics of the proposed parking. 
(4)  Applications for parking involving grading and/or paving shall be accompanied by grading plans and pavement specifications certified by a licensed engineer. Such plans and specifications shall include soil erosion and sedimentation control and hydrology studies as appropriate. 
(b)  Hearing for conditional use permit. Upon the filing of the application for a conditional use permit in accordance with the requirements specified in subsection (a) of this section, a public hearing before mayor and council shall be scheduled for the purpose of considering the application and rendering a decision thereon. A notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a minimum of 15 calendar days prior to the public hearing. One or more signs, as appropriate to the size and frontage of the property, shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property by the code enforcement officer. Each such sign shall have a minimum area of six square feet and shall contain information identifying the intended use of the property as non-residential parking and the date, time and location set for the public hearing before city council for consideration of the conditional use permit. No public hearing shall be held until such sign or signs have been posted for a minimum of 15 calendar days prior to the public hearing. 
(1)  No such application for a conditional use permit for non-residential parking on a residential property shall be filed more often than once every 12 months. 
(2)  Penalty for violation of this section. Any violation of this section shall be considered a violation of this chapter subject to the penalties herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.23), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-414. - Off-street parking in the historic district. 
(a)  [ H-1 district. ] Off-street parking requirements in the H-1 district shall be controlled by the following standards: 
(1)  Off-street parking, generally. At the time of establishment of any use or erection of any building, or at the time the floor area of any principal building is enlarged or increased by adding dwelling units or guest rooms, permanent off-street parking spaces improved with a brick, decorative stone pavers, asphalt or concrete surface shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Non-residential uses. Off-street parking may be provided within public parking facilities provided such facilities are located within 500 feet of the non-residential use. When public parking does not meet this proximity requirement, off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the standards in section 86-395. 
b.  Residential uses. Off-street parking shall be provided for the property at the rate of one space per dwelling unit. This requirement may be met by designating off-street residential parking or by leasing space in the municipal parking deck. Off-street parking shall be within a minimum walking distance of 1,000 feet of the main entrance of the building such off-premises parking is intended to serve. 
c.  Proximity of off-street parking spaces for use. All required parking for all uses shall be either on the same lot or within a walking distance of 500 feet of the main entrance to the building or use such off-premises parking is intended to serve. 
d.  Combination of required parking spaces. The required parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot; however, the required spaces assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except as follows: 
1.  Parking spaces may be shared by more than one use provided the city manager finds that the total number of spaces will be adequate at the peak hours of the uses such parking serves. Such a finding shall be based on data submitted by the applicant. 
2.  Half of the parking spaces required for a place of worship, theater or assembly hall whose peak attendance will be at particular times or days of the week may be assigned to a use that is closed at those times or dates. 
(b)  [ H-2 district. ] Off-street parking requirements in the H-2 district shall be controlled by the following standards: 
a.  Off-street parking, location. Parking shall be located to the rear of any non-residential use and shall be screened from public view with a landscaped buffer of trees and shrubbery having a minimum height of eight feet and occupying one-half the landscaped buffer or a landscaped buffer having a minimum height of four feet and comprised of a continuous hedge. 
b.  Minimum parking requirement. For non-residential uses, one parking space for every 1,200 gross square feet of floor area shall be required. 
c.  Maximum parking limit. For non-residential uses, one space for every 625 gross square feet of floor area may be permitted; provided, however, the city manager may, at his discretion, determine the use requires additional spaces. 
d.  Residential uses. No off-street parking shall be required on properties occupied by three or fewer dwelling units. Properties occupied by more than three dwelling units shall provided of-street parking at a ratio of 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit, rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
e.  Proximity of off-street parking spaces. Off-street parking for all uses shall be either on the same lot or within a walking distance of 500 feet of the main entrance to the building or use such off-premises parking is intended to serve provided; however, that no required parking spaces may be located across any state or U.S. highway or arterial street from the use they are intended to serve. 
f.  Combination of required parking spaces. The required parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot; however, the required spaces assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except as follows: 
1.  Parking spaces may be shared by more than one use provided the city manager finds that the total number of spaces will be adequate at the peak hours of the uses such parking serves. Such a finding shall be based on data submitted by the applicant. 
2.  Half of the parking spaces required for a place of worship, theater or assembly hall whose peak attendance will be at particular times or days of the week may be assigned to a use that is closed at those times or dates. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.24), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-415. - Off-street loading required. 
    Every building used for business, trade or industry shall provide space as indicated in this article for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley, or, if there is no alley, to a street. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided on all non-residential property appropriate to the function and scope of operation of the property and uses such spaces serve. Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering of delivery vehicles may be accommodated entirely within the boundaries of the property. Loading spaces shall be located so as not to interfere with the free, normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.25), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-416. - Size and location of off-street loading spaces. 
    Each off-street loading space shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width, 60 feet in length and provide a vertical height clearance of 14 feet. The city manager may reduce these requirements upon demonstration in specific instances that a particular loading space will be used exclusively by vehicles that may be accommodated by a loading space of smaller dimensions. In no case shall a loading space having dimensions of less than ten feet in width and 30 feet in length be approved. All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building or use they are intended to serve, or on an adjacent lot in those instances where joint use of a loading space with the use occupying that lot has been approved by city council. 
    Off-street truck loading; where required. Any business or industrial building, hospital, institution, or hotel, in any zoning district, shall provide adequate off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of business merchandise, supplies, goods or freight within or adjacent to the building as deemed appropriate by the owner or occupants of the property. 
    No off-street loading space shall be located within 25 feet of any residentially zoned property, nor within 30 feet of the street right-of-way along a driveway. Where such space is located in a manner that a truck must back directly from a major thoroughfare into the loading space, a maneuvering space of 49 feet shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.26), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-417. - Number of off-street loading spaces. 
    The following loading spaces shall be provided to serve the uses indicated: 
(1)  One loading space on the lot shall be provided for each 15,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof in excess of 8,000 square feet, devoted to commercial use. 
(2)  Bus and truck terminals shall provide sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loaded or unloaded at the terminal at any one time. 
(3)  Industrial uses shall provide loading spaces according to the following schedule: 
a.  One space for buildings up to 25,000 square feet 
b.  Two spaces for buildings of 25,001-99,999 square feet 
c.  Three spaces for buildings of 100,000-159,999 square feet 
d.  Four spaces for buildings of 160,000-239,999 square feet 
e.  Five spaces for buildings of 240,000-349,999 square feet 
f.  For each additional 100,000 square feet or fraction thereof, one additional space 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(13.27), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-418-86-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 86-431. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Whenever these regulations impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any federal or state law or applicable local ordinances, these regulations shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any applicable federal, state or local ordinances require more restrictive standards than are required by these regulations, the provisions of such laws or ordinances shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(14.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-432. - Penalties for transferring lot in unapproved subdivisions. 
    Whoever, being owner or agent of any land located within a subdivision, transfers or sells any land in such subdivision prior to final plat approval by mayor and recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clayton County, Georgia, shall forfeit and pay a penalty $1,000.00 for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. The city may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of equity jurisdiction or may recover the same penalty by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Notwithstanding any provision of this section the city may also proceed under section 86-42 for penalties for transferring as stated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(14.02), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-433. - Exemptions. 
    Previously approved final subdivision plats are exempt from the requirement of this chapter unless construction or development associated with such approved plats has not been commenced within 12 months of the date of plat approval. Specifically, in the event of a conflict in building setback pertaining to an individual building lot, those setbacks identified on the previously approved final plat shall control over those in this chapter, subject to the above 12-month period. However, standards associated with structures proposed on such lots, including minimum floor area, among other standards, shall comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(14.03), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-434. - Provisions of zoning ordinance declared to be minimum standards or maximum limits. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be the minimum standards or maximum limits, as the case may be, commensurate with promotion of the purposes of this chapter and adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Wherever the standards of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other officially adopted government statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances or codes, or privately recorded deed restrictions or covenants, the more restrictive shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(14.04), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-435. - Validity; severability of provisions. 
    Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this zoning ordinance are or were, upon their enactment, believed by the mayor and council to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this zoning ordinance is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this zoning ordinance. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that; to the greatest extent allowed by law, no section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this zoning ordinance is mutually dependent upon any other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this zoning ordinance. 
    In the event that any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this zoning ordinance shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the mayor and council that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of the zoning ordinance and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of the zoning ordinance shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(14.05), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-436-86-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERS 

Sec. 86-451. - Purpose and applicability. 
(a)  [ Purpose. ] The purpose of this article is to provide requirements for the landscaping of developments in industrial, commercial, office-institutional, multifamily residential and single-family zoning districts, in order to enrich the urban and natural environment of the city. The article also applies to institutional uses such as places of worship, schools, day care centers, and nursing homes. It is the intent and purpose of this landscape article to reduce the adverse visual, environmental and aesthetic effects of parking lots, drives, loading areas, and other development through introduction of trees and other plant materials in order to: 
(1)  Minimize the rate of stormwater runoff; 
(2)  Maximize the capability of groundwater recharge in urban or suburban areas; 
(3)  Increase air filtration and the removal of particulate and gaseous pollutants through plant materials; 
(4)  Provide shade and noise attenuation; 
(5)  Filter and reduce the glare of headlights and reflected sunlight from parked automobiles onto the public street rights-of-way; 
(6)  Improve the appearance of parking areas and vehicular surface areas; and 
(7)  Minimize the visual blight created by large expanses of paved surface area. 
(b)  [ Applicability. ] This article shall apply to all properties or portions thereof located within the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(15.01), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-452. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning prescribed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Buffer shall mean land area consisting of trees, shrubs, grasses, fences or combination thereof used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance, to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other conditions, to minimize physical passage to non-similar areas, or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter. 
    Buffer strip shall mean land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping and upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
    Canopy tree shall mean any tree that, under normal forest conditions, will compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and generally will reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
    Clearing shall mean the removal of vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means. 
    Construction buffer shall mean a type of buffer which is temporary and remains in effect during the construction of a project. 
    Diameter, tree shall mean the diameter of a tree measured as follows: (1) for existing preserved trees, at a point 41/2 feet above the ground; (2) for new replaced trees, at a point six inches above the ground for nursery stock up to four-inch caliper, above that size class the measurement shall be at 12 inches above grade. 
    Dripline shall mean a line on the ground established by a vertical plane extending from a tree's outermost branch tips down to the ground; i.e., the line enclosing the area directly beneath the tree's crown from which rainfall would drip. 
    Floodplain, One-hundred-year shall mean any land susceptible to being flooded or inundated by water during a storm or other weather event with accumulated precipitation of a measured amount which occurs, on average, once every 100 years. This definition shall include, without limitation, any land identified on the flood insurance rate map as being within a delineated zone of special flood hazard. 
    Grading shall mean the placement, removal, or movement of earth by use of mechanical equipment on a property. 
    Interior landscape area shall mean an area to be landscaped which is located in the interior area of a development or building site where vehicular parking spaces are to be provided or which is otherwise to be covered with impervious surface. 
    Land distributing permit (LDP) shall mean any permit other than a building permit issued by the city that authorizes clearing or grading activities on a site or portion of a site. This permit may be a clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading, or development permit as defined and authorized by the city. 
    Landscape plan shall mean a detailed plan depicting proposed landscaping which will accompany all site plans submitted for development approval for uses affected by this article. 
    Landscape strip shall mean land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
    Modification shall mean a type of administrative appeal that may be granted by the city manager only where specifically authorized in this ordinance. 
    Nonresidential landscape planning area shall mean an area to be landscaped in a nonresidential zoning district which is located around the perimeter of each nonresidential structure or in the front yard of a nonresidential structure. 
    Perimeter landscape area shall mean an area to be landscaped which is located between the property boundary and vehicle use area of a property developed in any use other than single family detached dwellings. 
    Residential landscape planting area shall mean an area to be landscaped in a residential zoning district which is located around the perimeter of each residential structure or in the front yard of a residential structure. 
    Screening shall mean a method of shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, or the like. 
    Shrub shall mean a woody plant of relatively low height, as distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk. 
    Tree shall mean any live, self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually having a main stem or trunk and many branches, and at maturity normally attaining a trunk diameter greater than four inches at any point and a height of over 12 feet. 
    Tree diameter shall mean the widest cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at diameter breast height (dbh) or at a point below diameter breast height for new trees or multi-stemmed species, but in no case less than six inches from the ground. 
    Understory tree shall mean a tree that, under normal forest conditions grows to maturity beneath canopy trees and will generally reach a minimum height at maturity of ten feet, but less than 40 feet. 
    Vehicular use areas shall mean any area, paved or unpaved, used for egress or ingress, or to store or park motor vehicles. 
    Zoning buffer shall mean a buffer required by the zoning ordinance or as a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval for a specific property. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(15.02), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-453. - Plans. 
    A buffer and landscape plan shall be prepared for any project wherein buffer areas or other landscaping areas or treatment are required by this ordinance, the zoning ordinances of the city, conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval, or other regulations of the city, and shall be approved prior to issuance of a development permit. While the plan shall cover, at a minimum, the required buffer and landscape areas, the plan can be combined with a general landscaping plan for the entire project at the developer's option. 
(1)  The buffer and landscape plan shall be shown on a site plan or boundary survey drawn to the same or a larger scale as the other plan documents prepared for the development permit application and shall cover the same area. 
(2)  The buffer and landscape plan shall contain but need not be limited to the following: 
a.  Project name and land district, land lot, and acreage; 
b.  Developer's name and telephone number; 
c.  The name, address, and telephone number of the registered landscape architect, urban forester, or arborist responsible for preparation of the plan, and the seal or statement of professional qualifications of said person (which may be attached separately). The performance of professional services in the preparation of plans required herein shall comply with Georgia Law governing the practice of the applicable profession; 
d.  A scale sufficient to clearly indicate all details shall be used, along with a north arrow; 
e.  Boundary lines of each buffer or other landscape area, appropriately labeled; 
f.  Depiction of undisturbed buffer areas and protective areas, and any other areas wherein trees are proposed to be retained to meet city requirements, along the driplines of the trees or groups of trees contained therein; 
g.  Identification of all proposed structures, vehicle use areas, sidewalks, wheel stops or curbs, walls and fences; 
h.  A description of proposed landscaping improvements and plantings, including the species, site, quantity, and location of all trees, shrubs, vines, groundcover and other landscaping materials; 
i.  Within areas involving or adjacent to land form changes, existing and finish grade topographic lines at an interval of no more than two feet may be required; 
j.  For new plant materials to be installed, a plant material list including but not limited to: 
1.  Common and botanical names of all proposed plants. 
2.  Plant quantities. 
3.  Size and condition of plants. (Example: one inch diameter, six feet height, balled and burlapped) 
4.  Spacing. 
5.  Remarks as necessary to insure proper plant selection upon installation. (Example: specimen, multi-stemmed). 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(15.03), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-454. - Buffer regulations. 
    Buffers shall be required between dissimilar districts or uses. 
(1)  Width of buffers. Buffers shall meet the minimum width requirements in accordance with the schedule in the table below, except as required by a condition of zoning, special use, or variance approval. 
Buffer Width between Dissimilar Uses 
Proposed Use must provide the Buffer Existing Use to be Buffered Detached 
Residential Attached 
Residential Commercial Industrial Detached Residential No Buffer 25-foot Buffer 50-foot Buffer 75-foot Buffer Attached Residential No Buffer No Buffer 25-foot Buffer 50-foot Buffer Office Commercial No Buffer No Buffer No Buffer 25-foot Buffer Industrial No Buffer No Buffer No Buffer No Buffer  
(2)  Screening requirements. 
a.  Buffers shall be natural, undisturbed, and free of encroachments except as authorized by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval, or as authorized herein, and shall contain the existing tree cover and vegetation as well as any supplemental plantings or replantings as may be required. 
b.  Buffers shall be of such nature and density so as to screen activities, structures and uses on the property from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot and shall further provide a year-round effective visual screen. 
c.  Buffers required along side property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required by the city manager in order to observe the sight distance requirements contained in the development regulations, or as authorized by a condition of zoning, special use, or variance approval. 
d.  In situations where the required buffer width is partially or completely contained within an existing easement (e.g. power or natural gas transmission, etc.), the screening requirements of this article shall be met outside of the easement area. 
(3)  Supplemental plantings. 
a.  Buffers in which vegetation is non-existent or is inadequate to meet the screening requirements of this article shall be planted with supplemental plantings so as to provide a year-round effective visual screen, 
b.  Supplemental plantings and replantings shall consist of evergreen trees, shrubs, or combination thereof, native or adaptable to the region. All trees planted shall be a minimum of six feet in height at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a minimum height of 20 feet at maturity. All shrubs planted shall be a large growing species, shall be a minimum of three feet in height at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a minimum height of ten feet at maturity. 
c.  All supplemental plantings shall be installed to allow for proper plant growth and maintenance. 
(4)  Non-vegetative screening. 
a.  Non-vegetative materials utilized to satisfy the screening requirements of this article, in addition to the use of existing vegetation and/or supplemental plantings, may consist of walls, fences, earthen berms or any combination thereof. 
b.  If walls or fences are to be utilized, their placement and installation shall be such so as to cause minimal disturbance of existing vegetation and located so as to provide an effective visual screen. All walls or fences must be architecturally compatible with existing adjacent structures and have a minimum height of six feet. 
(5)  Disturbance or encroachments. 
a.  Ditches, swales, storm water conveyance facilities, storm water detention ponds, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any associated easements, shall not encroach into a buffer except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g. storm water or sanitary sewer pipes) may encroach into the buffer as near to perpendicular as practical. 
b.  Supplemental plantings or replantings of vegetation, or authorized non-vegetative screening devices shall be authorized to encroach into a buffer provided their is minimal disturbance of any significant existing vegetation. 
c.  Land disturbance is authorized in areas of a buffer that are devoid of significant vegetation provided that the final grade and replantings of vegetation meet the screening requirements contained herein. 
d.  Dying, diseased or dead vegetation may be removed from a buffer provided minimal disturbance occurs, vegetation thus removed shall be replaced where necessary to meet the screening requirements contained herein. 
(6)  Protection during land disturbing activities. 
a.  During authorized land disturbing activities, buffers shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during, construction. 
b.  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with best management practices or as required by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(15.04), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-455. - Standards for construction buffers. 
(a)  [ Generally. ] Construction buffers shall only be required where specifically provided as a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval. 
(b)  Time constraints. Construction buffers shall only be in effect during the construction period of a project and shall terminate upon project completion. In the case of a residential subdivision, a construction buffer shall terminate upon each individual lot with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal dwelling. 
(c)  Disturbance or encroachments. 
(1)  Construction buffers shall be natural, undisturbed and free of encroachments except as authorized by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval, or as authorized herein. 
(2)  The encroachment of ditches swales stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sediment basins, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any associated easements, into a construction buffer shall not be authorized except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g. storm water or sanitary sewer pipes) and natural bottom detention ponds (sediment basins must be located outside of the construction buffer) and their appurtenant structures which require no grading and removal of trees, may encroach upon the construction buffer. 
(3)  If the construction buffer on a residential lot is devoid of existing trees and vegetation, and a tree survey is submitted to document this situation prior to conducting land disturbing activities (including clearing) on the lot, then the city manager may authorize the encroachment of a building or structure into the construction buffer for a distance not to exceed ten feet. 
(d)  Protection during land disturbing activities. 
(1)  During authorized land disturbing activities construction buffers shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during, construction. 
(2)  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with best management practices or as required by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(15.05), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-456. - Landscape regulations. 
(a)  Nonresidential and multifamily uses. Nonresidential and multifamily uses shall provide for and maintain landscape plantings on-site as follows: 
(1)  One landscape strip having a minimum width of ten feet adjacent to any street right-of-way abutting the property and running the length of the entire property frontage, with exception of approved driveways or pedestrian access; 
(2)  In areas adjacent to or internal to off-street parking lots that are required by the zoning ordinances to contain more than five off-street parking spaces in accordance with section 86-4; a five-foot perimeter landscaped area shall be required, perhaps even between adjoining parking lots; 
(3)  As required by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval; 
(4)  One nonresidential landscape planting area having a minimum width of six feet around the perimeter of each structure; landscaping of the rear face of nonresidential structures shall be at the owner's option; 
(5)  The remaining ground area shall be sodded, seeded or hydroseeded with grass; 
(6)  The city manager is hereby authorized to grant a modification of up to 50 percent of the ten-foot landscape strip width provided the strip is not required by a condition of zoning, special use, modification variance or waiver approval. 
(b)  Residential uses. Residential uses shall provide for and maintain landscape plantings on-site as follows: 
(1)  As required by a condition of zoning, special use, modification, variance or waiver approval, 
(2)  A residential landscape planting area on each lot having a minimum width of six feet around the perimeter of each structure; and 
(3)  Within the interior of an individual lot, a 150-square-foot interior landscaped area shall be required for each 5,000 square feet of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(15.06), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-457. - Landscape strip planting requirements. 
(a)  Ten-foot-wide landscape strips. Landscape strips which are required to be ten feet in width shall contain landscaping and plantings within the strip as follows: 
(1)  One canopy tree for each 25 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two inches and evergreens trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height at time of planting. Trees shall be a species native or suitable to this region; 
(2)  One understory tree for each 25 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Each canopy tree shall be a species native or suitable to this region; 
(3)  One shrub for each 25 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Each shrub shall be a species native or suitable to this region; 
(4)  Trees and shrubs required herein may be planted and spaced singly or in groups as authorized by the city manager so long as the total number of plantings is achieved; and 
(5)  The remaining ground area shall be sodded, seeded or hydroseeded with grass, and/or planted with groundcover species and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof. 
(b)  Six-foot-wide landscaping strips. Landscape strips which are required to be six feet in width shall contain landscaping and plantings within or adjacent to the strip as follows: 
(1)  One canopy tree for each 50 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two inches in caliper and evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of six feet at time of planting. Trees shall be a species native or suitable to this region. 
(2)  One shrub for each 50 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Each shrub shall be a species native or suitable to this region. 
(3)  One understory tree for each 25 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Each canopy tree shall be a species native or suitable to this region; 
(4)  Trees and shrubs required herein may be planted and spaced singly or in groups as authorized by the city manager so long as the total number of required plantings is achieved. 
(5)  The remaining ground area shall be sodded, seeded or hydroseeded with grass, and/or planted with groundcover species and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof. 
(c)  Landscape strips wider than ten feet. Tree and shrub quantities in landscape strips that are required to be wider than ten feet by a condition of zoning, special use, variance or waiver approval shall be proportional to their width (e.g. a 20-foot wide landscape strip would require two trees and two shrubs for each 25 linear feet of strip length). 
(d)  Encroachments into landscape strips. Landscaped strips shall not be encroached upon by parking spaces, driveway surfaces or storm water detention facilities except that driveway crossings may traverse such strip as near to a perpendicular alignment as practical. Signs may also be located in such strip. 
(e)  Residential or nonresidential landscape planting area. 
(1)  A six-foot-wide residential or nonresidential landscape planting area shall be required around the perimeter of each structure with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  One interior shrub with a minimum diameter of ten inches for every 15 linear feet with a minimum of six interior shrubs for every dwelling unit or structure; 
b.  One interior shrub with a minimum diameter of five inches for every 15 linear feet with a minimum of six interior shrubs for every dwelling unit or structure; 
c.  One understory tree having a minimum caliper of two inches for every 30 linear feet with a minimum of two trees per dwelling unit or structure; and 
d.  Ground cover shall be placed on all areas within the planting area wthat are not occupied by other landscape materials. 
e.  Landscaping of the rear face of nonresidential structures shall be at the owner's option. 
(2)  A 150-square-foot residential landscape planting area shall be required for each 5,000 square feet of the lot with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  A minimum of one planting area shall be located in the front yard of the dwelling unit. 
b.  One interior shrub with a minimum diameter of 25 inches for every 15 linear feet; 
c.  One interior shrub with a minimum diameter of 18 inches for every 15 linear feet; 
d.  One canopy tree with a minimum diameter of two caliper inches for every 30 linear feet with a minimum of two trees per dwelling unit; and 
e.  Ground cover shall be placed on all areas within the planting area which are not occupied by other landscape materials. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(15.07), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-458. - Vehicle use area planting requirements. 
    Quantity, spacing and planting standards. Vehicle use areas which are required to contain more than five parking spaces shall contain landscaping and plantings as follows: 
(1)  Perimeter landscaping shall be installed along the property boundary having a minimum width of five feet. Such perimeter landscaping shall comply with the landscaping requirements as to plant materials of this section. 
(2)  Interior landscape areas shall be installed such as islands, peninsulas, and medians, so that no more than ten adjacent parking spaces exist without a landscaped island having a minimum width of six feet and extending the depth of the parking space. Interior planting areas shall be located to most effectively relieve the monotony of large expanses of paving and contribute to orderly circulation of vehicles and pedestrian traffic. 
a.  Trees shall be provided and maintained adjacent to, and in the interior portions of, parking lots in a ratio of one tree for each seven parking spaces. In addition, every parking space shall be within 60 feet of the trunk of a tree. 
b.  Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two inches in caliper and evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height. A minimum of one in every three trees shall be a canopy tree. 
(3)  Within the interior of a site, 500 square feet of planting areas shall be required for each 5,000 square feet or major portion thereof of vehicular parking area. 
(4)  A minimum of one canopy tree shall be provided for every 80 square feet of planting area. 
(5)  A minimum of one understory tree shall be provided for every 40 square feet of planting area. 
(6)  The minimum planting area or island for each canopy tree shall be a minimum of 200 square feet. If shared with other trees, 80 square feet for each additional tree shall be added. 
(7)  The minimum planting area or island for each understory tree shall be 100 square feet. If shared with other trees, 40 square feet for each additional tree shall be added. 
(8)  Each planting area or island shall not be less than six feet in width in any direction. 
(9)  Ground areas shall be sodded, seeded or hydroseeded with grass and/or planted with groundcover species, and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof. 
(10)  Paved or striped islands greater than 50 square feet shall not be allowed. These areas shall contain landscape plantings. 
(11)  Trees removed or having had their tops cut after compliance with this article shall be replaced with the equivalent inches of removed trees. However, trees removed due to disease or insect infestation upon the written advice and findings of the county extension service or the Georgia Forestry Commission shall be replaced in accordance with the minimum standards contained in the article. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(15.08), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-459. - No-access easement screening requirements. 
    No-access easements that are along the line of double frontage lots abutting upon a city road shall be screened as follows: 
(1)  Planted with a single line of evergreen trees having a minimum height of six feet and spaced no greater than ten feet apart; or, 
(2)  Contain a solid or decorative fence having a minimum height of four feet; or, 
(3)  Contain such other landscaping treatments or grade changes that will produce a partial screening effect of achieve a minimum height of four feet as authorized by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(15.09), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-460. - Compliance. 
(a)  Artificial materials prohibited. All artificial plants, trees, shrubs, grass or other vegetation shall be prohibited from fulfilling the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Warranty or maintenance surety. Upon final installation of new trees, shrubs or other landscape material planted to meet the requirements of this ordinance, and following acceptance by the city manager in accordance with the procedures set forth in the development regulations, the owner of the property upon which the landscape material exists shall either provide proof of warranty or post a maintenance bond or other acceptable surety, warranting the new trees, shrubs or landscape material for a period of no less than one year. This article shall not apply to individual residential lot trees. The owner of buffer strips around residential developments shall be the homeowners association. 
(c)  Inspection. The code enforcement office shall perform an inspection of the plantings and landscape materials required by this ordinance prior to expiration of the one-year warranty or maintenance period. The owner shall be notified of any replacements or restoration that must be made to maintain compliance with this article or conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval. Required landscape material found to be dead or near death shall be replaced prior to release by the city manager of the warranty or maintenance surety. In no case shall replacement be delayed greater than 30 days from notification unless a performance bond is posted with the city clerk. 
(d)  Performance surety. In the event that trees or landscape material required to be planted as set forth in the buffer regulations or landscape regulations contained herein, are not installed upon application for a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval as appropriate to the project, then a performance bond or other acceptable surety in an amount equal to 110 percent of the value of the new trees or landscape material and their installation shall be posted with the city clerk in accordance with the performance bonding requirements and provisions of the development regulations. 
(e)  Continuing maintenance. The owner, occupant, tenant, and respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the perpetual maintenance and protection of buffers, trees and landscape plantings required by this article. The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to order diseased, infested, dying, dead or damaged landscaping required herein to be replaced. Buffers that, over a period of time, lose their screening ability shall be replanted to meet the requirements of this article. Replacement, trees and landscaping shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(15.10), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-461. - Enforcement and appeals. 
(a)  Enforcement. It shall be the responsibility of the code enforcement office to enforce this article. The code enforcement office shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading, development or building permit or to withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy or approval of a final plat, and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof, where tree removal or damage occurs in violation of this article. 
(b)  Violation and penalty. Any person violating a provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city, and upon conviction by municipal court, may be punished either by a fine not less than $100.00 per day and not to exceed $1,000.00 per day, or confinement in the county jail not to exceed 60 days, or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this article on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of said suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law which may include mandatory attendance at an educational program regarding tree preservation. The owner of any property wherein a violation exists, and any builder, contractor, or agent who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(c)  Appeals, modifications and waivers. 
(1)  The preservation of trees may be considered as a condition peculiar to a piece of property in support of a request for a variance from the literal application of the provisions of the zoning resolution, under the procedures and requirements contained therein. 
(2)  Appeals of the interpretation of the requirements of this article by the city manager shall be filed and processed in accordance with the appeal procedures as set forth in the in article XI. 
(3)  Waiver requests of the requirements of this article shall be filed and processed in accordance with the waiver procedures as set forth in the development regulations. 
(4)  Modification requests, where this article specifically authorizes their granting, shall be filed and processed in accordance with the modification procedures established by the development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(15.11), 8-15-05) 
Sec. 86-462. - Selected species. 
(a)  The following plants are approved landscaping requirements: 
(1)  Canopy. 
American Beech 
Bald Cypress 
Black Locust 
Chinese Elm 
Darlington Oak 
Dawn Redwood 
Deodar Cedar 
English Oak 
Gingko (male only) 
Japanese Cedar 
Japanese Katsura Tree 
Japanese Pagoda 
Japanese Zelkova 
Littleleaf Linden 
Virginia Pine 
London Plane-Tree (Sycamore) 
Red Maple 
River Birch 
Scarlet Oak 
Schumard Oak 
Sequoia 
Southern Magnolia 
Sweet Gum 
Tulip Poplar 
White Oak 
Willow Oak 
Winged Elm 
(2)  Understory trees. 
American Holly 
American Hornbeam 
Fringe Tree 
Golden Rain Tree 
Japanese Black Pine 
Japanese Cryptomeria 
Kwansan Cherry 
Leyland Cypress 
Mountain Ash 
Mountain Silverbell 
Pistachio 
Redmond Linden 
Saucer Magnolia 
Serviceberry 
Sourwood 
Trident Maple 
Washington Hawthorn 
Weeping Cherry 
Yellowwood 
Yoshino Cherry 
Amur Maple 
Crabapple 
Crape Myrtle 
Deciduous Holly 
Eastern Redbud 
Flowering Crabapple 
Flowering Dogwood 
Golden Chain Tree 
Ironwood 
Japanese Maple 
Saucer Magnolia 
Star Magnolia 
Sweetberry Magnolia 
Wax Myrtle 
Yaupon Holly 
(3)  Large screening shrubs. 
American Holly 
Arborvitae 
Burford Holly 
Eastern Red Cedar 
Hetz Juniper 
Japanese Black Pine 
Leyland Cypress 
Japanese Ligustrum 
Nellie R. Stevens Holly 
Osmanthus 
Russian Olive 
Savannah Holly 
(4)  Interior shrubs (Mature height: approximately 36 inches): 
Evergreen 
Dwarf Burford Holly 
Dwarf Chinese Holly 
Dwarf Nandina 
Dwarf Yaupon Holly 
Japanese Holly 
Juniper 
Leatherleaf Vinburnum 
Mugo Pine 
Nandina 
Oregonholly Grape 
Warty Barberry 
Winter Honeysuckle 
Deciduous 
Azalea 
Chinese Witchhazel 
Dwarf Burning Bush 
Flowering Jasmine 
Forsythia 
Japanese Flowering Quince 
Oakleaf Hydrangea 
Spirea (all varieties) 
Viburnum 
Weigela 
Winter Jasmine 
(5)  Ground cover (planting areas, berms, wall planters): 
Aaronsbeard St. Johnswort 
Creeping Lilyturf (shade) 
Dwarf Roses 
English Ivy (shade) 
Evergreen Candytuft (border) 
Hybrid Daylily 
Lily-Turf 
Ornamental Grasses 
Pachysandra (shade) 
Periwinkle (shade) 
Purpleleaf Wintercreeper 
Rockyspray Cotoneaster 
Shore Juniper 
Willowleaf Cotoneaster 
(6)  Grasses: 
Bermuda 
Centipede 
Fescue 
Zoysia 
(b)  Grasses may be sodded, sprigged, plugged or seeded, except that solid sod shall be used within 50 feet of all road rights-of-way and in drainage swales or other areas subject to erosion. Lawn grasses shall be planted so as to achieve complete coverage within two calendar years from the time of planting. 
(c)  Other plant materials with similar growth characteristics may be substituted upon approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2(15.12), 8-15-05) 
Secs. 86-463-86-474. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - SIGNS 

Sec. 86-475. - Short title. 
    This article shall hereafter be known and cited as the "Sign Ordinance of the City of Jonesboro." 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-476. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings. The governing authority of the City of Jonesboro hereby finds as follows: 
(1)  The explosive growth experienced in the entire Atlanta metropolitan area over the past two decades has impacted the city. Significant infrastructure improvements in the area have included the expansion of Tara Boulevard and other major thoroughfares within the municipal limits of the city. As a result of these improvements, the city has witnessed a dramatic increase in traffic and the addition of numerous signs within its limits. Uniform regulation of signage providing information to the motoring public is essential to minimize hazards to pedestrians and vehicle operators. 
(2)  Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and the quality of a community. This is particularly true in the city as very few areas within its limits are distinctly residential or distinctly commercial and homes are often found in close proximity to commercial areas. Moreover, the unique character of the historical areas of the city is especially vulnerable to the impact of exterior signs. A plethora of unregulated signs will have a negative impact on the visual characteristics of the community. Regulation of signs will protect property values and the aesthetic character of the city, maintaining it as a desirable place in which to live and to work. 
(3)  A variety of businesses are located within the municipal limits of the city. Their need to advertise products and services must be balanced by the city's obligation to restrict clutter, maintain an aesthetically pleasing environment, protect property values, minimize risks to pedestrians and motor vehicle operators, and enhance public safety. 
(4)  Signs provide an important medium through which individuals, organizations, institutions, and businesses may exercise their right to freedom of speech and expression and convey a variety of messages. 
(5)  The provisions in this article which regulate signs on the basis of size, height, shape, design, spacing, placement, and distance, but not on the content of any message conveyed therein, provide an appropriate balance between the right to freedom of speech and expression via the sign medium and the protection of the substantial governmental purposes stated above. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose and intent of the governing authority of the city in enacting this article are as follows: 
(1)  To protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Jonesboro, and to implement the policies and objectives of the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Jonesboro through the enactment of a comprehensive set of regulations governing signs within the municipal limits of the city. 
(2)  To regulate the erection and placement of signs within the City of Jonesboro in order to provide safe operating conditions for pedestrian and vehicular traffic without unnecessary and unsafe distractions to drivers and pedestrians. 
(3)  To preserve the value on property on which signs are located and from which signs may be viewed. 
(4)  To maintain an aesthetically attractive city in which signs are compatible with the use patterns of existing zoning districts. 
(5)  To establish comprehensive sign regulations which effectively balance legitimate business and development needs with a safe and aesthetically attractive environment for residents, workers, and visitors to the city. 
(6)  To provide fair and reasonable opportunities for the identification of businesses which are located within the city, and to provide for the identification of the availability of products, goods or services which are available upon site so as to promote the economic vitality of businesses which are located within the city. 
(7)  To ensure the protection of the right to freedom of speech and expression provided under the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Georgia and, in no event, place restrictions that apply to any given sign dependent on the communicative content of the sign. 
(8)  To establish a permit system to allow specific types of signs in zoning districts consistent with the uses, intent and aesthetic characteristics of those districts. 
(9)  To allow certain signs that are small, safe, unobtrusive, and incidental, subject to the substantive requirements of the article but without a requirement for permits. 
(10)  To provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances, without regard to the communicative content of the sign. 
(11)  To place reasonable controls on nonconforming signs that are by definition contrary to the public health, safety, and welfare while protecting the constitutional rights of the owners of said nonconforming signs. 
(12)  To continue to encourage the display of public art as a vital part of the urban landscape, while imposing reasonable restrictions on such art in order to protect public safety and to avoid the abuse of a public art exemption as a means for evading the purpose and effect of these sign regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-477. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, certain words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(b)  Unless otherwise indicated, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed herein: 
    2005 Zoning Ordinance means the provisions contained in Chapter 86 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Jonesboro, Georgia, as adopted and from time to time amended. 
    A-frame sign means a moveable sign not permanently secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located. 
    Administrator means the individual employed by the city as the "code enforcement officer" or his/her designee. In the absence of such employment, the term shall mean the individual designated by the mayor and council to oversee the enforcement of this article. 
    Animated sign means any sign with action, motion, changing colors, or having characteristics that require electrical or mechanical energy, including wind-activated elements such as spinners and aerial devices. 
    Area of sign. Both sides of a double-faced sign shall be used in computing the area. 
(1)  Ground sign/monument sign. The area of a ground sign or monument sign shall mean and shall be computed as the entire area within a continuous perimeter, enclosing the limits of all writing, representation, emblem, or any figure or similar character, together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background upon which it is placed. The supports or structure upon which any sign is supported shall be included in determining the sign area whenever such supports are designed in such a manner as to form an integral part of the display; however, provided that the area of the frame shall not be included in computing the area when the frame is composed of stone or brick and provided the frame contains or has attached no copy, words, writing, letters, or advertisement, although one trademark, insignia, coat of arms, or other similar identifying mark may be affixed to the frame, but may not be internally illuminated, and provided that the surface area of the frame that is parallel to the display of the sign is no greater than 100 percent of the area of the sign displayed. A ground sign may include individual letters, numbers, figures, mounted on a surface composed of stone or brick or other permanent structures. The area of monument signs shall be computed as provided for wall signs. 
(2)  Wall sign. The area of a wall sign shall mean and shall be computed using the smallest contiguous square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof, that would encompass the external limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming any integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. When a wall sign is formed by placing individual letters, numbers, or figures on the wall, without a distinguishing background, the area shall be determined by a contiguous perimeter drawn around all letters, numbers, figures, trademark, or other symbols, enclosing the limits of writing. Any letters, numbers, figures, trademarks, or graphics separated by 36 inches or more shall be considered two separate signs. 
(3)  Three dimensional sign. The area of a three dimensional sign shall be determined by a contiguous perimeter drawn around the three dimensional sign enclosing the limits of the three dimensional sign; said perimeter to be drawn around the vertical plane through the sign which creates the perimeter with the largest area. The three dimensional sign shall be treated as a double sided sign for purposes of sign area; therefore, the area of the above described perimeter shall be doubled, which product shall be the area of the sign for purposes of this sign ordinance. 
    Awning and canopy sign means a sign imposed or painted upon any roof-like structure that provides either permanent or temporary shelter for adjacent walkways or entrances to a building or property. 
    Banner means a sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation, applied to cloth, paper, plastic or fabric of any kind with only such material for backing, the same being characteristically hung or displayed on buildings or suspended in midair across streets, passageways, and other areas visible to the general public. 
    Bench sign means any sign attached to or painted upon a bench or other seat placed in the public view and meant to be for public use or viewing. 
    Building face projection means the facade area of a building, generally parallel to the street, excluding roofs, covered sidewalks, or facade areas which are perpendicular to the street. For applicants located in a planned center, the building face projection shall be that portion of the front facade that the applicant occupies. 
    Building line means a line established in general, parallel to the front street line, between which line and the street no part of a building shall project. 
    Changeable copy sign means a sign on which panels of copy may be changed manually in the field, or boards or backgrounds upon which changeable letters or changeable panels may be placed. 
    City means the City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    City Code means the Code of Ordinances, City of Jonesboro, Georgia. 
    Decision date means the date upon which the administrator makes a final decision to approve or to deny an application for authorization to erect a sign. 
    Designated agent means an individual who is licensed as a real estate broker or sales agent by the State of Georgia, and who is contracted with the owner(s) of land to sell, lease or manage said land or parts thereof. 
    District means a zoning district. 
    Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas against each other, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction, and where the two display areas are no more than 19 inches apart at any location on the displays. 
    Electronic message center sign (EMC) means a computer programmable sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures, or picture images that can be altered or rearranged on site or by remote means without altering the face or surface of the sign. Said messages are displayed through the use of LED, LCD, plasma or other similar type panels or screens. If any indoor EMC sign is visible from outside the building or other structure in which it is located, it will be subject to all conditions and standards of this article. 
    Erect means to build, construct, attach, paint, hang, place, replace, suspend, or affix or fabricate a sign, which shall also include painting of a Wall Sign or other graphics. 
    Exposed neon means neon tubing left uncovered or exposed to view on exterior of structure or a building. 
    Flag means a sign consisting of fabric or similar material attached at one end to a pole or building and hanging freely such that it may flutter or move in the wind. 
    Flashing sign means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effects. 
    Ground sign means a permanently affixed sign, which is wholly independent of a building for support. 
    Height of a ground sign or monument sign means the vertical distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest component of the sign. Normal grade shall be the predominant grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding or excavating for the purpose of locating or elevating the sign. Base shall be where the sign support meets, or should meet, the normal grade. Signs with a height of greater than six feet are prohibited, except that the structure of the monument may extend to seven feet above normal grade. 
    Historic district means any of the following zoning districts in the city as categorized in the 2005 Zoning Ordinance: H-1 (Historic District); H-2 (Historic District); and Historical Residential Overlay. 
    Illuminated sign, external means a sign illuminated by an external light source not mounted to the sign and directed toward such sign. 
    Illuminated sign, internal means a sign illuminated by an internal light source. 
    Lot means a parcel of land which meets all requirements of the city, including zoning and subdivision requirements, for a legally developable lot for the zoning district in which it is located, meets all of the minimum size, dimension, road frontage and other requirements for a developable lot within its zoning district, and which may be developed or used for purposes consistent with those permitted within its zoning district. 
    Mobile sign means any sign which is mounted or designed for mounting on wheels, or which is mounted or designed for mounting on a towed vehicle. 
    Monument sign means a free standing sign mounted directly upon the ground and not raised by vertical supports. 
    Multiple frontage lots means lots that have frontage on two or more public streets. 
    Neon means a lamp or tube filled with electrically charged gas thereby creating a light source. 
    Neon accents means neon lighting around windows (inside or outside the window), building facades, rooflines, doors, signs, and other building structures, building projections or designs upon buildings. 
    Non-residential zoning district means any of the following zoning districts in the City as categorized in the 2005 Zoning Ordinance: H-1 (Historic District); H-2 (Historic District); MX (Mixed Use District); O-I (Office and Institutional District); C-1 (Neighborhood Commercial District); C-2 (Highway Commercial District); M-1 (Light Industrial District); Tara Boulevard Overlay; Assembly Overlay; and Historical Residential Overlay. For purposes of this article, Lots zoned for mixed residential and commercial use shall be considered to be located in a Non-Residential Zoning District. 
    Nonconforming sign means signs, which, on the effective date of the original sign ordinance, which were approved or legally erected under previous sign restrictions, and which became or have become nonconforming with respect to the requirements of the original sign ordinance or this article. 
    Outparcel means a lot carved from a planned center which is in compliance with all city requirements and ordinances for legal stand-alone lot on which a free standing building is constructed which building meets all city setback requirements. 
    Pennant [shall] mean several small flags connected to a single line. See Spectacular signs. 
    Person means any individual, association, corporation, firm, organization, partnership, trust, or any other entity. 
    Planned center means a group of two or more retail stores, service establishments, offices, industries, or any other businesses, or combination thereof, consisting of individual buildings or units which are adjacent or abutting one another, and which are planned to serve the public, and which share common amenities or common area, sidewalks, parking areas or driveways, excepting outparcels. 
    Primary arterials means roads designed to provide a high degree of mobility and serve longer vehicle trips to, from, and within urban areas. Arterials form the skeleton of the roadway network, linking urban centers such as the central business district, industrial parks, commercial centers, major residential developments and other key activity centers. Primary arterials are designed to carry between 45,000 and 75,000 trips per day. The City of Jonesboro has only one primary arterial and that is Tara Boulevard (Highway 19/41). 
    Residential zoning district means any of the following zoning districts in the city as categorized in the 2005 Zoning Ordinance: R-2 (Single-Family Residential District); R-4 (Single-Family Residential District); R-C (Cluster Residential District); R-A (Single-Family Attached Residential); and R-M (Multifamily Residential District). 
    Roof sign means any sign erected or maintained wholly or partially on or over the roof of a building. This requirement does not include those signs that may be mounted on parapets or mansards, which may extend above the roofline. 
    Sandwich sign. See: A-Frame sign. 
    A shopping center is a planned center. 
    Sidewalk sign. See: A-Frame sign. 
    Sign means any surface, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, stroke, stripe, reading matter, material, fabric, device, object, three-dimensional object, or display which bears lettered, numbered, pictorial, or sculptured matter, designed to convey information visually or to draw attention and which is exposed to public view. For the purpose of this article, the term "sign" shall not include those devices located entirely within a building or structure, unless such devices are considered window signs; additionally the term sign shall include all structural members used to erect or mount same, and any company colors, trademarks, service marks, brand names, logos, symbols, or roof shapes, which are generally used by the company in the design of its buildings, and are generally used, or identified, as trade styles or other identifying marks or symbols of the company's business. 
    Sign face means the part of a sign that is or can be used to convey information visually. 
    Special event means any planned occurrence which does not take place on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis and is designed as a celebration or an irregular occurrence to attract business or raise money. Examples of a special event include: grand openings, seasonal sales, liquidations, going-out-of business sales, vehicle shows/displays, craft shows, rummage sales, bake sales, and festivals. 
    Spectacular sign means an animated sign, streamer, pennant, balloon and other air or gas filled device, search light, laser, beacon, or other light projecting device. 
    Stake sign means any temporary sign with supported by uprights which are placed into the ground, and not supported by or suspended from any building with signable area not greater than five square feet. A stake sign may not be more than four feet high to the top of the sign component, when placed and standing in ground. A stake sign may not be placed within the right-of-way. 
    Streamers mean several small flags connected to a single line. See Spectacular signs. 
    Swinging or projecting sign means a sign projecting perpendicularly more than 12 inches from the outside wall or walls of any building or supports upon which it is located. 
    Temporary sign means any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, vinyl, paper, plywood, fabric, or other lightweight material not well suited to provide a durable substrate or, if made of some other material, is neither permanently installed in the ground nor permanently affixed to a building or structure which is permanently installed in the ground. 
    Trailer sign. See: Mobile sign. 
    Unit means a portion of a planned center which by city ordinances and codes may be occupied by a single use or tenant, and which is segregated from other uses or tenants within the planned center by 360 degrees of vertical walls (may include doors and windows) and a floor and a ceiling, and which has a separate entrance to the outside. 
    Vehicle sign means any sign painted, drawn or affixed to or on a vehicle including an automobile, truck or trailer. 
    Wall sign means a sign applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which does not project more than 15 inches from the outside face of the wall of such building or structure, and does not extend above the highest horizontal line of the wall. The vertical surface of a canopy is not a wall for purposes of this article. 
    Window sign means any type of sign located entirely within the interior of a building or structure, and placed near a window or door, the letters, numbers, pictorial or sculptured matter of which is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-478. - Administration. 
    The provisions of this article shall be administered by the administrator. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-479. - Enforcement. 
    The administrator or a police officer of the city may issue citations for violation of this article. The citation shall be returnable to and tried before the municipal court of the city. Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount, and/or imprisoned for such term, as authorized by the City's Charter and Code. Each day any said violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16) 
Sec. 86-480. - Authorization to erect a sign and permit. 
(a)  Except where specifically excluded by a provision in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, change or modify sign face or face panels, alter, or erect, reconstruct, replace or reset a sign within the limits of the city without first having obtained an authorization to erect a sign and thereafter a permit in the manner prescribed herein. 
(b)  An existing sign which conforms to the provisions of this article that would be required to obtain authorization to erect a sign and a subsequent permit under this ordinance must register with the city within 90 days of the effective date of this article. The information provided for such registration will be the same information required in an application under section 86-481. No fee shall be required for the registration of an existing sign. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-481. - Application. 
    An application for authorization to erect a sign shall be made upon forms provided by the administrator, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner and applicant; 
(2)  Address of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected; 
(3)  Written consent of the property owner, or the property owner's agent, granting permission for the placement of the sign on the property and permission to enter the property to maintain said sign; 
(4)  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, other signs, setbacks from rights-of-way, property lines and easements; 
(5)  One accurate scale drawing of the sign plans, specifications, and method of construction and attachment to the building or ground for the sign as well as a scale drawing of the site showing driveways, structures, existing and proposed signs and any other limiting site features; 
(6)  A survey, prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer, of the lot upon which the proposed sign is to be erected; 
(7)  Name of person erecting the sign; 
(8)  Name of any business or other activity at the address where the sign is to be erected; 
(9)  Complete calculations establishing the area of the sign; and 
(10)  A written description of all other signs located on the lot indicating the sign type, size and placement. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-482. - Fees. 
    Fees for an authorization to erect a sign and for a permit shall be fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-483. - Time for consideration and notification. 
    The administrator shall process an application for authorization to erect a sign within 45 days of the city's actual receipt of a completed application and all necessary fees as required under section 86-482. The administrator shall give notice to the applicant of the decision of the city by hand delivery, by mailing to the address on the application, or by fax to the designated telephone number provided on the application on or before the 45th day after the city's receipt of the completed application and fee. Notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing (if mailed), date of faxing (if faxed), or date of hand delivery (if hand delivered). If the administrator fails to act within the 45-day period, applicant shall notify the administrator in writing of the failure and the administrator shall issue or deny the authorization sought by the application within ten business days after the notification. If the administrator fails to act upon the application within this ten-business-day period, the authorization to erect the sign shall automatically be granted; however, the applicant must follow the final permit procedures set forth in section 86-484. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-484. - Decision on application and issuance of permit; violations. 
(a)  Denial. In the event the administrator determines that the applicant has not properly completed the application for authorization to erect the proposed sign or that the application contains any false material statement, he shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and shall automatically deny the application. In the event the administrator determines that all requirements for approval of the application have not been met, he shall deny the application. 
(b)  Issuance of an authorization. Upon the filing of an application for authorization to erect a sign that contains all information required under section 86-481 and the payment of all necessary fees as required under section 86-482, the administrator shall examine all plans and specifications submitted and the premises upon which the proposed sign is to be erected. If it shall appear to the administrator that the proposed sign is in compliance with all requirements of this article and all other ordinances and laws of the city, and if a business, that the business has registered and paid any tax due pursuant to the city's occupation tax chapter, the administrator shall then issue an authorization to erect the sign pursuant to the application and any conditions placed upon the authorization by the city. If the work authorized thereby has not been completed within 180 days after the date of issuance and a final permit has not been requested in writing, the authorization shall become null and void and no final permit may be issued. 
(c)  Request for final permit. Within ten days after completion of the erection of a sign pursuant to an approved application, and within 180 days of the issuance of an authorization to erect a sign, the applicant shall deliver to the administrator a written request for a final permit along with current and dated color photographs of each face of the sign (at least three-inch by five-inch in size) and a signed affidavit that the photographs are current and accurate photographs of the sign faces as of the date on the photographs, that the sign was and is erected as described in the application as conditioned and authorized by the city, including the size, location; building materials, height and lighting. Within ten business days of the filing of a request for a final permit, the administrator shall issue the final permit or deny the final permit because of the applicant's failure to properly and timely submit the written permit request, failure to properly and timely document the request, or failure to properly and timely erect the sign as described in the application conditioned and authorized by the city. Notification of a denial shall be effectuated pursuant to section 86-483. Failure of the administrator to approve or deny the application for a final sign permit within said ten business days of the applicant properly and timely filing with the city a fully and properly documented written permit request shall constitute an approval of the final permit. 
(d)  Violations and noncompliance. An applicant who fails to complete the erection of a sign within 180 days of the issuance of an authorization or who fails to request a final permit within ten days of erection of a sign pursuant to an authorization or who fails to apply for a final permit within 180 days of the issuance of an authorization or whose request for a final permit is denied, shall remove the sign or parts of the sign within 30 days of notice from the administrator to remove the sign or parts of the sign. Failure to so remove the sign shall constitute a separate ordinance violation for each day that the sign or part of the sign is not removed from the proposed site and upon conviction, the applicant and/or owner or tenant of the sign site shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and shall be subject to fines or imprisonment as authorized by the City's Charter and Code. Furthermore, if the sign and all parts thereof are not removed within said 30 days, the city may remove the sign and all parts thereof and charge the applicant and/or owner of the site the cost of removal and disposal. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-485. - Appeals. 
(a)  An applicant who is dissatisfied by a decision of the administrator rendered under section 86-484 or 86-493 may appeal such decision to the mayor and council. Any such appeal shall comply with the procedures set forth in article XI of the 2005 Zoning Ordinance, subject to the following: 
(1)  The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the administrator on or before the tenth day following the date notice of the decision of the administrator is given. In the event that no appeal is filed within this ten-day period, the decision of the administrator shall become final. In the event that an appeal is filed, the administrator shall transmit to the mayor and council all documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  The mayor and council shall schedule the matter for hearing within 45 days of the appeal being filed and, at such meeting, may continue the matter for ten days for further investigation to determine whether to affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the administrator. The mayor and council shall make its final determination on the appeal on or before ten days of the close of the hearing. 
(3)  The review of the decision by the mayor and council shall be limited to a determination of whether or not the decision of the administrator was clearly erroneous. 
(b)  Any appeal of the decision of the mayor and council shall be taken to the Superior Court of Clayton County by a petition for a writ of certiorari. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-486. - Variances. 
(a)  The mayor and council can authorize upon appeal in a specific case such variance from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest when, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will, in an individual case result in extreme and unusual hardship, so the spirit of this article shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The mere existence of a nonconforming sign shall not constitute a valid reason to grant a variance. A variance shall be granted in an individual case of extreme and unusual hardship not self-imposed only upon a finding by the mayor and council that the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There exist extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the property in question resulting from its size, shape, or topography which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area; 
(2)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other similar properties in the city; 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant significant privileges which are denied to other similar properties in the city; 
(4)  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this article and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare; 
(5)  The variance is not a request to permit a type of sign which otherwise is not permitted in the zoning districts involved; 
(6)  The cause for the need for the variance is not created by the applicant, the owner, lessor, or successor in ownership or occupancy; 
(7)  Signs may be displaced upon the vertical surface of a canopy only by a variance, upon the applicant reducing the number or square footage of ground signs or wall signs authorized by this article for the lot in question, so as to reasonably set-off for the additional signs. 
(b)  All requests for such variances shall be in written form and filed for review by the mayor and council at its next regular meeting at least ten days prior to said meeting. 
(c)  No change may be made in the location, shape, color, height, size, copy or text of any sign subject to a variance unless the sign is brought into compliance with the provisions of this article and a sign permit is granted. 
(d)  A change in the owner, lessor, lessee, or user of property served by a sign subject to a variance shall negate the variance, and the sign shall be removed or brought into compliance with the provisions of this article and a new sign permit granted. 
(e)  A sign subject to a variance may not be reconstructed, replaced or reset if it is removed for any reason. 
(f)  When a sign under a variance has been razed or damaged by any cause, naturally occurring or otherwise, the sign shall not be re-established: 
(1)  If the value of the sign as damaged is 50 percent or less of the value of the sign prior to the damage; 
(2)  If the estimated cost of repairing the above ground portion of the sign is more than the value of the sign in its damaged condition; or 
(3)  Value shall be established by the administrator and shall be based upon the value of the sign's materials above ground with no allowance for the intrinsic value of the sign or the value of the right to have a sign at that location. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-487. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city: 
(1)  Air and gas filled devices; 
(2)  Awning and canopy signs, except as authorized in section 86-495; 
(3)  Banners, except as authorized in section 86-494; 
(4)  Bench signs; 
(5)  Flashing signs; 
(6)  Mobile signs or trailer signs; 
(7)  Roof signs; 
(8)  A-frame signs; 
(9)  Signs on a public right-of-way or on city property; 
(10)  Signs that due to color, shape, size, height, lighting, location, and/or position appear to be in imitation of or may be confused by motorists or pedestrians for an official traffic control device or signal; 
(11)  Signs that impede the view of an official traffic control device or signal; 
(12)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any public right-of-way by an individual with normal hearing; 
(13)  Signs affixed to utility poles, trees, street markers, and fence posts or placed on any curb, sidewalk, fence, hydrant, bridge or other surface located on public property or over or across any public street; 
(14)  Signs that contain exposed neon or neon accents; 
(15)  Signs that are erected, located or maintained in such a manner as to interfere with safe and free ingress or egress of any door, any window, an emergency exit, or any fire escape; 
(16)  Spectacular signs; 
(17)  Swinging or projecting signs, except as authorized in section 86-495; 
(18)  Signs which obstruct sight of motorists or pedestrians so as to create safety hazards for motorists or pedestrians; 
(19)  Vehicle signs with a total sign area in excess of ten square feet, when the vehicle upon which the sign is painted, drawn, or otherwise affixed meets the following: 
a.  Any part of the vehicle is parked for more than three consecutive hours within 100 feet of any street right-of-way; 
b.  The vehicle is visible from any street right-of-way; 
c.  The vehicle is not being actively loaded or unloaded; 
d.  If the vehicle is parked on a non-residential lot, the vehicle is not being used for the purpose of providing transportation for the owner, employees, inventory, merchandise, supplies, or materials concerning a business operated on that lot; and 
e.  There are other available and accessible locations on or about the lot where the vehicle can be parked, which are not within 100 feet of a street right-of-way and visible from such. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-488. - Exempt signs. 
    The following signs are allowed and exempt from the authorization and permit provisions in this article but, notwithstanding, must comply with all other applicable requirements in this article, the 2005 Zoning Ordinance, and the Code: 
(1)  Except as limited by section 86-495, window signs so long as they do not exceed 25 percent of the total window area exposed to view to the public. 
(2)  Flags. In non-residential zoning districts, each lot that is less than five acres in area shall be allowed a maximum of two flags and each lot that is greater than five acres in area shall be allowed a maximum of four flags. In residential zoning districts, each lot shall be allowed a maximum of two flags. 
(3)  Each lot is entitled to one sign that is less than 36 square inches in area and that must be placed in any of the following areas: 
a.  On the front of every building, every unit in a multiple unit building, residence, or structure; 
b.  On each side of an authorized United States Postal Service mailbox; or 
c.  On one post which measures no more than 48 inches in height and four inches in width and shall not be placed in a public right-of-way. 
(4)  Temporary signs that meet the following criteria: 
a.  For each lot during the period that it is being developed under an active building permit issued by the city, one sign that is no more than 12 square feet in area, is no more than six feet in height to the top of the sign component when placed and standing in ground, and is not placed within a public right-of-way. 
b.  For each lot in a residential zoning district, one temporary sign that is no more than five square feet in area, is no more than four feet in height to the top of the sign component when placed and standing in ground, and is not placed within a public right-of-way. 
c.  For each lot of less than five acres in a non-residential zoning district, one temporary sign that is no more than five square feet in area, is no more than four feet in height to the top of the sign component when placed and standing in ground, and is not placed within a public right-of-way. For each lot of more than five acres in a non-residential zoning district, two temporary signs, each sign shall be no more than five square feet in area, no more than four feet in height to the top of the sign component when placed and standing in ground, and not placed within a public right-of-way. 
d.  For each lot during the period in which it is listed for sale or for rent, one temporary sign that is no more than 12 square feet in area, is no more than six feet in height to the top of the sign component when placed and standing in ground, and is not placed within a public right-of-way. 
e.  For each lot, additional temporary signs that, collectively, have a total area of no more than 32 square feet, do not exceed four signs in number at any one time, are not placed within a public right-of-way, and are removed within 90 days after being erected. 
    Any sign erected under this section shall not be calculated as part of the overall signage allowed per lot by any other provision of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-489. - General regulations. 
(a)  Messages. Any sign allowed under this article may contain any message. 
(b)  Non-residential zoning districts. In non-residential zoning districts signs shall be permitted in the following combination of wall and ground signs subject to the provisions hereinafter stated: 
(1)  Lot with one building, which building is currently occupied pursuant to a current and valid certificate of occupancy issued by the city. 
a.  Combination of one wall sign and one ground sign equal to five percent of the building face projection (subject to the size limitations in section 86-490). 
b.  Single building on multiple frontage lots are allowed a total of 7.5 percent of the building facade, and may have one additional wall sign, and one additional ground sign (subject to the size limitations in section 86-490). When calculating their allowed square footage, buildings on multiple frontage lots shall base their calculations on the facade with the primary entrance and/or architectural features of the building. Otherwise, the facade used shall be that facade which faces the public road of the greatest capacity. The classification of streets in the 2005 Zoning Ordinance shall be the basis for determining street capacity. 
(2)  Lots of less than three acres in non-residential zoning districts shall be entitled to one stake sign, which shall not be placed within a right-of-way. 
(c)  Planned centers. 
(1)  A planned center shall be entitled to one monument sign on each street right-of-way fronted. These permitted signs shall be limited to 45 square feet with a maximum height of six feet from grade. No portion of the sign shall include an area for changeable letters. 
(2)  A planned center shall be entitled to one ground sign per entrance which shall not be designed or placed so as to be read from a public road. Each such ground sign may have multiple face panels. Each face panel shall be of the same size, color, and font and shall be no more than 108 square inches in area. No portion of the sign or any face panel shall include an area for changeable letters. 
(3)  Each building or unit with a separate entrance, not accessible by other tenants, located in a planned center shall be permitted one wall sign with a maximum area of five percent of the building facade which it is mounted upon (see the definition of "building facade"), but not to exceed 150 square feet. Additional wall signs per section 86-490(b) are not allowed for multiple facade frontages. If two or more tenants, as in the case of an office building, share an entrance to a building, wall signs on the exterior of the building are not permitted. As an example: a building constructed as a shopping center will be allowed wall signs. A building constructed as an office building will not be allowed wall signs. 
(4)  No permits shall be issued for buildings or units in a planned center unless and until a master signage plan for the planned center has been submitted and approved by the administrator. The master signage plan shall indicate how all signage will be consistent in: 
a.  Lighting. 
b.  Colors. 
c.  Fonts. 
d.  Building materials. 
e.  Location in relation to the primary building. 
f.  Proportions. 
(d)  Other allowable signs. 
(1)  Changeable copy shall be limited to ground signs, unless expressly allowed or prohibited by another provision in this article. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no sign, whether permitted as a regulated sign or an exempt sign, shall be permitted within 100 feet of the intersection of any state highway with any other state highway or major thoroughfare without the prior approval of the mayor and council. In considering such application, the mayor and council shall approve such a location only upon a determination that the proposed sign will not potentially obstruct the view of motorists or pedestrians so as to prevent their safety in traversing the intersection. 
(3)  Subdivisions shall be permitted one double-sided ground sign, each side of which shall not exceed 35 square feet of signage area, or two one-sided signs, each sign not to exceed 35 square feet of signage area. The height of the sign shall not exceed six feet. Each sign shall be placed on private property and may not be placed within ten feet of a public right-of-way. 
(4)  Subdivision homeowner associations may have one 25 square feet changeable copy or glass covered sign located adjacent to the entrance to the subdivision's intersection with the public right-of-way and located within the common area owned by the homeowner's association but not interfering with sidewalks or streets, and the sign face directed toward motorist and pedestrians who have entered the subdivision. These signs may not be placed on individual lots. The homeowner association sign shall be the responsibility of the elected officials of the homeowner's association. Subdivisions without elected homeowner association officers must have a designated individual responsible for the sign. 
(5)  An apartment complex, a condominium complex, a non-subdivided industrial or commercial complex, or any other building with multiple residential dwelling units or multiple commercial units shall be permitted one double-sided ground sign at its entrance. Each side of such ground sign shall not exceed 35 square feet signage area. the height of the sign shall not exceed six feet. 
(6)  In non-residential zoning districts, each lot that is less than five acres in area shall be allowed a maximum of two flags and each lot that is greater than five acres in area shall be allowed a maximum of four flags. In residential zoning districts, each lot shall be allowed a maximum of two flags. 
(7)  The owner or the owner's designated agent (but not both at the same time) of a subdivision under development in which the owner of the subdivision owns one or more subdivision lots may obtain a permit, effective for up to one year, to display within the subdivision under development one temporary double-sided ground sign with no more than 16 square feet of sign face per side. A planned center with one out-parcel is not a subdivision for purpose of this subsection. The sign may not be placed within ten feet of a right-of-way. 
(8)  In non-residential zoning districts within the Tara Boulevard Overlay District, as defined in section 86-109 of the 2005 Zoning Ordinance, the following shall apply: 
a.  A lot with one building facing a primary arterial, which building is currently occupied pursuant to a current and valid certificate of occupancy issued by the city, shall be permitted one double-sided sign to be located within 100 feet of the right-of-way of the primary arterial, each side of which shall not exceed 150 square feet signage area. The height of the sign shall not exceed 35 feet. 
b.  A planned center, facing a primary arterial, which building is currently occupied pursuant to a current and valid certificate of occupancy issued by the city, shall be permitted one double-sided sign to be located within 100 feet of the right-of-way of the primary arterial, each side of which shall not exceed 400 square feet signage area. The height of the sign shall not exceed 35 feet. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-490. - Regulated signs. 
(a)  Ground signs, which are permanent, shall be permitted in non-residential zoning districts. No ground sign shall have a height greater than six feet above normal grade, or an area greater than 35 square feet for lots with a single building and 45 square feet for planned centers. A ground sign shall not be located within ten feet of a street right-of-way or within 50 feet of any other sign, structure or building. Changeable copy shall not exceed 20 percent of the area of the sign face. Ground signs are allowed only on lots upon which there is a building which is currently occupied pursuant to a current and valid certificate of occupancy issued by the city or which is currently being developed under an active building permit issued by the city. 
(b)  Wall signs shall be permitted in non-residential zoning districts. Permitted area of wall signs shall not exceed 150 square feet. No single building or unit shall be permitted more than one wall sign except for multiple frontage lots as provided in section 86-490(b)(1). Wall signs are allowed only upon a building which is currently occupied pursuant to a current and valid certificate of occupancy issued by the city or which is currently being developed under an active building permit issued by the city. 
(c)  Electronic message center signs are permitted freestanding signs in a non-residential zoning district subject to the following: 
(1)  A maximum of one electronic message center sign is allowed per lot; 
(2)  An electronic message center sign shall not exceed 40 percent of the total sign area of the freestanding sign on which the electronic message center sign is located; 
(3)  Each message displayed on an electronic message center sign shall remain static for at least ten seconds following the completion of its transition from the previous message. As used in this subsection, "static" shall mean a display that is fixed in one position with no portion of the display being in motion or changing in color or intensity; 
(4)  Electronic message center signs shall have automatic dimming capability that adjusts the brightness to the ambient light at all times of the day and night so as to comply with the provisions stated in section 86-493(j) and (k); and 
(5)  Electronic message center signs are permitted in the following zoning districts: 
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District 
C-2 Highway Commercial District 
O&I Office and Institutional District 
MX Mixed Use District 
M-1 Light Industrial District 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-491. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Non-conforming signs may continue in existence subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No change may be made in the location, shape, height, size, or design of any nonconforming sign, or replacement of or change in the face or message panel of a nonconforming sign except to bring the sign into compliance with the provisions of this article, and a sign permit granted. 
(2)  A nonconforming sign may not be reconstructed, replaced, or reset if the owner or agent for the owner for any reason removes it. 
(3)  Any sign erected in violation of this article may be removed from any public right-of-way by duly authorized employees of the city, and the responsible party may be cited for such violation. 
(4)  No additional sign shall be erected on the same lot with an existing nonconforming sign until the nonconforming sign has been removed or brought into conformity with this article. 
(5)  No sign permit may be granted to any applicant, where there exists on the subject lot a nonconforming sign, as defined in this article, an illegal sign, an unpermitted sign, a damaged sign, a sign in need of repair or painting, or a sign in violation of section 86-492. 
(6)  A nonconforming sign may not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except where changed conditions beyond the control of the owner render the sign nonconforming or warrant the sign's repair. 
(7)  A nonconforming sign may not be expanded or altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-492. - Removal of certain signs. 
(a)  Any sign within the right-of-way which has become dilapidated, or any sign which, due to poor maintenance or neglect, has become a visual blight, or by its condition and state of repair is deemed to be dangerous, and any sign which has been erected in a manner which fails to meet the requirements of this article as a legal or a recognized nonconforming sign may be removed by the administrator provided some reasonable attempt has been made to have such sign removed by the owner thereof, and provided further that such removal can be made without damage to any property or sign, except for the cutting or severing of supports for the sign at or near the ground or its attachment to any wall or structure. Any sign removed under the foregoing provision shall be stored by the city at the expense of the sign owner or owner of the lot upon which the sign is located. 
(b)  In the case of a sign which cannot be removed without risk of property damage and in the case of signs removed and stored as provided herein, the administrator shall cause notice of the same to be mailed to the owner of the sign if the same may be determined or to the owner of the property upon which said sign be located of the impending action pertaining to said sign. Owners shall be given 30 days from the date of receipt of such notice to take appropriate remedial action. 
(c)  If the permittee or property owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within 30 days after such notice, the permit for such sign shall be revoked and the permittee or property owner shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 86-479. 
(d)  After notification as herein prescribed, the administrator shall cause such signs to be removed and disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned personal property. 
(e)  No sign removed after the provisions hereof shall be returned to the owner until all expenses incurred in the removal and storage of the same has been paid. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-493. - Construction and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  No sign shall be constructed in such a manner which will hinder vehicle traffic or pedestrians or block any entrances or exists from any sidewalk or building or any windows, doors, fire escapes. Each sign shall be securely erected and free of any protruding nails, tacks and wire. 
(b)  No sign shall be constructed with any type material, finished letters, characters or surface that will reflect sunlight or any other type of light of such an intensity to hinder vehicle traffic or in any way create a nuisance to the surrounding area. 
(c)  A sign containing wood in its structure, face or frame or any part thereof shall be painted or stained. 
(d)  No wall sign or its supports shall protrude more than 15 inches from the wall on which it is mounted. 
(e)  All signs shall be constructed in such a manner and fastened in such a way to prevent movement by wind action. 
(f)  No wood, metal or any other type of supports for ground signs shall be less than four by four inches in size for each support or less than three inches in diameter if circular. 
(g)  Wood signs shall be framed on the two sides attached to the supports, except for hanging and projecting signs allowed in the historic district. Supports can be considered framing if the sign is so designed with supports as part of framing on both sign face areas. 
(h)  UL, FM or similar approval is required where applicable. 
(i)  All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the building code as adopted and from time to time amended by the city. 
(j)  The illumination of internally illuminated signs shall not exceed 20 foot candles of incandescent light measured at a distance of ten feet from such structure. 
(k)  Externally illuminated signs shall be lighted so as to shine on the sign itself, and that no lights are positioned in such a manner that light glares or shines into the eyes of motorists or pedestrians or on residences as to create a hazardous or dangerous condition. 
(l)  No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. 
(m)  All signs erected under section 86-494 shall be securely installed, and shall meet all applicable safety standards as prescribed by the city's current building code or electrical code. 
(n)  All ground signs and monument signs shall be placed on private property and may not be placed within ten feet of a right-of-way. 
(o)  All lots, buildings, structures or property owned or operated by the city shall be exempt from all requirements of this article. 
(p)  Except for ground signs described in section 86-489(c)(4), all signs must be placed upon a lot, as defined in the 2005 Zoning Ordinance and the subdivision regulations. No sign may be placed on any lot that does not meet the minimum Lot requirements of the 2005 Zoning Ordinance and the subdivision regulations. 
(q)  No message may be displayed on any portion of the structural supports of any sign. 
(r)  All signs regulated by this article shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from all electrical and mechanical hazards, including, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose connections, and the premises surrounding the signs shall be maintained by the owner in a sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all weeds, rubbish, and debris. 
(s)  No sign shall be illuminated either internally or externally, in any residential zoning district except that a ground sign located at the entrance of a subdivision, an apartment complex, a condominium complex, or other building with multiple dwelling units may be externally illuminated from dusk until dawn. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-494. - Special events. 
    Additional signs are authorized for any lot in a non-residential zoning district during the period that a special event occurs on that lot but only under the following conditions and subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Prior to the special event and the erection and placement of any sign under this section, an application for a permit shall be filed with the administrator. The application shall specifically describe all signs as to their construction and/or composition. 
(2)  Any sign erected under this section sign shall meet the definition in this article of a temporary sign or a banner. 
(3)  The maximum size allowance for all signs erected under this section shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
(4)  Any sign erected under this section may be attached to the exterior wall or walls of a building or beneath a canopy or attached to the ground. 
(5)  Any sign erected under this section shall not be placed within ten feet of a public right-of-way or in any other way as to obstruct the view of motorists or pedestrians. 
(6)  A lot shall be eligible for additional signs under this section for a maximum of two special events per year. 
(7)  A permit issued under this section shall be valid for 30 consecutive days, starting from the date of issuance. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-495. - Historic district. 
    The purpose of this section is to ensure that signage in the historic district is harmonious in proportion, form, color, and materials to the character of said district. Visual relatedness is crucial to the goal of an integrated historic district, and signs play a key role in helping to preserve the historical district's sense of time and place, and to achieve the desired effect of charm and compatibility. No sign shall be erected, altered, restored or moved within the historic district until an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior architectural features and signage has been reviewed and approved by the historic preservation commission. All proposed changes requiring a certificate of appropriateness shall comply with the applicable design standards in the 2005 Zoning Ordinance. 
(1)  Applicability. This section shall apply only to those building structures and uses within the geographical boundaries of the historic district. 
(2)  Compatibility. As to signs, buildings, structures, and uses within the Historic District, when a provision of this section conflicts with any section in the balance of this article, the provision of this section shall control. Otherwise, to the extent reasonably possible, the provisions of this section shall be interpreted consistent with the provisions of the balance of this article. 
(3)  Signage standards. 
a.  General. Signage shall complement the architectural details of the building, and shall not violate or otherwise obscure the architecture of the building to which it is attached. Signs, lettering, or boxed graphics shall not cut across columns, cornices, windowsills, arches or balconies, nor extend above the roofline of any building to which it is attached. 
b.  Lettering, size, and content. Letters can be painted or mounted directly on a signboard, storefront, wall or window, if in proportion to the storefront. Lots in the H-1 Historic District are allowed the same amount of signage as lots outside of the H-1 Historic District. In the H-1 Historic District, canopy signs and hanging or suspended signs may be utilized. Provided, however, in no case may the total signage area exceed ten percent of the building face to which the sign is attached. Acceptable lettering materials include wood, stone, synthetic stone, metal, vinyl, dimensional plastic, acrylic, or high-density polystyrene foam. The overall design of all signage shall be compatible with the turn-of-the-century theme of the historic district. 
c.  Materials. Signs may be constructed of concrete, brick, wood, stone, metal, glass, or synthetic materials that have the same appearance of the aforementioned natural materials due to their finish. All materials shall be compatible with the building's architecture, and should be colorfast and resistant to corrosion. Signs shall be professionally finished in accordance with the material selected, whether by sanding, painting, staining and/or sealing, with the edges of the sign framed out and/or sealed. 
d.  Lighting. All signs in the historic district, whether ground signs or wall signs, shall only be illuminated by an external light source, and through craftsmanship and materials, shall reflect the design aesthetics of the historic district. 
e.  Colors. The historic preservation commission shall approve the color or colors of all signs as well as the color or colors of all lettering, symbols, marks, pictures, figures, embellishments, frames or the like contained therein. 
f.  Awning and canopy signs. Awnings or canopies over doors, entrances, windows or outside service areas are permitted in the H-1 Historic District. Professionally applied forms, graphics, symbols, lettering, or other visual presentation may be incorporated into the awning or canopy valance/drop flap, but are restricted to 20 percent of the awning field. Size of the signage shall be computed as for a wall sign. Signage pursuant to this subsection shall be included within the overall amount of signage allowed under section 86-489. Awnings or canopies shall clear sidewalks by seven feet in height, and project no more than six feet from the building. Canvas or synthetic look-alike canvas, is the only material permitted for awnings and canopies. Metal or vinyl may be approved for awnings or canopies if the overall design is consistent with the H-1 Historic District's turn-of-the-century theme. Awnings or canopies may not be backlit. 
g.  Hanging or suspended signs. Hanging, suspended, or projecting signs are permitted and shall clear sidewalks by seven feet in height, and project no more than 36 inches from the building. Hanging or suspended signs should project from the wall at a 90-degree angle. Hanging or suspending signs over driveways, alleys, or parking areas is prohibited. Hanging, suspended, or projecting signs shall be limited to a maximum size of six square feet, and if double sided, shall be calculated as only one sign. One hanging, suspended, or projecting sign per building street frontage is permitted, and shall be calculated as part of the total signage area allowed under section 86-489. Attractive hardware for hanging is encouraged. 
h.  Window signs. Interior window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the total window area exposed to public view. Window signs shall not be included within the overall amount of signage allowed under section 86-489. 
i.  Special events. Additional signage is permitted in the historic district under section 86-494, provided that all such additional signage conforms to the aesthetic standards of the historic district. 
j.  Ground signs. Ground signs may hang or suspend from a horizontal support that is affixed to the ground by vertical post. 
(4)  Any lot in the H-2 Historic District that is used as residential property shall comply with the residential provisions of this article. Any lot in the H-1 Historic District or the H-2 Historic District for which a business license is maintained shall comply with the non-residential provisions of this article and obtain approval of the historic preservation commission before the display of any sign. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-496. - Substitution clause. 
    The owner or the permittee of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this article may substitute non-commercial speech in lieu of any other commercial speech or non-commercial speech. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial speech over any other non-commercial speech. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-497. - Severability. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that all parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases, terms, or words of this article, were upon their enactment, believed by the mayor and council to be fully valid, enforceable, and constitutional. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term, or word of this article is severable from every other part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term, or word of this article. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, no part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term, or word in this article is mutually dependent upon any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term or word in this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 86-498. - Other ordinances regarding signage. 
    It is the intention of this article to regulate signage. Where additional ordinances regulate signs in the Code, such other regulations shall be harmonized herewith. If such provisions are in conflict with this article, the provisions of this article shall be deemed to prevail. Specifically, all other references to signage found in the 2005 Zoning Ordinance shall be considered superseded by section 86-475 et seq. as provided hereinabove. 
( Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-16 ) 
APPENDIX. - THOROUGHFARE PLAN 
Organization of the Plan 
    Background. This Section describes the philosophical foundations of the Thoroughfare Plan. 
    Commonly-accepted Standards. This Section presents information, standards and design criteria commonly used by other jurisdictions. 
    Design Guidelines for Street Classifications. This Section provides standards and design criteria used by the North Carolina Department of Transportation. 
    Jonesboro Thoroughfare Plan. This Section represents the application of those standards and design criteria to the Jonesboro context, and comprises the proposed Thoroughfare Plan standards and criteria. 
Background 
    The approach characterizing the Jonesboro Thoroughfare Plan stems from "New Urbanism" and "Traditional Neighborhood Development" models. The approach is also to "Keep It Simple," and accordingly, the name of the plan is proposed as the Jonesboro Thoroughfare Plan. 
    Post-war Development Model 
    The following excerpt conveys the roots of these development models that spell a return to a traditional development model that preceded widespread automobile ownership and suburbanization of America. 
"Prior to WWII, the traditional neighborhood street was in the range of 28 feet-30 feet wide with corner radius of 5 feet-10 feet. Since that time, the typical local street has grown to a width of 36 feet, with a corner radius of 25 feet. The wider street was intended to move traffic more quickly and efficiently. It has. Unfortunately, faster traffic and increased amounts of asphalt have diminished the quality of our neighborhoods. 
Through the first quarter of this century, the United States was developed in the form of compact, mixed-use neighborhoods. The pattern began to change with the emergence of modern architecture and zoning and ascension of the automobile. After World War II, a new system of development was implemented nationwide, replacing neighborhoods with a rigorous separation of uses that has become known as conventional suburban development, or sprawl. The majority of US citizens now live in suburban communities built in the last 50 years." 
    Principles of New Urbanism The strength of New Urbanism lies in the design of neighborhoods. This is guided by principles developed by town planners Andres Duany and Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk. According to these planners, an authentic neighborhood contains most of the following elements: 
A.  The neighborhood has a discernible center. This is often a square of a green, and sometimes a busy or memorable street corner. A transit stop would be located at this center. 
B.  Most of the dwellings are within a five-minute walk of the center, an average of roughly 2,000 feet. 
C.  There is a variety of dwelling types - usually detached dwellings, townhouses and apartments - so that younger and older people, singles and families, the poor and the wealthy may find places to live. 
D.  There are shops and offices at the edge of the neighborhood, of sufficiently varied types to supply the weekly needs of a household. 
E.  A small ancillary building is permitted within the backyard of each house. It may be used as a rental unit or place to work, e.g., office or craft workshop. 
F.  An elementary school is near enough so that most children may walk from their home. 
G.  There are small playgrounds near every dwelling - not more than a tenth of a mile away. 
H.  Streets within the neighborhood are a connected network that disperses traffic by providing a variety of pedestrian and vehicular routes to any destination. 
I.  The streets are relatively narrow and shaded by rows of trees. This slows traffic, creating an environment suitable for pedestrians and bicycles. 
J.  Buildings in the neighborhood center are placed close to the street, creating a well-defined outdoor space. 
K.  Parking lots and garage doors rarely front the street. Parking is relegated to the rear of buildings, usually accessed by alleys. 
L.  Certain prominent sites at the termination of street vistas or in the neighborhood center are reserved for civic buildings. These provide sites for community meetings, education, religion or cultural activities. 
Commonly-Accepted Standards 
    A number of state highway departments have developed standards that advance TND objectives. These standards are consistent with Jonesboro's historic development pattern and are presented here for application to the proposed Jonesboro Thoroughfare Plan. 
Street Construction Design Guidelines 
Design Speed 
Maximum design speeds should consider the street type, vehicle use and the proposed speed limit. As most streets are "lanes" and "streets" which provide direct access to neighborhoods, the maximum desired vehicle speed is approximately 20 mph. 
Street Types and Widths 
Specific dimensions of each street element are provided in the table below; dimensions are from curb face to curb face. 
STREET TYPES AND PROPOSED WIDTHS 
Street Type Lane Parking Bicycle Gutter Median 
Gutter Lane 8 feet 8 feet NA 1 foot NA Street 9 feet 6 feet NA 2 feet NA Avenue 11 feet 6 feet 6 feet 2 feet 1 foot Main Street 11 feet 6 feet 6 feet 2 feet 1 foot Boulevard 11 feet 6 feet 6 feet 2 feet 1 foot Parkway 12 feet NA NA 2 feet 1 foot  
NOTE: Bicycle lanes are optional when alternate routes to the same destination are provided. 
Many of the standards advocated in this reference are designed to accommodate the "most frequent and numerous users of TND street networks," that is, motorists, cyclists and pedestrians. Use by oversized vehicles, such as delivery trucks, moving vans, school buses and fire trucks, is generally infrequent, particularly on residential streets and lanes. A basic premise of TND-responsive design is that "A street should be no wider than the minimum width needed to accommodate the usual vehicular mix desired for that street. On a properly designed TND street, the occasional oversized vehicle may cross the centerline of a street when making a right turn." 
Stopping Sight Distances 
Minimum stopping distances are referenced to design speed. According to the TND standards advanced, sight distances should be accommodated for both vertical and horizontal alignments. Stopping distances must be increased for downhill grades. Distances under wet pavement conditions are as follows: 
Design Speed Minimum Stopping Distance 20 mph 125 feet 25 mph 150 feet 30 mph 200 feet  
Vertical Curve Design 
K values for vertical curve design should be consistent with design speeds. The maximum centerline grades should also be consistent with design standards. 
Centerline Radii 
The criteria for minimum centerline radius for design speeds of 25 mph or less (no super elevation) are: 
Design Speed Minimum Centerline Radius 20 mph 90 feet 25 mph 175 feet  
Curb Radii 
A minimum curb radius of 15 feet is recommended for design speeds of 20 mph. Certain intersections on avenues, main streets and boulevards may require a curb radius of as much as 25 feet. In instances of larger curb radii, sidewalks may be set back six to 10 feet from curbs. In addition, on-street parking may be prohibited within 30 feet of the intersection on each street. 
Intersection Sight Triangles 
The minimum sight triangle for stop conditions at street intersections shall be 70 feet along the major road right-of-way and 20 feet along the minor road right-of-way. The intersection sight triangle shall be permanent right-of-way. These dimensions may be reduced for lower design speeds on lanes and streets. 
Curb Construction 
All curbed streets shall be built in accordance with GDOT requirements for vertical curb and gutter construction. Gutters for lanes are to be two feet wide; street median gutters are to be one foot. 
Pavement Design 
Alleys shall conform to City of Jonesboro standards as to pavement section for local streets. All other roads shall meet the pavement design criteria established in the "City of Jonesboro Development Code." 
Sidewalks 
Minimum sidewalk width is five feet for neighborhoods and eight feet for commercial districts. Sidewalks shall also meet or exceed the guidelines of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Cyclists 
On lower volume streets, cyclists should be considered a normal part of the vehicle traffic on the street. On higher volume streets, cyclists should be accommodated with six-foot wide bike lanes; separate bikeways may be considered. Routing for cyclists may include signs and striping, including changing the color of the bike lane, as appropriate. 
Transit 
Road design should be compatible with transit. Transit should be addressed wherever it is present and should be appropriately planned for developing areas. 
On-street Parking 
Parking on lanes and local streets is not designated or marked. On-street parking along major streets should be signed, marked or otherwise clearly designated. 
Curb Cuts 
Curb cuts, or driveways, should be minimized to reduce impacts to on-street parking, conflicts with pedestrians and cyclists and interruptions in traffic flow. 
Planting Strips and Street Trees 
Planting strips, located between the curb and sidewalk, parallel with the street, shall be six feet or more in width. Small street trees may be planted within three feet of the back of curb and should generally be planted along the centerline of the planting strip along streets with design speeds of 20 mph or less, or along streets with on-street parking. In commercial areas with high pedestrian volumes, granted tree wells may be used in lieu of planting strips. Trees and other objects should be restricted from corners for distances of 30 feet on all sides to maintain sight lines. Along all planting strips, the area between two feet and seven feet above ground shall be maintained as a clear zone to preserve sight lines and accommodate pedestrians. 
Utilities 
All utility installations within rights-of-way shall be consistent with the City of Jonesboro Development regulations. Underground utilities may cross under or run longitudinally under the pavement in residential subdivision streets, provided future utility stub-outs are installed prior to paving. Underground utilities may cross under all other streets and roadways, but may not run longitudinally under the pavement, except in unusual situations approved by the City Engineer. 
Lighting 
Shorter light standards located on a reduced spacing are preferable to fewer, taller, high-intensity light standards. The scale of lighting fixtures and the illumination provided must be appropriate for both pedestrian and vehicular movement. 
Design Guidelines by Street Classification 
Alleys 
Alleys provide access to residential and commercial properties, but are not designed to handle through traffic. Alleys are found primarily in single-family residential developments and serve as rear access to garages. Business owners sometime use alleys for locating dumpsters. Utilities are often provided in alleys to connect to the rear of homes or businesses. A minimum right-of-way of 20 feet is required, with a minimum pavement width of 12 feet. 
Lanes 
Lanes provide access to single-family dwellings and are generally two to six blocks in length. A street width of 18 feet is typical, with storm drainage addressed by curb and gutter. On-street parking is permitted, though usually limited to guests. Planting strips six feet in width parallel five-foot sidewalks that are located on both frontages. The design speed for lanes is 20 miles per hour (mph) and a 40-foot right-of-way is required. 
Streets 
Streets provide access to many forms of housing and are generally two to six blocks in length. Streets are 28 feet wide, with curb and gutter and on-street parking. Planting strips six feet in width and five-foot sidewalks on both sides of each frontage are typical. Design speed for streets is 20 mph and a 50-foot right of way is required. 
Avenues 
Avenues convey vehicular traffic over short distances at moderate speeds. These routes serve as connectors between neighborhoods and mixed-use and commercial centers. Avenues often lie along an important axis, terminating at prominent buildings or plazas. Avenues may also provide circulation around squares or neighborhood parks. 
Recommended street width is 26 feet on both sides of an 18-foot median. This configuration accommodates one 12-foot travel lane, a six-foot bike lane and an eight-foot parallel parking space. A minimum right-of-way of 98 feet and a maximum of two travel lanes are recommended. Planting strips with a width of six feet and eight-foot sidewalks are also recommended on each side. Design speed for avenues is 30 mph. 
Main Streets 
Main streets provide low-speed access to neighborhoods and high-density residential and commercial districts. A 66-foot right-of-way is required to accommodate sidewalks, curb and gutter and on-street parking, which is to be striped. Travel lanes on main streets are 11 feet and limited to two travel lanes. Bike lanes are optional, but if provided, a minimum width of six feet is recommended. Sidewalks having a minimum width of eight feet and installed on each side of the right-of-way are also recommended. Planting wells using six-foot tree grates are recommended rather than medians. Bike lanes are optional. 
Features unique to main streets are "bulb-outs" at intersections and mid-block crossings; both of which are intended to enhance pedestrian use and safety. Posted speeds should not exceed 25 mph. 
Parkways 
Parkways are designed to serve motorists at the edge of towns or in agricultural areas. They are used for travel into town, or for travel through natural areas. Parkways are not designed for developed areas as when the parkway enters town, these routes transition to a boulevard. 
Parkways require a minimum right-of-way of 118 feet. Travel lanes are typically 11-12 feet and a typical section uses a shoulder with ditches to accommodate runoff. Parkways can accommodate abundant pedestrian amenities; landscaped medians up to 30 feet wide, multi-use trails ranging from 10-14 feet in width, planting strips of 7-20 feet and bikeways separated from travel lanes are not uncommon. Storm water runoff can be addressed using swales or curb and gutter. The multi-use trails may be established on either or both sides of a parkway. 
A paved shoulder having a minimum width of six feet should be provided on high-speed parkways, that is, those with posted speeds greater than 45 mph. Maximum design speed for parkways is 50 mph. 
Jonesboro Thoroughfare Plan 
    Standards and design criteria adopted by other jurisdictions can provide an appropriate frame of reference in considering local plans. However, this information must be tailored to the Jonesboro context. The following standards and design criteria are proposed: 
    The Jonesboro Thoroughfare Plan establishes a street hierarchy comprised of Primary Arterial, Major Collector and Local Street. These are organized in order of size, with the Interstate conveying the highest traffic volumes and the highest speeds; local streets carry the lowest volumes and are characterized by the lowest speeds. Each street classification in the hierarchy is described below: 
  Primary Arterial 
  Major Collector 
  Local Street 
Primary Arterials 
Arterials are designed to provide a high degree of mobility and serve longer vehicle trips to, from, and within urban areas. Arterials form the skeleton of the roadway network, linking urban centers such as the Central Business District, industrial parks, commercial centers, major residential developments and other key activity centers. Primary Arterials are designed to carry between 45,000 and 75,000 trips per day. The City of Jonesboro has only one Primary Arterial and that is Tara Boulevard (Highway 19/41). 
Major Collector Streets 
Collector streets link neighborhoods to commercial districts and commuter traffic to secondary arterials. These streets are well traveled and are built to an urban standard. Collector streets are typically two- to four-lane facilities with an average daily traffic count between 7,500 and 15,000 vehicles. The following streets comprise Jonesboro's Major Collector Streets: 
Fayetteville Road 
North Avenue 
North Main Street 
South Main Street 
McDonough Street 
Smith Street 
Stockbridge Road/Highway 138 
Jodeco Road 
Local Streets 
Local streets serve neighborhoods and are generally arranged in a grid pattern although development out from Jonesboro's historic core tends to be served by curvilinear street patterns. These roads accommodate access to collector streets and local destinations at low speeds; sidewalks encourage pedestrian travel and community livability. Standards and design criteria pertaining to local streets are as follows: 
  Local streets shall be limited to a two-lane section with a two foot curb and gutter on each frontage. 
  Pavement sections shall be comprised of two 12-foot lanes with parking permitted. 
  Stormwater runoff shall be addressed using drainage sales. 
  Five-foot sidewalks shall be established on each frontage as well as landscaped strips having a minimum dimension of four feet. Shade trees shall be planted on 50-foot centers. 
  Right-of-way required for a local street shall be a minimum of 50 feet. 
  All local streets in the "town center" shall have sidewalks and pedestrian-scale street lights. 
    The following streets comprise Jonesboro's local streets: 
Adamson Drive Elaine Terrace Rendor Street Arnold Place Evenview Circle Rhett Butler Drive Batiste Garden Circle Evenview Drive Riley Way/Plant St Batiste Lane Fayette Ave Roberts Street Batiste Park Road Gloria Drive Rogers Avenue Batiste Way Government Circle Royston Street Broad Street Hanes Street Scarlett Drive Brown Leaf Drive Hightower Street Scott Drive Brown Drive Huie St Sims Street Burkshire Court Ingleside Drive Souder Way Burnette Street Irwin Street/Irvin Street South Ave Burnside Street Johnston Street/Johnson St Spring Street Carlton Drive Key Street Starr Drive Carriage Lane King Street Stewart Avenue Cecelia Circle Lee Street Sunnybrook Drive Cecelia Drive Memorial Avenue Thornton Drive Chestnut Street Mercer Court Turner Rd Church Street Mercer Drive Wallis Street Cloud Street/St. James Place Moore Street Watterson Street College St North Lake Drive Wayne Avenue Courthouse Alley/Courthouse St Old Morrow Rd West Avenue Courthouse Way Old Stockbridge Road West Mill Street Crowder Street Pharr Avenue West Mimosa Drive Dean Street Pine Circle Whiteline Street Dixon Road Poplar Street Wilburn Street Dixon Street Porter Lane Williamson Mill Rd East Dixie Drive Raymond Street Woodhaven Drive East Mimosa Drive Red Briar Way Woodland Drive  
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 2, 8-15-05) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1987 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1987 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1987 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1987 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1, 1-1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-1-3-1-1-5 1-4-1-6 1-1-6 1-8 1-1-7 1-10 1-1-8 1-12 2-1-3-2-1-8 2-51-2-56 2-1-9 2-31 2-2-5 2-121 2-4-1 2-91 3-1-1-3-1-7 2-151-2-157 3-2-7(a)- 
3-2-7(f) 66-136-66-141 3-2-8(a), 3-2-8(b) 66-101, 66-102 3-2-8(c), 3-2-8(d) 66-103 3-2-31, 3-2-32 6-126, 6-127 4-1-1 2-91 4-2-1 38-1 4-2-2 46-1 4-2-5 38-2 5-1-2-5-1-8 58-1-58-7 5-3-1 22-1 6-1-5 78-1 6-1-11 78-2 8-2-21 16-26 8-2-31 16-26 8-2-41 16-26 8-2-51 16-26 8-2-61 16-26 8-2-71 16-26 8-2-81 16-26 8-6-2 86-1 8-6-11-8-6-14 86-81-86-84 8-6-21-8-6-28 86-116-86-123 8-6-41 86-2 8-6-42, 8-6-43 86-4, 86-5 8-6-51-8-6-54 86-156-86-159 8-6-55-8-6-59 86-161-86-165 8-6-71 86-166 8-6-81-8-6-84 86-196-86-199 8-6-91-8-6-94 86-41-86-44 8-6-95, 8-6-96 86-46, 86-47 8-6-101- 
8-6-107 86-231-86-237 8-6-121- 
8-6-126 86-271-86-276 8-6-131 86-45 9-1-1 6-1 9-1-2-9-1-5 6-31-6-34 9-1-6-9-1-9 6-91-6-94 9-1-10-9-1-13 6-56-6-59 9-1-14 6-2 9-3-1-9-3-12 18-277-18-288 9-3-13 18-276 9-3-14 18-289 9-4-1 18-91 
18-111 9-4-2-9-4-4 18-112-18-114 9-5-2-9-5-5 18-323-18-326 9-5-6 18-322 9-6-1 58-8 9-6-2(a)- 
9-6-2(e) 18-361-18-365 10-1-1 74-41 10-1-4-10-1-9 74-1-74-6 10-3-1-10-3-3 58-61-58-63 10-3-4 58-41 11-1-2(b), (c) 34-90 11-1-3-11-1-4 34-89 11-1-5, 11-1-6 46-17, 46-18 11-1-7-11-1-10 46-2-46-5 11-1-12 46-6 11-1-14-11-1-17 46-7-46-10 11-1-18-11-1-20 34-121-34-123 11-1-21 46-11 11-2-1 34-81 11-2-5, 11-2-6 34-87, 34-88  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1987 Code which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1987 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since the 1987 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code  1-28-1988(Ord.) 1, 2 6-91, 6-92  3-14-1988(Ord.) 58-9 86-157 1(8-6-51) 86-156 3-5 86-165  6-13-1988(Ord.) 1(a) 18-241 1(b)-1(d) 18-243-18-245 1(e) 18-242  9-12-1988(Ord.) 1 86-165  9-19-1988(Ord.) 2(8-5-1)- 
2(8-5-14)       Added 52-1-52-14  1- 9-1989(Ord.) 3 14-32 3(11-3-33)- 
3(11-3-38) 14-33-14-38 4 14-31  4-10-1989(Ord.) 1 86-157 1(8-6-128) 86-277  7-10-1989(Ord.) 1 52-2 2, 3 52-3(10), (11) 4 52-6(e) 5 52-7(a) 6 52-7(b)(1) 7 52-11(4) 12-11-1989 
(1)(Ord.) 1(3-2-41)- 
1(3-2-43) 66-31-66-33 12-11-1989 
(2)(Ord.) 1(11-1-24) 46-15  5-13-1991(Ord.) 1 86-200  7- 8-1991(Ord.) 1 86-166  9- 9-1991(Ord.) 18-290 11- 4-1991(Ord.) 86-1 7 86-3  9-14-1992(Ord.) 1 18-321 2 18-327 10-12-1992(Ord.) 1(9-7-1) 18-146 1(9-7-2)- 
1(9-7-5) 18-148-18-151 1(9-7-6) 18-147 11- 9-1992(Ord.) 1 46-21  5-10-1993 
(1)(Ord.) 22-2, 22-3  5-10-1993 
(2)(Ord.) 1 74-3 93-101  9-13-1993 1(9-7-15) 10-31, 10-32 1(9-7-17)- 
1(9-7-20) 10-33-10-36  1- 4-1994(Res.) 66-66  2-14-1994(Ord.) 11-1-24 46-14  4-11-1994(Ord.) 86-1 IV 86-6  6-12-1995(Ord.) 1(8-8-1)- 
1(8-8-5) 78-36-78-40 1(8-8-6)- 
1(8-8-9) 78-42-78-45 1(8-8-10) 78-41 1(8-8-11), 
1(8-8-12) 78-46, 78-47  8-14-1995(Ord.) 74-71, 74-72 12-11-1995(Ord.) 1(8-6-57) 86-163 12-13-1995(Ord.) 34-89  1- 8-1996(Ord.) 1 34-89 10-14-1996(Ord.) 1(8-8-1)- 
1(8-8-17)       Added 70-51-70-67 2(8-6-2) 86-1  3-10-1997(Ord.) 1 46-19, 46-20 1(11-1-24.1), 1(11-1-24.2) 46-13 11-1-25.2 46-12 11-1-26 46-16  8-11-1997(Ord.) 1(8-3-1) 34-31 1(8-3-2)- 
1(8-3-7) 34-33-34-38 1(8-3-8) 34-32 1(8-3-9)- 
1(8-3-18) 34-39-34-48 11-10-1997(Ord.) 1-3 38-36-38-38 11-10-1997(Res.) 38-39  1-12-1998(Ord.) 1(9-7-1) 18-181 1(9-7-2(a))- 
1(9-7-2(c)) 18-206-18-208 1(9-7-3) 18-209 1(9-7-4)- 
1(9-7-6) 18-182-18-184 2 86-163  2- 9-1998(Ord.) 1(3-3-1)- 
1(3-3-11) 66-171-66-181  3- 8-1999(Ord.) 1, 2 16-27 1999-02  4-12-1999 1 86-233  7-12-1999(Res.) 1-3 70-1  9-13-1999 
(1)(Ord.) 1 16-71  9-13-1999 
(2)(Ord.) 1(8-2-14(a)) 16-73 1(8-2-14(b), (c)) 16-74 1(8-2-14(d), (e)) 16-76 1(8-2-15(a), (b)) 16-77 1(8-2-15(c), (d)) 16-75 1(8-2-16) 16-73  9-13-1999 
(3)(Ord.) 1 16-72  9-27-1999(Ord.) 1(11-2-2)- 
1(11-2-4) 34-82-34-84 1(11-2-7), 
1(11-2-8) 34-85, 34-86 1(a) 74-95 1(b) 74-91 1(c)-(h) 74-95 1(i), 1(j) 74-93, 74-94 1(k)-(m) 74-92 12-30-1999(Ord.) 86-81 2, 3 86-1 4 86-160 6 86-165  2-14-2000(Ord.) 1, 2 86-273, 86-274  6-12-2000(Ord.) 1(7-1-1) 48-26 1(7-1-2(a)) 48-31 1(7-1-2(b)) 48-30 1(7-1-2(c)) 48-29 1(7-1-2(d)) 48-32 1(7-1-2(e)) 48-34 1(7-1-3(a)) 48-33 1(7-1-3(b))- 
1(7-1-3(d)) 48-35-48-37 1(7-1-3(e)) 48-27 1(7-1-4) 48-28  6-19-2000(Ord.) 1(3-2-1) 18-33 1(3-2-2) 18-31 1(3-2-3)- 
1(3-2-9) 18-39-18-45 1(3-2-10) 18-32 1(3-2-11)- 
1(3-2-16) 18-46-18-51 1(3-2-17) 18-34 1(3-2-18)- 
1(3-2-29) 18-52-18-63 1(3-2-30), 
1(3-2-31) 18-35, 18-36 1(3-2-32) 18-38 1(3-2-33) 18-37  8-14-2000(1)(Ord.) 1(1-1-6) 1-8(b), (c)  8-14-2000(2)(Ord.) 1 (3-2-1)18-33 1(3-2-2) 18-31 1(3-2-3)- 
1(3-2-9) 18-39-18-45 1(3-2-10) 18-32 1(3-2-11)- 
1(3-2-16) 18-46-18-51 1(3-2-17) 18-34 1(3-2-18)- 
1(3-2-29) 18-52-18-63 1(3-2-30), 1(3-2-31) 18-35, 18-36 1(3-2-32) 18-38 1(3-2-33) 18-37  9-11-2000(Ord.) 1(9-8-1)-1(9-8-10)       Added 74-121-74-131 1(9-8-12)-1(9-8-30)       Added 74-132-74-151 1(9-8-34)-1(9-8-37)       Added 74-152-74-155 10- 9-2000(1)(Ord.) 1(1-1-5) 1-6 10- 9-2000(2)(Ord.) 1(1-1-2A)       Added 1-14 10- 9-2000(3)(Ord.) 2(8-6-2) 86-1 3(8-6-11) 86-81 4(8-6-59)       Rpld 86-165(b)(4)       Rnbd 86-165(b)(5)-(20) as (b)(4)-(19) 5(8-6-61)       Added 86-162.1 11-13-2000(Ord.) 1(3-3-1)- 
1(3-3-10)       Added 2-181-2-190 002  1-23-2001(Res.) 1-4 Ch. 86(note) 003  1-23-2001(Res.) 1-3       Added Adopt. Ord, p. ix  4- 9-2001(Ord.) 1       Added 74-7  8-13-2001(Ord.) 1 34-32 2 34-37 01-04 11-12-2001       Added 46-22 02-02  4-29-2002 1       Rpld 52-1-52-14       Added 86-278-86-291 02-03  6-10-2002 1 86-164(c)(1) 02-04  6-10-2002 1 6-58 2       Added 18-185 3       Rpld 18-241-18-245       Added 18-241 4 18-364 5 46-4 6 46-17 7 70-60(3) 8 70-61(3) 9 70-62(3) 10 74-4 11 74-132(7) 12 86-1 02-05  6-10-2002 1       Rpld 34-31-34-48       Added 34-31-34-39 02-06 10- 1-2002 1 34-89       Rpld 34-90 02-07 10-14-2002 1       Added 34-90, 34-91 03-01  1-13-2003 1 34-82 03-02  1-13-2003 1 34-83-34-88 03-03  2-10-2003 1       Added 18-400-18-410 03-05  3-10-2003 1 10-31-10-36       Added 10-37-10-54 03-11  6-16-2003 1       Rpld 86-157 2 86-156 03-12  6-16-2003 1       Rpld 86-158, 86-159 2       Added 86-157 03-13  6-16-2003 1 86-278-86-292 03-14  6-16-2003 1       Added 82-10-82-21 03-15  6-16-2003 1 46-22 03-16 12- 8-2003 1, 2       Added 18-430-18-444 03-17 12- 8-2003 1       Dltd 16-71-16-77       Added 16-71-16-77 03-19 12- 8-2003 1 18-34 2 18-46 3 18-55 04-01  1-12-2004 3, 4       Added 42-26-42-32 04-02  1-12-2004 1       Added 52-1-52-16 04-03  1-12-2004 1 86-279 2       Dltd 86-280(b)(8) 3 86-280(d) 4 86-280(f) 5, 6 86-280(g)(2), (3) 7 86-280(h) 8 86-280(k) 9 86-281(a) 10 86-281(f)(2)b 11       Added 86-281(h) 12 86-282(3)b 13       Dltd 86-282(3)d. 14       Rnbd 86-282(3)e-g       as d-f 15 86-282(4)d 16 86-282(4)e.1 17       Added 86-282(5)c.6-8 18, 19 86-283(a), (b) 20 86-284(a)(2) 21       Added 86-284(b)(1)c 22 86-284(b)(2)c 23       Added 86-284(c)(1)f, g 24 86-284(c)(2)a 25 86-284(c)(3)f 27       Rnbd 86-285-86-292       as 86-286-86-293 26       Added 86-285 28, 29 86-286(a), (b) 30 86-287(a)(2) 31 86-287(d) 32 86-288(2) 33 86-288(d)(8) 34 86-289(a) 35 86-290 37       Rnbd 86-291-86-293       as 86-292-86-294 36       Added 86-291 04-04  1-12-2004 1-3 18-430-18-444 04-06  3- 8-2004 1, 2       Added 34-200-34-229 04-07  3- 8-2004 1 46-16 04-08  4-12-2004 1 86-6(b) 2 86-81 3       Added 86-156(e)(7) 04-09  4-12-2004 1       Rpld 34-31-34-39 2       Added 34-31-34-39 04-10  5-17-2004 1, 2       Added 18-460-18-475 04-11  5-17-2004 2 18-146-18-151 04-12  5-17-2004 2       Added 26-1 04-13  5-17-2004 1 46-7 04-14  5-17-2004 1, 2       Rpld 18-91, 18-11-18-114 04-15  5-17-2004 1, 2       Added 34-251-34-261 04-16  5-17-2004 1       Added 30-1-30-21 04-17  8- 9-2004 1, 2       Added 34-301-34-315 04-18  8- 9-2004 1 34-31 3       Dltd 34-35(f)-(i) 04-19  8- 9-2004 1       Added 34-140-34-145 04-20  8- 9-2004 1       Rpld 34-81-34-91 2       Added 34-81-34-86 04-21  9-13-2004 1       Rpld 86-278-86-294       Added 86-278-86-293 04-22  9-13-2004 1       Rpld 52-1-52-16 2       Added 52-1-52-16 05-01  1-10-2005       Rpld 6-1, 6-2, 6-31-6-34, 6-56-6-59, 6-91-6-94, 6-126, 6-127       Added 6-1-6-21, 6-36-6-57, 6-71-6-77, 6-91-6-112, 6-131-6-133, 6-151, 6-161-6-168, 6-181, 6-182, 6-201 05-02  1-10-2005 1       Dltd 54-31       Added 54-1-54-12, 54-31-54-48, 54-56-54-62, 54-71-54-73, 54-81-54-88 05-03  1-10-2005 1, 2       Dltd 38-1       Rnbd 38-2       as 38-1 05-04  1-10-2005 1, 2 18-40(b) 05-05  2-14-2005 1, 2 70-54 05-08  8-15-2005 1       Rpld 86-1-86-6, 86-41-86-47, 86-81-86-84, 86-116-86-123, 86-156-86-166, 86-196-86-200, 86-231-86-237, 86-271-86-293, 86-301-86-304, 2       Added 86-1-86-9, 86-31-86-45, 86-61, 86-62, 86-71-86-77, 86-91-86-111, 86-121-86-204, 86-221-86-229, 86-241-86-247, 86-261-86-277, 86-291-86-297, 86-311-86-325, 86-341-86-350, 86-361-86-377, 86-391-86-417, 86-431-86-435, 86-451-86-462 App. 05-09  8-15-2005 Art. 1       Rpld 52-1-52-16 Art. 2       Added 52-1-52-16 2005-10(Res.)  8-15-2005 1, Exh. A       Added 44-1-44-6, 44-21-44-27, 44-41, 44-51-44-59, 44-81-44-90, 44-111-44-129, 44-151-44-170 05-11  8-15-2005 Art. 1 86-73 2005-13 12-15-2005 Arts. I-VII       Added 2-221-2-227 2006-02  3-13-2006 34-250-34-261       Added 34-361-34-372 2006-05  9-19-2006 1 86-204 2006-06  9-19-2006 1       Rpld 46-7 2006-07  9-19-2006 1       Dltd 34-33(c)(15), (16) 2(34-316)-(34-331)       Added 34-331-34-346 2006-08  9-19-2006 1       Added 86-112 007-001  6-11-07 Art. I 6-11 Art. II 6-46 2007-000  2-12-2007 1 46-19 2007-03  8-18-2007 90-1-90-6       Added 2-251-2-256 90-15- 
90-24       Added 2-271-2-280 2007-005 12-10-2007 Art. I       Added 34-376-34-380 2008-000  3-10-2008 1       Rpld 10-32-10-54       Added 10-32-10-44 2008-001  3-10-2008 1       Added 66-190 2008-003  8-11-2008 1       Added 16-91 2008-004  9- 8-2008 1       Added 74-175-74-179 2008-005  6- 9-2008 1-4       Added 30-22 2010-001  9-13-2010 1       Rpld 14-1 14-31-14-38 1(14-3-1- 
14-3-16)       Added 14-1-14-16 1(14-3-21- 
14-3-23)       Added 14-31-14-33 1(14-3-30)       Added 14-51 2010-002  2- 8-2010 1 74-175-74-177       Rnbd 74-178, 74-179       as 74-179, 74-180       Added 74-178, 74-181 2010-004 12-13-2010       Rpld 34-31-34-39 1       Added 34-31-34-40 2010-006  6-14-2010 1       Rpld 38-1       Rpld 38-36-38-39       Added 38-1 2011-002  8- 8-2011 1       Added 46-19(a)(25) 2011-003 10-10-2011 1-4 70-1 2011-004 11-14-2011 1 6-11(c) 2011-005 12-12-2011 2, 3 18-362, 18-363 2011-006 12-12-2011 I-III 18-61-18-63 2012-001  3-13-2012 1-5 30-22 2012-004 11-12-2012 1 86-121 2012-007 11-12-2012 1 34-31-34-40 2013-002  5-13-2013 1       Added 34-1-34-4 2014-001  2-10-2014 1       Dltd 16-26, 16-27       Added 16-26-16-38 2014-002  2-10-2014 1 86-109 2014-003  6- 9-2014 1       Added 86-113 2 86-110 2014-004  6- 9-2014 1       Added 6-46(f) 2014-006 10-13-2014 1 54-1 2 54-11 2014-009 10-13-2014 1, 2 66-171 3, 4 66-174 2014-010 10-13-2014 1 6-50(2) 2014-011 12- 8-2014 1       Rpld 34-200-34-228       Added 34-200-34-228 2014-012 12- 8-2014 1 52-2(b) 2       Added 52-11(d) 3 52-8(6) 2015-001  1-12-2015 1(Att.) 74-71 2(Att.) 74-72 2015-002  4-13-2015 1 34-81(b)(14)       Added 34-81(b)(15) 3       Added 6-211-6-218 2015-002B  2- 9-2015 1 86-274 2015-003  2- 9-2015 1 2-51 2015-006  8-10-2015 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 6-1-6-201       Added 6-1-6-201 2015-008a  8-10-2015 1 44-159 2 44-120(g) 3 44-164(c) 2015-008b  8-10-2015 1       Added 86-109(l)(5)c 2 86-399 2015-009  8-10-2015 1(Att.) 74-71 2(Att.) 74-72 2015-10  8-10-2015 1 86-62 2       Added 86-163.1 3 86-204 2015-011 11- 9-2015 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 18-31-18-63       Added 18-31-18-66 2016-01  2- 8-2016 1       Rpld 74-121-74-155 2016-002  2- 8-2016 1 6-101 2       Rpld 6-103 2016-03  2- 8-2016 1 86-62 2 86-204 2016-004  3-14-2016 1       Rpld 52-1-52-16       Added 62-475-86-498 2016-005  4-11-2016 Ch. 58(title)       Rpld 58-41       Added 58-41-58-59 2016-006  4-11-2016 1       Added 58-42(4)       Added 58-60 2016-007  5-31-2016 1 Ch. 6(title) 1       Added 6-219 2016-09 10-10-2016 1 58-60(g) 2 6-6 2016-10 10-10-2016 1       Added 2-1 2016-12 10-10-2016 1 66-172, 66-173 2016-13 10-10-2016 1       Added Art. VIII, 2-290-2-295 2017-001  1- 9-2017 1       Added Ch. 32, 32-1-32-6 2017-002  1- 9-2017 1-4 42-28-42-31 2017-03  2-13-2017 1 86-204 2017-04  2-13-2017 1       Added Ch. 33, 33-1 2017-07  5- 8-2017 1, 2 58-60 2017-08  6-12-2017 3 2-91 4 2-1 5 2-292 6, 7 32-3, 32-4 2018-001A  1- 8-2018 1       Added Art. III, Div. 1, 18-91, 18-92 2018-001B  1- 8-2018 1 86-204 2018-02  1- 8-2018 1       Added Art. III, 58-70-58-80       Rpld 58-5 2018-003  1- 8-2018 1       Rpld 70-51-70-67       Added 70-51-70-94 2018-004  1- 8-2018 1 34-31-34-40 2018-004B  3-12-2018 1 34-31-34-40 2018-05  3-12-2018 1 6-182 2018-007  8-13-2018 5 6-11 2018-009  8-13-2018 1       Added Art. VIII, Div. 2, 
2-300-2-307 2018-010  8-13-2018 1(Exh. A) 86-204 2018-012 10- 8-2018 1 Art. VI, 
74-175-74-181 2018-013 10- 8-2018 1       Added Art. XIII, 
18-490-18-506  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
O.C.G.A. 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-3 1-6 1-1-7 1-4 1-3-1 1-2 1-3-1 et seq. 1-2 1-3-2, 1-3-3 1-2 1-3-3 34-33 1-4-1 1-2 2-10-105 18-53 2-10-130 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. V ch. 3 6-1 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 6 3-1-2 46-15 3-3-2.1 6-182 3-3-21 6-39 6-47 3-3-23 6-214 6-215 6-218 3-3-24 6-5 3-3-41, 3-3-42 Ch. 10, Art. II 3-4-90 6-1 3-4-110 6-1 3-5-40 6-1 3-5-42 6-1 3-6-40 6-1 4-3-1 et seq. Ch. 14 4-5-1 et seq. Ch. 14 4-8-6 Ch. 14 4-8-20 et seq. Ch. 14 Ch. 14, Art. II 4-8-42 14-32 4-11-1 et seq. Ch. 14 5-3-29 16-74 5-4-1 34-225 5-14-1 et seq.       2-295 2-307 7-1-730-7-1-734       66-102 tit. 8, ch. 2 16-73 8-2-1 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. II 8-2-3 Ch. 16, Art. III 8-2-20 16-26 8-2-20(a) 16-26 8-2-25 Ch. 16, Art. II 16-26 8-2-25(a) Ch. 38 8-2-26 Ch. 16, Art. II 8-2-50 Ch. 16 Ch. 38 8-2-200 Ch. 38 8-2-200 et seq. Ch. 42 9-6-20-9-6-28 10-42 9-11-6 1-2 12-2-8 34-34 12-3-50.2 Ch. 42 12-4-70 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 12-4-72 34-33 78-42 tit. 12, ch. 5 34-34 12-5-1 et seq. Ch. 78 12-5-20 34-32 12-5-20 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 12-5-23(a)(5) 34-35 12-5-30 34-34 12-5-30(f) 34-32 34-34 12-5-120 Ch. 16 12-5-120 et seq. Ch. 78 12-5-282 34-32 12-5-286 34-34 12-5-440 et seq. 34-32 ch. 12-7 34-32 12-7-1 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 34-34 12-7-4 Ch. 34, Art. II 12-7-6 34-33 12-7-6, 12-7-7 Ch. 34, Art. II 12-7-6(b) 34-33 34-34 12-7-6(c) 34-34 12-7-7(e) 34-36 12-7-7(f)(1) 34-35 12-7-7.1 34-33 12-7-8(a) 34-35 34-36 12-7-9 Ch. 34, Art. II 12-7-14 Ch. 34, Art. II 12-7-17 Ch. 34, Art. II 12-7-17(9), (10)       34-35 12-7-19(1)(b) 34-39 12-7-19(4)(b) 34-39 12-7-20 34-35 34-39 12-8-2 Ch. 78 12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 54 12-8-21.1 Ch. 54 12-8-31.1 Ch. 54 12-8-40.1, 12-8-40.2       Ch. 54 12-14-1 78-39 15-6-67 44-122 15-6-67(d) Ch. 62 15-21-93 1-13 15-21-95 1-13 15-21-112 1-12 tit. 16, ch. 2 34-84 tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2       16-73 16-1-1 et seq. Ch. 46 16-7-20 et seq. Ch. 22 16-7-25 Ch. 58 16-7-40 et seq. Ch. 54 16-7-51(6) 46-16 16-10-23 Ch. 38 16-10-24.1 Ch. 38 16-10-26-16-10-29       46-22 16-10-27 Ch. 38 16-11-34 Ch. 58, Art. II 16-11-43 Ch. 58 16-12-2 6-219 16-12-4 Ch. 14 16-12-35 18-430 16-12-35(c) Ch. 10 16-12-37 Ch. 14 16-12-80 52-2 16-13-2 34-84 16-13-32 18-401 17-6-11 1-12 Ch. 74 17-7-22 Ch. 30 21-3-1 et seq. Char. § 5.10 Char. § 5.14 Ch. 2, Art. IV tit. 22 Char. § 1.13 tit. 25, ch. 2 16-73 25-2-1 et seq. Ch. 38 25-2-13 Ch. 42 25-3-1 et seq. Ch. 38 25-3-4 Ch. 38 25-4-1 et seq. Ch. 38 25-6-1 et seq. Ch. 38 25-7-1 et seq. Ch. 38 25-9-6 58-75 25-10-1 et seq. Ch. 38 25-11-1 et seq. Ch. 38 26-2-160 Ch. 14 27-4-30 et seq. Ch. 14 27-5-4 et seq. Ch. 14 30-3-1 et seq. Ch. 16 31-19-1 et seq. Ch. 14 31-19-4 Ch. 14 31-19-6 Ch. 14 31-21-20 et seq. Ch. 22 31-28-1 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. VI 31-40-1 18-400 32-1-1 et seq. Ch. 58 32-1-8 Ch. 58 32-4-1 et seq. Ch. 58 32-4-42(6) 58-70 32-4-90 et seq. Ch. 58 32-4-92 Ch. 58 70-51 32-6-1 et seq. Ch. 58 32-6-240 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VI 33-3-5(1) 66-140 33-8-4 66-139 33-8-8 66-136 33-8-8 et seq. 18-53 33-8-8.1 Ch. 66, Art. V 66-139 33-8-8.2 Ch. 66, Art. V 66-140 33-8-8.2(a) 66-140 34-12-1 et seq. Ch. 10 36-1-15 46-7 36-1-16 Ch. 54 36-1-20 58-70 36-3-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-18-1 34-33 36-18-3 Ch. 70, Art. II 36-26-2 86-377 36-30-2 Ch. 2, Art. V 36-30-10 Ch. 58 36-31-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-32-1 et seq. Ch. 30 36-32-6 46-8 36-32-10(a) 6-218 36-33-4 Ch. 2, Art. II, Ch. 2, Art. III 36-34-1 et seq. Char. Arts. 1-7 Ch. 2 36-34-2 Ch. 2 36-34-2(2), 
36-34-2(4) Ch. 2, Art. III 36-34-2(7) Ch. 78 36-34-3 Ch. 58 36-34-5 Ch. 78 36-35-1 et seq. Char. Arts. 1-7 Ch. 2 36-35-1-36-35-8       34-201 36-35-3 2-31 36-35-4 Ch. 2, Art. III 36-35-6(a)(2) Ch. 46 36-35-6(a)(5) Ch. 78 36-36-6 86-377 36-37-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 36-37-6, 36-37-7 Ch. 2, Art. V 36-39-1 et seq. Ch. 58 36-39-7 Ch. 78 36-40-1 Ch. 42 36-40-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 36-40-20 et seq. Ch. 78 36-43-1 et seq. Ch. 50 36-60-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-60-13 Ch. 2, Art. V 36-61-11 Ch. 16 36-66-1 et seq. Ch. 50 Ch. 86 36-66-2 Ch. 86 36-66-4 28-302 86-366 36-66-5 86-361 36-66B-1 et al. 70-51 36-67A-1 et seq. Ch. 50 Ch. 86 36-69-1 et seq. Ch. 26 36-70-1 et seq. Ch. 50 36-71-2(8) 18-31 36-72-1 et seq. Ch. 22 36-80-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 36-81-3-36-81-6       Ch. 2, Art. V 36-88-1 et seq. 32-3 36-88-3 et seq. 32-1 38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 26 38-3-70 et seq. Ch. 26 tit. 40 34-376 40-1-1 74-7 74-41 40-1-1(17.3)       74-175 40-1-1(32), (33) 74-175 40-1-1(43.1)       74-175 40-1-116 18-53 40-4-40 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VI 40-5-100-40-5-104       6-5 40-6-2-40-6-395       74-41 40-6-7 Ch. 58, Art. II 40-6-14 Ch. 34, Art. IV 40-6-76 Ch. 58, Art. II 40-6-183 Ch. 74, Art. III 40-6-247, 40-6-248       Ch. 38 40-6-249 Ch. 54 40-6-253.1 Ch. 54 40-6-371 Ch. 74 40-6-371(a)(3) Ch. 58, Art. II 40-6-371(a)(19) Ch. 26 40-6-372 Ch. 74, Art. II 40-6-372-40-6-376       74-41 40-8-71(c) Ch. 34, Art. IV 40-8-76 30-22 40-8-76.1 30-22 40-11-1(c) 74-7 40-11-2-40-11-9       74-7 40-13-1 et seq. Ch. 74 40-13-3 Ch. 74 41-1-1 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. III 41-2-5 16-74 Ch. 30 Ch. 34, Art. III 46-22 41-2-7 et seq. 16-74 41-2-7 Ch. 16 41-2-7-41-2-17 16-73 70-52 70-54 70-66 41-2-9 et seq. Ch. 16 41-2-9-41-2-17 16-73 41-2-12(f) 16-74 42-1-12 10-35 42-8-102 Ch. 30 tit. 43 18-49 43-8-1 18-430 tit. 43, ch. 39A 16-74 43-8-2 Ch. 10 43-12-1 Ch. 18, Art. VIII 43-14-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 43-17-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VIII 43-21-1 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. VI 43-22-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VI 43-32-6 Ch. 18, Art. V 43-46-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VIII 43-48-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VI 44-1-14 78-1 44-3-130 et seq. Ch. 22 44-5-60 Ch. 86 44-10-1 et seq. Ch. 42 44-10-20 et seq. Ch. 42 44-10-24 Ch. 42 44-10-26 Ch. 42 44-10-28 Ch. 42 44-12-130 et seq.       Ch. 18, Art. VII 45-2-5 Ch. 2, Art. III 45-6-6 Ch. 2 45-6-7 et seq. Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. II 45-8-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 45-10-1 Ch. 2, Art. II 45-11-1 1-10 Ch. 2 45-19-20 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 45-20-90 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 45-22-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 45-23-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III tit. 46, ch. 3 18-53 46-5-1 70-51 46-5-2 Ch. 70, Art. II 46-5-134(f) 70-1(d) 46-5-134.2 70-1(a) 46-5-134.2(a)(4) 70-1(a) 46-5-134.2(j)(1) 70-1(c) 46-5-134.2(j)(5) 70-1(d) 46-5-134(3)(2) 70-1(d) 46-7-15 18-53 47-5-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 47-11-51 30-21 47-17-60 1-13 30-21 47-18-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 47-20-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III tit. 48, ch. 4 16-74 tit. 48, ch. 4, art. 5       16-77 tit. 48, ch. 8 70-1(b) 48-4-5 34-88 48-4-40 et seq. 34-86 48-4-78 16-74 48-5-1 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. II 48-5-7.2, 48-5-7.3       Ch. 42 48-5-355, 48-5-356       18-53 48-5-358 34-86 Ch. 58 48-5-380 18-64 48-6-93 18-53 Ch. 66, Art. IV 66-101 48-6-93(d) 66-103 48-8-80 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. III 66-66 48-13-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 48-13-5-48-13-28       18-32 48-13-7 18-33 18-40 48-13-9 18-39 18-40 48-13-9(c) 18-31 48-13-9(c)(1)-(22)       18-44 48-13-13(5) 18-48 48-13-14(a)(2) 18-47 48-13-20.1 18-55 48-13-21 18-46 18-51 48-13-26 18-34 48-13-31 Ch. 18, Art. II 48-13-50 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. VI 48-13-55 18-53 48-17-1 et seq. Ch. 10 50-5-100 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 50-8-7.3 Ch. 54 50-8-30 et seq. Ch. 50 50-14-1 Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2 50-14-1(d) Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2 50-14-3 Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2 50-18-70 et seq. 2-1 50-18-90 Ch. 2 50-18-99(e) Ch. 2 50-18-102 Ch. 2 51-2-7 Ch. 14  
