1
THE CODE OF THE CITY OF SUGAR HILL, GEORGIA Codified through Amendments of Dec., 2003. Adopted and Effective March 14, 2005
Updated March 24, 2009
Updated January, 2011
Updated April, 2012
Updated December 16, 2013
Updated August 19, 2014
Updated September 14, 2015
THE CODE
OF THE CITY OF SUGAR HILL, GEORGIA
Published by Order of the Mayor and City Council
M
MUNICIPAL CODE
CORPORATION
CC
Tallahassee, Florida 2005
2
OFFICIALS of the CITY OF SUGAR HILL, GEORGIA
Steve Edwards
Mayor
Marc Cohen
Susie Gajewski
Brandon Hembree
Curtis Northrup
Mike Sullivan
City Council
Paul Radford
City Manager
Lee Thompson
Frank Hartley
City Attorney
Jane Whittington
3
City Clerk
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1988 Code, as amended and supplemented, and ordinances adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1988 Code, as supplemented and amended, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catch lined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code.
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters.
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of
4
the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:
CHARTER
CHT:1
RELATED LAWS
RL:1
CHARTER
COMPARATIVE TABLE
CHTCT:1
RELATED LAWS
COMPARATIVE TABLE
RLCT:1
CODE
CD1:1
CODE COMPARATIVE
TABLES
CCT:1
STATE LAW
REFERENCE TABLE
SLT:1
CHARTER INDEX
CHTi:1
CODE INDEX
CDi:1
Indexes
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested.
Loose leaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the loose leaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.
Acknowledgments
5
This publication was under the direct supervision Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Ellen K. Torof, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs.
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catch lines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia. © Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia. 2005.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Officials of the City at the Time of this Recodification…… iii
Current Officials (Reserved) .......... v
Preface........... vii
Adopting Ordinance
THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SUGAR HILL HEREBY ORDAIN:
Section 1. The publication entitled “The Code of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia,” published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 74, each inclusive, is hereby adopted.
Section 2. Any ordinances included in the version of the Sugar Hill Code adopted June 13, 1988 and not included in or recognized and continued in force by reference in the version of
6
the Code adopted by this Ordinance are hereby repealed with the exception of the Ordinances contained in Section 3, below.
Section 3. The following are specifically not repealed by the enactment of the Sugar Hill Code adopted by this Ordinance:
a) The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill;
b) The Development Regulations of the City of Sugar Hill;
c) The Buffer, Landscape or Tree Ordinances of the City of Sugar Hill;
d) The Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance;
e) Any other similar or related land use ordinances adopted by and placed in affect by the City of Sugar Hill;
f) Any grants of franchises by the City of Sugar Hill; and
g) Other ordinances intentionally not included in or that have been intentionally removed from the codification of this or prior versions of the Sugar Hill Code.
Section 4. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.
Section 5. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or any combination thereof. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense, and with respect to other violations,
7
each violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
Section 6. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same as part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.
Section 7. Ordinances adopted after November 1, 2001 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective upon approval of the Mayor and Council of the City of Sugar Hill.
Chapter
Part I
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
Subpt. A. Charter …… CHT:1
Sec. 1 ……. CHT:5
Art. I. Creation, Incorporation, and Powers ….. CHT:5
Art. II. Governing Body …… CHT:11
Art. III. Executive Branch …… CHT:16
8
Art. IV. Municipal Court …… CHT:19
Art V. Elections …… CHT:21
Art. VI. Finance and Fiscal ........... CHT:23
Art. VII. General Provisions .......... CHT:28
Sec. 2. [Effective Date] .......... CHT:62
Sec. 3. [Conflicts] ......... CHT:62
Subpt. B. Related Laws .......... RL: 1
Charter Comparative Table--Georgia Laws .......... CHTCT: 1
Related Laws Comparative Table--Georgia Laws RLCT:3
9
PART II
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1. General Provisions …… CD1 :1
2. Administration …… CD2: 1
Art. I. In General …… CD2:3
Art. II. Mayor and Council …… CD2:7
Div. 1. Generally …… CD2:7
Div. 2. Meetings …… CD2:8
Art. III. Officers and Employees …… CD2:12
Div. 1. Generally …… CD2:12
Div. 2. City Clerk …… CD2:13
Div. 3. City Manager …… CD2:14
Div. 4. City Attorney …… CD2:17
Div. 5. Code of Ethics …… CD2:18
Art. IV. Boards and Commissions …… CD2:22
Div. 1. Generally …… CD2:22
Div. 2. Recreation Board …… CD2:23
3-- 5. Reserved …… CD3:1
6. Alcoholic Beverages …... CD6:7
Art. I. In General …… CD6:7
Art. II. Retail Sale of Malt Beverages …… CD6:7
Div. 1. Generally …… CD6:7
10
Div. 2. License …… CD6:7
Div. 3. Operational Requirements and Restrictions …… CD6:10
Art. III. Retail Sale of Wine .......... CD6:12
Div. 1. Generally ............ CD6:12
Div. 2. License ............ CD6:12
Art. IV. Sale of Malt Beverages and Wine .......... CD6:16
Div. 1. Generally …… CD6:16
Div. 2. License …… CD6:20
Div. 3. Alcoholic Beverage Review Board …… CD6:27
Div. 4. Operational Requirements and Restrictions …… CD6:29
Div. 5. Beer and/or Wine Wholesaler Licensing and Regulations …… CD6:40
Art. V. Sale of Spirituous Liquor for On-Premises Consumption …… CD6:44
Div. 1. Generally ............ CD6:44
Div. 2. License ............ CD6:48
Div. 3. Operational Requirements and Restrictions ........... CD6:56
Div. 4. Alcoholic Beverage Review Board ............ CD6:69
Div. 5. Excise Tax ............ CD6:70
7--9. Reserved ............ CD7:1
10. Animals ......... CD10:1
Art. I. In General …… CD10:3
Art. II. Animal Control …… CD10:4
11--13.Reserved ......... CD11:1
11
14. Buildings and Building Regulations CD14:1
Art. I. In General …… CD 14:3
Art. II. Technical Codes …… CD14:3
Art. III. Swimming Pools ........... CD14:4
Div. 1. Generally........... CD14:4
Div. 2. Private Residential Pools ............ CD14:4
Div. 3. Minimum Standards for Swimming Pools, Public Spas, Pools and Bathhouses. . . . . CD14:9
Subdiv. I. In General ......... CD14:9
Subdiv. II. Public Pools ......... CD14:15
Subdiv. III. Spas ........ CD14:26
Subdiv. IV. Bathhouses ................... CD14:28
Art. IV. Ultra-Low-Flow Plumbing Fixtures ............ CD14:29
15-17.Reserved ........... CD15:1
18. Businesses …… CD18:1
Art. I. In General …… CD1 8:5
Art. II. Game Machines, Vending Machines and Other Recreational Machines …… CD1 8:5
Div. 1. Generally …… CD18:6
Div. 2. License …… CD18:5
Art. III. Yard Sales .......... CD1 8:9
Art. IV. Pawnbrokers and Pawnshops .......... CD18:10
Div. 1. Generally........... CD18:10
12
Div. 2. Annual Permit ............. CD18:17
Art. V. Food Sales …… CD18:18
Div. 1. Generally …… CD18:18
Div. 2. License …… CD18:19
Art. VI. Food Vending Vehicles ........... CD18:19
Div. 1. Generally ........... CD18:19
Div. 2. License ........... CD18:20
Art. VII. Massage or Spa Establishments .......... CD18:22
Div. 1. Generally ........... CD18:22
Div. 2. License ........... CD18:25
Art. VIII. Adult Entertainment Establishments ......... CD1 8:30
Div. 1. Generally ........... CD18:30
Div. 2. License ........... CD18:40
Subdiv. I. In General ............ CD1 8:40
Subdiv. II. Application .......... CD1 8:42
Div. 3. Appeals ........... CD18:47
19-21.Reserved .......... CD19:1
22. Emergency Management and Emergency Services CD22: 1
Art. I. In General …… CD22:3
Art. II. Emergency Management Organization …… CD22:3
23-25.Reserved …… CD23:1
26. Environment …... CD26: 1
13
Art. I. In General …… CD26:3
Art. II. Wetlands …… CD26:3
Div. 1. Generally ........... CD26:3
Div. 2. Wetlands Protection District ........... CD26:3
Subdiv. I. In General .......... CD26:3
Subdiv. II. Local Development Permits ......... CD26:8
27-29.Reserved .......... CD27: 1
30. Fire Prevention and Protection .......... CD30: 1
31-33.Reserved CD31:1
34. Floods …… CD34:1
Art. I. In General …… CD34:3
Art. II. Flood Damage Prevention …… CD34:3
Div. 1. Generally …… CD34:3
Div. 2. Administration …… CD34:9
Div. 3. Flood Hazard Reduction …… CD34:1 1
35-37.Reserved …… CD35:1
38. Health and Sanitation …… CD38:1
Art. I. In General …… CD38:3
Art. II. Storage of Junk …… CD38:3
Art. III. Noise Control …… CD38:6
Art. IV. Tourist Courts …… CD38:10
Art. V. Vector Control …… CD38:17
39-41.Reserved CD39:1
14
42. Law Enforcement …… CD42: 1
43-45 .Reserved …… CD43:1
46. Municipal Court …… CD46: 1
Art. I. In General …… CD46:3
Art. II. Indigent Defense Program …… CD46:5
47-49.Reserved ............ CD47: 1
50. Nuisances ........... CD50:1
51-53.Reserved ............ CD51:1
54. Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions .......... CD54: 1
55. Reserved .......... CD55:1
56. Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks …… CD56:1
Art. I. In General …… CD56:3
Art. II. License Permits …… CD56:7
Art. III. Plans and Specifications …… CD56:9
57. Reserved ......... CD57:1
58. Parks and Recreation …… CD58:1
Art. I. In General …… CD58:3
Art. II. Public Parks and Recreation Facilities …… CD58:3
59-61.Reserved …… CD59:1
62. Planning …… CD62: 1
Art. I. In General …… CD62:3
Art. II. Planning Commission …… CD62:3
15
63-65 .Reserved CD63:1
66. Solid Waste …… CD66: 1
Art. I. In General …… CD66:3
Art. II. Litter Control …… CD66:3
Art. III. Solid Waste Management …… CD66:6
67-69.Reserved ........... CD67: 1
70. Taxation …… CD70: 1
Art. I. In General …… CD70:3
Art. II. Occupation Tax …… CD70:3
Art. III. Insurers …… CD70:15
Art. IV. Financial Institutions …… CD70:16
Art. V. Psychic Reading, Fortune Telling and Related Practices …… CD70: 17
71-73.Reserved CD71:1
74. Utilities …… CD74: 1
Art. I. In General …… CD74:3
Art. II. Prevention of Damage to Underground Utilities …… CD74:3
Art. III. Fees and Charges …… CD74:7
Art. IV. On-site Sewage Management Systems …… CD74:9
Code Comparative Table--1988 Code ......... CCT:1
Code Comparative Table--Ordinances ........ CCT:3
State Law Reference Table ..........SLT:1
Charter Index ......... CHTi:1
16
Code Index ............. CDi:1
PART I
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
Subpart A CHARTER*
* Editors Note: Printed in this subpart is the city charter being 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 227), page 3232, as amended in full by 2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 19) p. 3546). Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catch lines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Section 1.
Article I. Creation, Incorporation, and Powers
Sec. 1.10. Incorporation.
Sec. 1.11. Corporate boundaries.
Sec.1.12. Specific powers.
Sec. 1.13. General powers.
Sec. 1.14. Construction.
Sec. 1.15. Exercise of powers.
Sec. 1.16. Ordinances.
Article II. Governing Body
Sec. 2.10. Creation; composition; number; election.
Sec. 2.11. Terms of office.
Sec. 2.12. Qualification of office.
Sec. 2.13. Mayor Pro tempore.
Sec. 2.14. Vacancy; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies.
Sec. 2.15. Compensation and expenses.
Sec. 2.16. Prohibitions.
Sec. 2.17. Inquiries and investigations.
Sec. 2.18. General power and authority of the council.
Sec. 2.19. Powers and duties of mayor.
Sec. 2.20. Organizational meeting.
Sec. 2.21. Regular and special meetings.
Sec. 2.22. Rules of procedure.
Sec. 2.23. Quorum voting.
Sec. 2.24. Action requiring an ordinance.
Sec. 2.25. Reserved.
Sec. 2.26. Codes of technical regulations.
Sec. 2.27. Submission of ordinances to the mayor; authenticating, recording, codification, printing.
17
Article III. Executive Branch
Sec. 3.10. Administrative and service departments
Sec. 3.11. Boards, commissions and authorities.
Sec. 3.12. City manager.
Sec. 3.13. City attorney.
Sec. 3.14. City clerk.
Sec. 3.15. Tax collector.
Sec. 3.16. City accountant.
Sec. 3.17. Consolidation of functions.
Sec. 3.18. Position classification and pay plans.
Sec. 3-19. Personnel policies.
Article IV. Municipal Court
Sec. 4.10. Creation.
Sec. 4.11. Judge.
Sec. 4.12. Convening.
Sec. 4.13. Jurisdiction; powers.
Sec. 4.14. Certiorari. Sec.
Sec. 4.15. Rules for court.
Article V. Elections
Sec. 5.10. Regular elections; time for holding.
Sec. 5.11. Qualifying; nomination of candidates; absentee ballots.
Sec. 5.12. Nonpartisan elections.
Sec. 5.13. Election by majority.
Sec. 5.14. Applicability of general laws.
Sec. 5.15. Special elections; vacancies.
Sec. 5.16. Grounds for removal.
Sec. 5.17. Procedure for removal.
Article VI. Finance and Fiscal
Sec. 6.10. Property taxes.
Sec. 6.11. Tax Levy
Sec. 6.12. Tax due dates and tax bills.
Sec. 6.13. Collection of delinquent taxes.
Sec. 6.14. Licenses, occupational taxes, excise taxes.
Sec. 6.15. Sewer service charges; sanitary and health services charge.
Sec. 6.16. Franchises
Sec. 6.17. Special assessments.
Sec. 6.18. Transfer of executions.
Sec. 6.19. General obligation bonds.
Sec. 6.20. Revenue bonds.
Sec. 6.21. Short-term notes.
Sec. 6.22. Fiscal year.
Sec. 6.23. Preparation of budgets.
Sec. 6.24. Submission of operating budget to city council.
Sec. 6.25. Action by council on budget.
Sec. 6.26. Property tax levies.
Sec. 6.27. Additional appropriations.
Sec. 6.28. Capital improvements budget.
Sec. 6.29. Contracting procedures.
Sec. 6.30. Centralized purchasing and disposition of city property.
18
Article VII. General Provisions
Sec. 7.10. Official bonds.
Sec. 7.11. Existing ordinances and regulations.
Sec. 7.12. Section captions.
Sec. 7.13. Penalties.
Sec. 7.14. Severability.
Sec. 7.15. Effective date.
Sec. 7.16. Repealer.
Exhibit A
Section 2./[Effective Date.]
Section 3.[Conflicts]
SECTION 1.
An act providing a new charter for the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, approved April 17, 1975 (Ga. L. 1975, p. 3232), as amended, is hereby amended by striking Sections 1.10 through 7.17 in their entirety and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
ARTICLE I.
CREATION, INCORPORATION, AND POWERS Section 1.10. Incorporation.
The City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, in the County of Gwinnett, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia. Under that name, said city shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the corporation; shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold, or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will; and may exercise, in conformity with this charter, all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever.
Section 1.11. Corporate boundaries.
The City of Sugar Hill shall encompass all of the territory described within the following boundaries:
(a) The boundaries of the city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter and as further described in Exhibit A which is attached to this charter and incorporated in this charter by reference. Upon the adoption of this charter, the boundaries of the city shall include all of that area as described in the previous city charter (Ga. L. 1975, p. 3232) as well as any areas added by amendment to said charter, and by all annexation ordinances adopted by the
19
mayor and council of the City of Sugar Hill since the adoption of that charter. The boundaries of the city shall include those areas as shown on a map titled the Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, dated March 2003, which map shall be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and which map is incorporated herein by reference. Alterations of the boundary of the city may be made from time to time in any manner provided by law. Boundaries of the city shall be shown at all times on a map to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and entitled Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia. Photographic, typed, or other copies of such maps certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map.
(b) The city council may provide for the redrawing of such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. The redrawn map shall supercede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace.
Section 1.12. Specific powers.
The corporate powers of the government of the City of Sugar Hill, to be exercised by the governing authority, may include the following:
(1) Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city;
(2) Animal regulations. To regulate and license or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance;
(3) Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city;
(4) Building regulations. To establish minimum standards for and to regulate the erection, construction, and repair of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; to regulate all housing, building, and building trades; to license all building trades; and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city;
20
(5) Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions, and to license and regulate such privileges, occupations, trades, and professions, and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes;
(6) Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under the provisions of Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 22] or such other laws as are or may exist or hereafter be enacted;
(7) Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefore;
(8) Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city;
(9) Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the city, region, and state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment;
(10) Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting;
(11) Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges;
(12) General health and safety. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards;
(13) Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose;
21
(14) Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards;
(15) Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court shall work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials;
(16) Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, loads, alleys, and walkways of the city;
(17) Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same;
(18) Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia;
(19) Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city;
(20) Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of the same by the public;
(21) Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric lights plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties; and to provide for withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced;
(22) Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property;
(23) Penalties. To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia;
22
(24) Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community;
(25) Police protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers or in any other manner provided by the general laws of the State of Georgia;
(26) Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public;
(27) Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted;
(28) Public peace. To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of loitering, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, the playing of lotteries, and disturbing the peace in the corporate limits of the city and to prohibit or regulate by ordinance such other conduct and activities within said city which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this state, is deemed by the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the city or to the welfare of the citizens thereof;
(29) Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial;
(30) Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services, not to exceed periods of 50 years; to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with such regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission;
(31) Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof within or abutting the corporate limits of the city;
(32) Retirement. To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city;
23
(33) Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city;
(34) Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operation, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a sewer service charge fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees, and to charge the same from time to time, such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system;
(35) Sidewalks. To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so;
(36) Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others including the granting of exclusive or nonexclusive franchises for such services; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items;
(37) Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawnshops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transformation, storage, and use of combustible explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerate trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind by taxation or otherwise;
(38) Special areas of public regulation. To license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling or palmistry;
(39) Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements;
(40) Taxes: ad valorem and other. To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation;
24
(41) Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles;
(42) Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program;
(43) Welfare: general. To make, ordain, and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules, and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; and
(44) Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia.
Section 1.13. General powers.
In addition to all other powers herein granted, the city shall be vested with any and all powers which municipal corporations are, or may hereafter be, authorized or required to exercise under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein, and any and all powers which the city was heretofore authorized to exercise upon the effective date of this charter.
Section 1.14. Construction.
The powers of the city shall be construed liberally and in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the city as stated in this charter. It is the intention hereof to grant the city full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the city and all of its affairs.
25
Section 1.15. Exercise of powers.
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city and its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the governing authority and as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia.
Section 1.16. Ordinances.
All ordinances, bylaws, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the governing authority.
ARTICLE II.
GOVERNING BODY
Section 2.10. Creation; composition; number; election.
The legislative authority of the government of the City of Sugar Hill, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a Mayor and five Council Members. The Mayor and Council Members shall be elected in the manner provided by Article V of this charter.
Section 2.11. Terms of office.
The Mayor and members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. The Mayor and Council Members who hold posts 4 and 5 shall be elected in the same year. The Council Members who hold posts 1, 2, and 3 shall be elected in the same year. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of Sugar Hill for one year prior to the date of election as mayor or councilmember; each shall continue to reside therein during that person's term of office and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city.
Section 2.12. Qualification of office.
No person shall be eligible to hold any office under this act who is not an eligible voter and has not been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of the election. Each shall continue to reside in the city therein during that member's tenure of service.
26
Section 2.13. Mayor Pro tempore.
At the first meeting of the city council by majority vote in each odd-numbered year, the council shall choose from its own number a mayor pro tempore, who, in the absence, sickness, or disqualification of the mayor, shall be clothed with all rights, privileges, and duties of the mayor. If the mayor elected by the people and the mayor pro tempore shall be unable from any cause to attend to their duties, the council shall immediately elect from any one of the remaining Council Members another mayor pro tempore, who shall thereby be clothed with all the powers, rights, and duties of the mayor of the city upon taking the usual oath.
Section 2.14. Vacancy; resignation of current office; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies.
(a) Vacancies. The office of mayor and councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent’s death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia.
(b) Resignation of current office. The mayor, any councilmember, or any other elected official of the City, shall first resign from the office then held before qualifying to run for any elected public office other than for re-election to the same office/post that such person may then be holding, their resignation must be effective no later than the last day of qualification for the office sought by such person.
(c) Forfeiture of office. The mayor or any councilmember shall forfeit office if he or she:
(1) Lacks at any time during the term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; or
(2) Is convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude.
(d) Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in Article V of this charter.
Amend. January, 2010.
Section 2.15. Compensation and expenses.
The Mayor and Council Members shall receive as compensation for their services an amount which may be determined from time to time by majority vote of the council; provided, however, that there shall be no change of compensation by either increase or decrease during the term of any councilmember, mayor, or mayor pro tempore in office at the time of any such change
27
of compensation. The Mayor and Council Members shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office.
Section 2.16. Prohibitions.
(a) Holding other office. Except as authorized by law, no council member shall hold any other elective city office or city employment during the term for which he or she was elected.
(b) Voting when personally interested. Neither the mayor nor any other council member shall vote upon any question in which he or she is personally interested.
(c) Dealing with city. No person holding office under this charter shall at any time during the term of which he or she was elected or appointed, or while in office, be capable of contracting with the city for the performance of any work or the sale of anything which is to be paid for out of the treasury, nor shall any such person be capable of holding or having any interest in such contracts entered into by himself or herself or another, directly or indirectly.
Section 2.17. Inquiries and investigations.
The council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance.
Section 2.18. General power and authority of the council.
(a) Except as otherwise provided by law or by this charter, the council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Sugar Hill as provided by Article 1 of this charter.
(b) In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, the Constitution, and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Sugar Hill and may enforce such ordinance by imposing penalties for violation thereof.
(c) By ordinance, the council may create, change, alter, abolish, or consolidate
28
offices, agencies, and departments of the city and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies, and departments expressly provided for by this charter.
Section 2.19. Powers and duties of mayor.
(a) The mayor shall be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy. He or she shall preside at meetings of the council, shall sign ordinances and resolutions on their final passage, and shall sign deeds, bonds, contracts, and other instruments or documents when authorized by the council to do so. The mayor shall perform such other duties as may be imposed by this charter or by ordinance of the council not inconsistent therewith.
(b) The mayor, or mayor pro tempore while acting as mayor, shall have the right to vote on all questions before the council when said vote is a tie.
Section 2.20. Organizational meeting.
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the second Monday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of the office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows:
'I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America, so help me God.'
Section 2.21. Regular and special meetings.
(a) The council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meeting on any date or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting.
(b) The mayor and council may hold special meetings and may transact business therein in accordance with law.
(c) All meetings of the council may be public in accordance with applicable law.
Section 2.22. Rules of procedure.
The council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal in written or electronic form of its proceedings, which shall be a public record.
29
Section 2.23. Quorum voting.
The mayor or mayor pro tempore and any three Council Members shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. The mayor or mayor pro tempore shall have the right to cast a vote in the case of a tie and the majority of votes shall determine any and all questions and elections before the council.
Section 2.24. Action requiring an ordinance.
(a) Except as herein provided, every official action of the council which is to become law shall be by ordinance. Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and in the form for final adoption. The enacting clause shall be 'The Council of the City of Sugar Hill hereby ordains....'
(b) An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the council and read at a regular or special meeting of the council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish.
Section 2.25. Reserved.
Section 2.26. Codes of technical regulations.
(a) The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally, except that:
(1) The requirements for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and
(2) A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk.
(b) Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the adoption of other codes or regulations by reference, provided a copy of the referenced code or regulation is attached to the adopting ordinance.
30
Section 2.27. Submission of ordinances to the mayor; authenticating, recording, codification, printing.
(a) Procedure:
(1) Every ordinance adopted by the council shall be presented promptly by the city clerk to the mayor.
(2) The mayor, within ten calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the clerk with or without approval or with disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the clerk. If the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at 12:00 Noon on the tenth calendar day after its adoption. If the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the council, through the clerk, a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor.
(3) Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be represented by the clerk to the council at its next regular meeting and, if the council should then or at its next regular meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of four members, it shall become law.
(4) The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided herein.
(5) The council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto, with this charter and any amendments thereto, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as 'The Code of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase of the written document by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the council and by electronic format.
31
(6) The council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the council or available via electronic format. Following publication of the first code of the City of Sugar Hill and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or addition to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code.
ARTICLE III.
EXECUTIVE BRANCH
Section 3.10. Administrative and service departments.
(a) The council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as they shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices, and agencies or of any departments, offices, and agencies hereinafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number or offices and positions or employment; and may transfer or change the function or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city.
(b) The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by this charter or by ordinance, and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the mayor and council.
(c) Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. Vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed by this charter for an original appointment.
(d) Except as otherwise provided by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications.
32
(e) All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance of the city council.
Section 3.11. Boards, commissions, and authorities.
(a) All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the council for such terms of office and such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by applicable state law.
(b) No member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by applicable state law.
(c) Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or any applicable state law.
(d) No member of any board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she shall have executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his or her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance of the council and administered by the mayor.
(e) Members of boards, commissions, or authorities shall serve at the pleasure of the council and may be removed from office at any time by a majority vote of the city council.
(f) Members of boards, commissions, and authorities may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance.
(g) The qualifications required of members of boards, commissions, and authorities shall be as prescribed by ordinance.
(h) Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by applicable state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city government shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson for terms of one year, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or applicable state law as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the city.
33
Section 3.12. City manager.
The council may appoint a city manager who is not a member of the city council for an indefinite term and shall fix the city manager's compensation. The duties and authority of the city manager shall be established by ordinance of the council and, in so doing; the council may specifically delegate to the city manager any of the administrative or budgetary duties of the mayor.
Section 3.13. City attorney.
The council shall appoint a city attorney, who is not a member of the city council, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized by ordinance, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city' affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the position as city attorney.
Section 3.14. City clerk.
The council may appoint a city clerk who is not a member of the city council to keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council and to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city, to be the custodian of the official city seal, and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the council may direct.
Section 3.15. Tax collector.
The council may appoint a tax collector who is not a member of the city council to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city, subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city, and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale, or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities.
Section 3.16. City accountant.
The council may appoint a city accountant who is not a member of the city council to perform the duties of an accountant.
34
Section 3.17. Consolidation of functions.
The council may consolidate any two or more of the positions of the city clerk, city tax collector, city accountant, or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. The city manager may, with the approval of the city council, perform all or any part of the functions of any of the positions of offices in lieu of appointing other persons to perform the same.
Section 3.18. Position classification and pay plans.
The city manager may prepare a position classification and pay plan to be submitted to the council for approval. Said plans may apply to all employees of the City of Sugar Hill and to any of its agencies and offices. When a pay plan has been adopted, the council shall not increase or decrease the salaries of individuals employees except by amendment of said pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees.
Section 3.19. Personnel policies.
The council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning:
(1) The method of employee selection and conditions of employment;
(2) The administration of any position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan;
(3) Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; and
(4) Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the City of Sugar Hill.
ARTICLE IV.
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 4.10. Creation.
(a) There is hereby established a court to be known as the municipal court of the City of Sugar Hill, which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish violations of the same. Such court shall have the power and authority to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid,
35
encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; and to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof.
(b) Said court shall be presided over by a chief judge appointed by the city council. In the absence or disqualification of the judge, an assistant judge designated as such by the council shall preside and shall exercise the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. Should both the chief judge and assistant judge become disqualified, then any member of the state bar may be designated by the mayor to preside with the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting.
Section 4.11. Judge.
(a) No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and a member of the State Bar of Georgia. The chief judge shall be appointed by the council and shall serve at the discretion of the council. The compensation of the judge shall be fixed by the council.
(b) The assistant judge shall serve in the absence of the chief judge, shall have the same qualifications as the judge, shall be appointed by the council, and shall take the same oath as the judge.
(c) Before entering on duties of the office, the chief judge shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state that the judge will truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the council.
(d) Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance.
(e) Judges serve at the will of the city council and may be removed at any time by a majority vote of the city council.
Section 4.12. Convening.
Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof.
Section 4.13. Jurisdiction; powers.
(a) The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law.
36
(b) The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt. Such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days of imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(c) The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for one year or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law.
(d) The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law.
(e) The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizance to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and, if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes.
(f) The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary.
(g) The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law.
(h) Each judge of the municipal court may be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city.
(i) The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations.
Section 4.14. Certiorari.
37
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari.
Section 4.15. Rules for court.
With the approval of the council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the council may adopt in part or in total the rules and regulations relative to the procedure of the operation of the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted for said court shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings.
ARTICLE V.
ELECTIONS
Section 5.10. Regular elections; time for holding.
(a) All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Election Code,' as now or hereafter amended.
(b) There shall be a municipal election biennially in odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November.
(c) On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 2013 and every four years thereafter, the successors to the position of Mayor and such two Council Members who hold seats 4 and 5 shall be elected and shall serve terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the day of the first organizational meeting in January following their election. The seat held by Curtis Northrup on the effective date of this Act shall be Post 4 and the seat held by Mike Sullivan on the effective date of this Act shall be Post 5.
(d) On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 2015 and every four years thereafter, the successors to the position of such three Council Members who hold seats 1, 2, and 3 shall be elected and shall serve terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the day of the first organizational meeting in January following their election. The seat held by Steve Edwards on the effective date of this Act shall be Post 1; the seat held by Marc Cohen on the effective date of this Act shall be Post 2, and the seat held by Susie Gajewski on the effective date of this Act shall be Post 3.
38
Section 5.11. Qualifying; nomination of candidates; absentee ballots.
By ordinance, the council may prescribe rules and regulations governing qualifying fees, nominations of candidates, absentee ballots, write- in votes, challenge of votes, and such other rules and regulations as may be necessary for the conducting of elections in the City of Sugar Hill.
Section 5.12. Nonpartisan elections.
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations.
Section 5.13. Election by majority.
The person receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected.
Section 5.14. Applicability of general laws.
The procedures and requirements for election of all elected officials of the City of Sugar Hill as to primary, special, or general elections shall be in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Election Code,' as now or hereafter amended.
Section 5.15. Special elections; vacancies.
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of office of the mayor or any councilmember, said vacancy in office shall be filled by appointment by the remaining members of the council.
Section 5.16. Grounds for removal.
The mayor or any councilmember shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes:
(1) Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; which shall be deemed to include but shall not be limited to: failure to attend three (3) regularly scheduled council meetings within a twelve (12) month period without just cause for such absence, participation in intentional dishonest acts, willfully disseminating false information, malicious exercise of statutory powers, or other similar acts.
(2) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
(3) Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law;
39
(4) Willful violation of any express prohibition of this charter.
(5) Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or
(6) Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by law.
Section 5.17. Procedure for removal.
Removal of an elected officer from office may be accomplished by one of the following methods:
(1) By action of two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right to appeal from the decision of the council to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or
(2) By information filed in the Superior Court of Gwinnett County, as provided by law.
ARTICLE VI.
FINANCE AND FISCAL
Section 6.10. Property taxes.
All property subject to the taxation for state or county purposes assessed as of January 1 in each year shall be subject to the property tax levied by the City of Sugar Hill. The council by ordinance shall elect to use the county assessment for the year in which the city taxes are to be levied and shall request the county to furnish appropriate information for such purpose.
Section 6.11. Tax levy.
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined
by the city council in its discretion.
40
Section 6.12. Tax due dates and tax bills.
The council shall provide by ordinance when the taxes of the city shall fall due and in what length of time said taxes may be paid and shall provide by ordinance for the payment of taxes due to the city in installments or in one lump sum and when and how and upon what terms such taxes shall be due and payable, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due.
Section 6.13. Collection of delinquent taxes.
The council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi.fa. issued by the city clerk and executed by any police officer of the city under the same procedure provided by the laws governing execution of such process from the superior court or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property upon which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment date of each year, which lien shall be superior to all other liens, except that it shall have equal dignity with those of federal, state, or county taxes. In cases of hardship, the council shall have discretionary authority to waive any and all penalties imposed by this charter for delinquent taxes, fees, assessments, or on other amounts due to the city.
Section 6.14. Licenses, occupational taxes, excise taxes.
The council, by ordinance, shall have full power to levy such license and business or occupational taxes upon the residents of the City of Sugar Hill, both individual and corporate, and on all those who transact or offer to transact business therein, or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein, as the council may deem expedient for the public health, safety, benefit, convenience, or advantage to the city and as are not prohibited by state law; to classify business, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful; to require such persons to pay such taxes; to compel the payment of such taxes by execution or any other lawful manner; and to make laws and regulations necessary or proper to carry out the powers herein conferred, and to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof. The council shall have full power and authority to levy an excise tax not prohibited by general law. The city shall have the power to assess reasonable regulatory fees for businesses regulated by the city as allowed by general law.
Section 6.15. Sewer service charges; sanitary and health services charge.
The council by ordinance shall have the right, power, and authority to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer services rendered both within and without the corporate limits of the City of Sugar Hill to provide for the cost and expense of providing for the collection and disposal of sewage through the sewage facilities of said city. If unpaid, said sewer service charge shall constitute a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be second in priority only to liens for county and city property taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. The council shall have also
41
authority by ordinance to provide for, to enforce, and to collect the cost of sanitary and health services necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in said city benefiting from such service. Such authority shall include the power to assess, levy, and collect annual or monthly sanitary taxes or fees in such amount or amounts and based upon and in accordance with such classification of property and sanitary service or service provided, as may be fixed by ordinance. Said sanitary taxes and the assessment thereof shall be a charge and lien against the real estate in respect to which said taxes are so assessed and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except liens for county and city property taxes, and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes.
Section 6.16. Franchises.
(a) The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefore. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted.
(b) If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations.
Section 6.17. Special assessments.
The council shall have the power and authority to assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances against the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent 30 days after their due dates, shall thereupon be subject, in addition to fi.fa. charges, to a penalty of 10 percent, and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate of 7 percent per annum from date due until paid. A lien shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens, except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes, and said lien shall be enforceable by the same procedures and under the same remedies as provided for in this article for city property taxes.
42
Section 6.18. Transfer of executions.
The city clerk shall be authorized to assign or transfer any fi.fa. or execution issued for any tax or for any street, sewer, or other assessment in the same manner and to the same extent as provided by Georgia law regarding sales and transfers of fi.fas. Such transfer or assignment, when made, shall vest the purchaser or transferee with all right, title, and interest as provided by Georgia law governing sales and transfers of tax fi.fas; provided that, upon levy of execution and sale of property pursuant to such tax fi.fa., whether assigned, transferred, or executed by the city, the owner of such property, in fee simple or lesser interest, shall not lose his or her right to redeem the property in accord with the requirements of redemption of property sold under state or county ad valorem tax fi.fas., as said requirements now exist or as may be hereinafter provided by law.
Section 6.19. General obligation bonds.
The council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any projects, programs, or ventures authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken.
Section 6.20. Revenue bonds.
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued.
Section 6.21. Short-term notes.
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law.
Section 6.22. Fiscal year.
The council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department or institution, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law.
Section 6.23. Preparation of budgets.
The council shall provide by ordinance the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvement program and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs.
43
Section 6.24. Submission of operating budget to city council.
On or before a date fixed by the council but not later than 90 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations or major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or she may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection.
Section 6.25. Action by council on budget.
(a) The council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager; except, that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues constituting the fund availability of such fund.
(b) The council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of January of each year. If the council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriation ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget document.
(c) The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable.
Section 6.26. Property tax levies.
The council shall levy by ordinance an annual tax on all real and personal property within the City of Sugar Hill. The tax rate set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the City of Sugar Hill.
Section 6.27. Additional appropriations.
44
The council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose, but any such additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies.
Section 6.28. Capital improvements budget.
(a) On or before the date fixed by the city council but not later than 90 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening the lives, health, or property of the inhabitants, when passed by wo-thirds vote of the membership of the council.
(b) The council shall adopt the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of January of each year. No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided the city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his or her recommendations thereon. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a vote of the council.
Section 6.29. Contracting procedures.
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless:
(1) It is in writing; and
(2) It is made or authorized by the city council or by the city manager under the authority properly delegated to the city manager by the city council.
Section 6.30. Centralized purchasing and disposition of city property.
(a) The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law.
(b) The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value.
45
(c) Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made.
ARTICLE VII.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 7.10. Official bonds.
The officers and employees of the City of Sugar Hill, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require.
Section 7.11. Existing ordinances and regulations.
Existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Sugar Hill not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified, or amended by the council. Existing rules and regulations of departments or agencies of the City of Sugar Hill not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified, or amended.
Section 7.12. Section captions.
(a) Section captions in this charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof.
(b) The word ‘shall’ is mandatory and the word ‘may’ is permissive.
(c) The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
Section 7.13. Penalties.
The violation of any provision of this charter for which a penalty is not specifically provided for herein is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of
46
not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 120 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Section 7.14. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part or parts held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other.
Section 7.15. Effective date.
This act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor of the State of Georgia or upon its becoming law without such approval.
Section 7.16. Repealer.
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed.
EXHIBIT A
The boundaries of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, are intended to include and are hereby declared to include all of the area included within the corporate boundaries upon the effective date of this charter which includes all areas described in the previous charter (Ga. L. 1975, p. 3232), all properties added through amendments to that charter, and all properties added by all annexation ordinances adopted by the mayor and council of the City of Sugar Hill since the adoption of that charter, which properties are intended to include and are hereby declared to include all of the property included in the tax parcels set forth below as those tax parcels exist on the tax rolls and the tax maps of Gwinnett County for the year 2002, and all of the public roadways and right of ways adjacent to those parcels, including railroad right of ways lying adjacent to those parcels or to public road ways adjacent to those parcels.
7-253-001
7-254-014
7-254-094
7-257-002F
7-253-002
7-254-017
7-255-001
7-257-002G
7-253-006
7-254-019
7-255-00
37-257-002H
7-253 -007
7-254-020
7-255-00
47-257-002I
7-253-008
7-254-021
7-255-005
7-257-006
7-253 -009
7-254-022
7-255-0 12
7-257-007
7-253-010
7-254-023
7-255-013
7-257-008
7-253-012
7-254-026
7-255-015
7-257-011
7-253-013
7-254-036
7-255-025
7-257-012
7-253-015
7-254-040
7-255-027
7-257-013
7-253-016
7-254-042
7-255-035
7-257-030
7-253-017
7-254-044
7-255-037
7-257-031
7-253 -020
7-254-046
7-255-03 9
7-257-032
7-253-022
7-254-048
7-255-041
7-257-033
47
7-253 -027
7-254-050
7-255-043
7-257-034
7-253-031
7-254-054
7-255-045
7-257-03 5
7-253 -035
7-254-056
7-255-068
7-257-03 6
7-253 -037
7-254-057
7-255-069
7-257-03 7
7-253-039
7-254-058
7-256-007
7-257-038
7-253-041
7-254-062
7-256-008
7-257-039
7-253-043
7-254-064
7-256-010
7-257-040
7-253-045
7-254-065
7-256-025
7-257-041
7-253 -047
7-254-067
7-256-026
7-257-043
7-253 -050
7-254-068
7-256-049
7-257-044
7-253 -052
7-254-069
7-256-050
7-257-045
7-253 -054
7-254-070
7-256-068
7-257-048
7-253-056
7-254-071
7-256-071
7-257-049
7-253 -058
7-254-073
7-256-083
7-257-050
7-253-060
7-254-075
7-256-085
7-257-05 1
7-253 -062
7-254-076
7-256-118
7-257-052
7-253 -064
7-254-078
7-256-119
7-257-053
7-253-066
7-254-080
7-256-121
7-257-054
7-253-068
7-254-081
7-256-124
7-257-055
7-253 -069
7-254-082
7-256-131
7-257-056
7-253-072
7-254-083
7-256-136
7-257-057
7-253-076
7-254-084
7-256-138
7-257-058
7-253-08 1
7-254-085
7-257-002
7-257-059
7-254-007
7-254-086
7-257-002A
7-257-060
7-254-008
7-254-087
7-257-002B
7-257-06 1
7-254-010
7-254-088
7-257-002C
7-257-063
7-254-011
7-254-092
7-257-002D
7-257-065
7-254-013
7-254-093
7-257-002E
7-257-066
7-257-067
7-257-145
7-257-196
7-258-025B
7-257-068
7-257-146
7-257-197
7-258-025C
7-257-069
7-257-147
7-257-198
7-258-030
7-257-070
7-257-148
7-257-199
7-258-032
7-257-071
7-257-149
7-257-201
7-258-033
7-257-072
7-257-150
7-257-202
7-258-034
7-257-073
7-257-151
7-257-203
7-258-036
7-257-074
7-257-152
7-257-204
7-258-037
7-257-075
7-257-154
7-257-205
7-258-038
7-257-076
7-257-155
7-257-206
7-258-039
7-257-077
7-257-156
7-257-207
7-258-041
7-257-078
7-257-157
7-257-209
7-258-042
7-257-079
7-257-158
7-257-210
7-258-043
7-257-080
7-257-159
7-257-211
7-258-044
7-257-081
7-257-160
7-257-212
7-258-046
7-257-086
7-257-161
7-257-213
7-258-047
7-257-094
7-257-162
7-257-214
7-258-048
7-257-099
7-257-163
7-257-215
7-258-049
7-257-117
7-257-164
7-257-2 16
7-258-050
7-257-119
7-257-165
7-257-2 17
7-258-051
7-257-12 1
7-257-166
7-257-218
7-258-053
7-257-122
7-257-167
7-257-219
7-258-054
7-257-123
7-257-168
7-257-220
7-258-055
7-257-124
7-257-169
7-257-221
7-258-056
7-257-125
7-257-170
7-257-222
7-258-057
7-257-126
7-257-171
7-257-223
7-258-058
7-257-127
7-257-172
7-257-224
7-258-059
7-257-128
7-257-173
7-257-225
7-258-060
7-257-129
7-257-174
7-257-226
7-258-061
48
7-257-130
7-257-175
7-257-227
7-258-062
7-257-131
7-257-176
7-257-231
7-258-063
7-257-132
7-257-177
7-257-235
7-258-064
7-257-133
7-257-178
7-257-239
7-258-065
7-257-134
7-257-179
7-257-241
7-258-066
7-257-135
7-257-180
7-257-245
7-258-067
7-257-13 6
7-257-181
7-257-249
7-258-068
7-257-137
7-257-182
7-257-257
7-258-069
7-257-138
7-257-183
7-258-001
7-258-070
7-257-139
7-257-184
7-258-002
7-258-071
7-257-140
7-257-185
7-258-008
7-258-072
7-257-141
7-257-191
7-258-009
7-258-074
7-257-142
7-257-193
7-258-110
7-258-075
7-257-143
7-257-194
7-258-025
7-258-076
7-257-144
7-257-195
7-258-025A
7-258-077
7-258-080
7-258-127
7-258-207
7-271-049
7-258-081
7-258-128
7-258-208
7-271-051
7-258-082
7-258-129
7-258-209
7-271-053
7-258-083
7-258-130
7-270-030
7-271-054
7-258-084
7-258-13 1
7-271-001
7-271-056
7-258-085
7-258-132
7-271-002
7-271-058
7-258-086
7-258-133
7-271-003
7-271-060
7-258-087
7-258-134
7-271-004
7-271-062
7-258-088
7-258-135
7-271-005
7-271-064
7-258-089
7-258-136
7-271-006
7-271-065
7-258-090
7-258-137
7-271-007
7-271-066
7-258-091
7-258-138
7-271-008
7-271-067
7-258-092
7-258-139
7-271-009
7-271-068
7-258-094
7-258-140
7-271-009A
7-271-069
7-258-095
7-258-141
7-271-011
7-271-070
7-258-097
7-258-142
7-271-012
7-271-071
7-258-098
7-258-143
7-271-013
7-271-072
7-258-099
7-258-144
7-271-014
7-271-073
7-258-100
7-258-145
7-271-015
7-271-074
7-258-101
7-258-146
7-271-016
7-271-075
7-258-102
7-258-147
7-271-017
7-271-076
7-258-103
7-258-148
7-271-018
7-271-078
7-258-105
7-258-149
7-271-019
7-271-079
7-258-106
7-258-152
7-271-020
7-271-080
7-258-107
7-258-163
7-271-022
7-271-081
7-258-108
7-258-170
7-271-023
7-271-082
7-258-109
7-258-180
7-271-024
7-271-083
7-258-110
7-258-182
7-271-025
7-271-084
7-258-111
7-258-184
7-271-026
7-271-085
7-258-112
7-258-190
7-271-027
7-271-086
7-258-113
7-258-192
7-271-028
7-271-087
7-258-114
7-258-193
7-271-029
7-271-088
7-258-115
7-258-194
7-271-030
7-271-089
7-258-116
7-258-195
7-271-031
7-271-090
7-258-117
7-258-197
7-271-032
7-271-091
7-258-118
7-258-198
7-271-033
7-271-092
7-258-119
7-258-199
7-271-034
7-271-093
7-258-120
7-258-200
7-271-035
7-271-094
7-258-121
7-258-201
7-271-036
7-271-095
7-258-122
7-258-202
7-271-037
7-271-096
7-258-123
7-258-203
7-271-040
7-271-097
7-258-124
7-258-204
7-271-042
7-271-098
49
7-258-125
7-258-205
7-271-045
7-271-099
7-258-126
7-258-206
7-271-047
7-271-100
7-271-101
7-271A-024
7-271B-065
7-271B-121
7-271-102
7-271A-025
7-271B-067
7-271B-124
7-271-103
7-271A-026
7-271B-068
7-271B-125
7-271-104
7-271A-027
7-271B-069
7-271B-126
7-271-105
7-271A-028
7-271B-070
7-271B-127
7-271-106
7-271A-029
7-271B-071
7-271B-128
7-271-108
7-271A-030
7-271B-072
7-271B-130
7-271-110
7-271A-031
7-271B-073
7-271B-132
7-271-112
7-271A-033
7-271B-074
7-271B-134
7-271-114
7-271A-034
7-271B-076
7-271B-135
7-271-116
7-271A-035
7-271B-077
7-271B-136
7-271-118
7-271A-036
7-271B-078
7-271B-139
7-271-120
7-271A-037
7-271B-079
7-271B-142
7-271-122
7-271A-038
7-271B-080
7-271B-144
7-271-124
7-271A-039
7-271B-08 1
7-271B-146
7-271-126
7-271A-040
7-271B-082
7-272-001
7-271-128
7-271A-041
7-271B-083
7-272-001B
7-271-130
7-271A-042
7-271B-084
7-272-002
7-271-132
7-271A-043
7-271B-085
7-272-004
7-271-136
7-271A-044
7-271B-086
7-272-007
7-271-138
7-271A-045
7-271B-087
7-272-008
7-271-140
7-271A-046
7-271B-089
7-272-009
7-271A-002
7-271A-047
7-271B-090
7-272-010
7-271A-003
7-271A-049
7-271B-091
7-272-011
7-271A-004
7-271A-050
7-271B-093
7-272-014
7-271A-005
7-271B-001
7-271B-094
7-272-018
7-271A-006
7-271B-002
7-271B-095
7-272-019
7-271A-007
7-271B-003
7-271B-097
7-272-022
7-271A-008
7-271B-004
7-271B-098
7-272-023
7-271A-009
7-271B-004A
7-271B-100
7-272-024
7-271A-010
7-271B-005
7-271B-101
7-272-025
7-271A-01 1
7-271B-006
7-271B-102
7-272-026
7-271A-013
7-271B-007
7-271B-105
7-272-027
7-271A-014
7-271B-008
7-271B-107
7-272-032
7-271A-015
7-271B-009
7-271B-108
7-272-033
7-271A-016
7-271B-010
7-271B-109
7-272-039A
7-271A-016A
7-271B-01 1
7-271B-1 10
7-272-046A
7-271A-017
7-271B-029
7-271B-1 11
7-272-047
7-271A-018
7-271B-044
7-271B-1 12
7-272-048
7-271A-019
7-271B-046
7-271B-1 14
7-272-049
7-271A-020
7-271B-048
7-271B-1 18
7-272-053
7-271A-023
7-271B-064
7-271B-121
7-272-054
7-272-056
7-272-096
7-272-138
7-272-206
7-272-056A
7-272-097
7-272-139
7-272-207
7-272-056B
7-272-099
7-272-140
7-272-208
7-272-056C
7-272-100
7-272-142
7-272-209
7-272-058
7-272-101
7-272-143
7-272-210
7-272-059
7-272-102
7-272-144
7-272-211
7-272-060
7-272-103
7-272-145
7-272-212
7-272-061
7-272-104
7-272-146
7-272-213
7-272-062
7-272-104A
7-272-147
7-272-214
7-272-062A
7-272-104B
7-272-148
7-272-215
7-272-062B
7-272-105
7-272-149
7-272-216
7-272-062C
7-272-105A
7-272-151
7-272-217
7-272-062D
7-272-105B
7-272-152
7-272-218
50
7-272-063B
7-272-106
7-272-155
7-272-219
7-272-064A
7-272-107
7-272-156
7-272-220
7-272-065
7-272-108
7-272-157
7-272-221
7-272-067
7-272-109
7-272-158
7-272-222
7-272-068
7-272-110
7-272-16 1
7-272-223
7-272-069
7-272-111
7-272-162
7-272-224
7-272-070
7-272-112
7-272-163
7-272-225
7-272-07 1
7-272-113
7-272-164
7-272-226
7-272-072
7-272-114
7-272-166
7-272-227
7-272-073
7-272-115
7-272-167
7-272-228
7-272-074
7-272-116
7-272-17 1
7-272-229
7-272-075
7-272-117
7-272-172
7-272-23 0
7-272-076
7-272-118
7-272-173
7-272-231
7-272-077
7-272-119
7-272-175
7-272-232
7-272-078
7-272-120
7-272-176
7-272-234
7-272-079
7-272-121
7-272-177
7-272-235
7-272-080
7-272-122
7-272-179
7-272-236
7-272-081
7-272-123
7-272-181
7-272-237
7-272-083
7-272-124
7-272-184
7-272-23 8
7-272-084
7-272-125
7-272-188
7-272-239
7-272-085
7-272-126
7-272-190
7-272-240
7-272-086
7-272-127
7-272-192
7-272-241
7-272-087
7-272-128
7-272-194
7-272-242
7-272-088
7-272-129
7-272-196
7-272-243
7-272-089
7-272-132
7-272-197
7-272-244
7-272-090
7-272-133
7-272-198
7-272-245
7-272-092
7-272-135
7-272-199
7-272-246
7-272-093
7-272-135A
7-272-200
7-272-247
7-272-093A
7-272-136
7-272-202
7-272-248
7-272-094
7-272-137
7-272-204
7-272-249
7-272-095
7-272-137A
7-272-205
7-272-250
7-272-251
7-273-024
7-273-076
7-273-123
7-272-252
7-273-028
7-273-077
7-273-124
7-272-253
7-273-030
7-273-078
7-273-125
7-272-254
7-273-031
7-273-079
7-273-127
7-272-255
7-273-033
7-273-080
7-273-128
7-272-256
7-273-034
7-273-081
7-273-129
7-272-258
7-273-035
7-273-082
7-273-130
7-272-260
7-273-036
7-273-083
7-273-131
7-272-262
7-273-038
7-273-084
7-273-132
7-272-264
7-273-040
7-273-085
7-273-134
7-272-266
7-273-042
7-273-086
7-273-136X
7-272-268
7-273-043
7-273 -087
7-274-002
7-272-270
7-273-044
7-273 -088
7-274-002A
7-272-272
7-273-045
7-273 -089
7-274-004
7-272-273
7-273-046
7-273 -090
7-274-005
7-272-274
7-273-047
7-273-091
7-274-007
7-272-277
7-273-048
7-273-092
7-274-011
7-272-279
7-273-049
7-273-093
7-274-013
7-272A-001
7-273-050
7-273-094
7-274-015
7-272A-002
7-273-05 1
7-273-095
7-274-020
7-272A-003
7-273 -052
7-273 -096
7-274-027
7-272A-004
7-273-053
7-273-100
7-274-028
7-272A-005
7-273-054
7-273-101
7-274-029
7-272A-006
7-273-055
7-273-102
7-274-030
7-272A-007
7-273-056
7-273-103
7-274-031
7-272A-008
7-273-057
7-273-104
7-274-032
51
7-272A-009
7-273-058
7-273-105
7-274-033
7-272A-1 10
7-273-059
7-273-106
7-274-034
7-272A-1 11
7-273-060
7-273-107
7-274-035
7-272A-1 12
7-273-061
7-273-108
7-274-036
7-272A-1 13
7-273-062
7-273-109
7-274-037
7-272A-1 14
7-273 -063
7-273-110
7-274-03 8
7-272A-1 15
7-273-064
7-273-111
7-274-039
7-272A-1 16
7-273-065
7-273-112
7-274-040
7-272A-1 17
7-273-066
7-273-113
7-274-041
7-272A-1 18
7-273-067
7-273-114
7-274-042
7-272A-020
7-273 -068
7-273-115
7-274-043
7-273-002
7-273-069
7-273-116
7-274-044
7-273-004
7-273-070
7-273-117
7-274-045
7-273-004A
7-273-071
7-273-118
7-274-046
7-273-006
7-273-072
7-273-119
7-274-047
7-273-007
7-273-073
7-273-120
7-274-048
7-273-014
7-273-074
7-273-121
7-274-049
7-273-020
7-273-075
7-273-122
7-274-050
7-274-051
7-274-096
7-275-042
7-275-090
7-274-052
7-274-097
7-275-043
7-275-09 1
7-274-053
7-274-098
7-275-044
7-275-092
7-274-054
7-274-099
7-275-045
7-275-093
7-274-055
7-274-100
7-275-046
7-275-094
7-274-056
7-274-101
7-275-047
7-275-095
7-274-057
7-274-102
7-275-048
7-275-096
7-274-058
7-274-103
7-275-049
7-275-097
7-274-059
7-274-104
7-275-050
7-275-098
7-274-060
7-274-105
7-275-051
7-275-099
7-274-061
7-274-106
7-275-052
7-275-100
7-274-062
7-274-107
7-275-053
7-275-101
7-274-063
7-274-108
7-275-054
7-275-102
7-274-064
7-274-109
7-275-055
7-275-103
7-274-065
7-274-110
7-275-056
7-275-104
7-274-066
7-274-111
7-275-057
7-275-105
7-274-067
7-274-112
7-275-058
7-275-106
7-274-068
7-274-113
7-275-059
7-275-107
7-274-069
7-274-114
7-275-060
7-275-108
7-274-070
7-274-115
7-275-06 1
7-275-109
7-274-072
7-274-116
7-275-062
7-275-110
7-274-073
7-274-117
7-275-063
7-275-111
7-274-074
7-274-118
7-275-064
7-275-112
7-274-075
7-274-119
7-275-065
7-275-113
7-274-076
7-274-120
7-275-066
7-275-114
7-274-077
7-274-12 1
7-275-067
7-275-115
7-274-078
7-275-002
7-275-068
7-275-116
7-274-079
7-275-006
7-275-069
7-275-117
7-274-080
7-275-007
7-275-070
7-275-118
7-274-081
7-275-026
7-275-07 1
7-275-119
7-274-082
7-275-028
7-275-072
7-275-120
7-274-083
7-275-029
7-275-073
7-275-127
7-274-084
7-275-030
7-275-074
7-275-128
7-274-085
7-275-031
7-275-075
7-275-129
7-274-086
7-275-032
7-275-076
7-275-130
7-274-087
7-275-03 3
7-275-077
7-275-131
7-274-088
7-275-034
7-275-079
7-275-132
7-274-089
7-275-035
7-275-083
7-275-133
7-274-090
7-275-036
7-275-084
7-275-135
52
7-274-091
7-275-037
7-275-085
7-275-136
7-274-092
7-275-038
7-275-086
7-275-137
7-274-093
7-275-039
7-275-087
7-275-138
7-274-094
7-275-040
7-275-088
7-275-139
7-274-095
7-275-041
7-275-089
7-275-140
7-275-14 1
7-275-186
7-289-042
7-289-087
7-275-142
7-275-187
7-289-043
7-289-088
7-275-143
7-275-188
7-289-044
7-289-089
7-275-144
7-275-189
7-289-045
7-289-090
7-275-145
7-275-190
7-289-046
7-289-091
7-275-146
7-275-191
7-289-047
7-289-092
7-275-147
7-275-192
7-289-048
7-289-093
7-275-148
7-275-193
7-289-049
7-289-094
7-275-149
7-275-194
7-289-050
7-289-095
7-275-150
7-275-195
7-289-051
7-289-096
7-275-151
7-275-196
7-289-052
7-289-097
7-275-152
7-275-197
7-289-053
7-289-098
7-275-153
7-275-198
7-289-054
7-289-099
7-275-154
7-275-199
7-289-055
7-289-100
7-275-155
7-275-200
7-289-056
7-289-101
7-275-156
7-275-201
7-289-057
7-289-102
7-275-157
7-275-202
7-289-058
7-289-103
7-275-158
7-275-204
7-289-059
7-289-104
7-275-159
7-275-205
7-289-060
7-289-105
7-275-160
7-275-206
7-289-061
7-289-106
7-275-161
7-275-207
7-289-062
7-289-107
7-275-162
7-275-208
7-289-063
7-289-108
7-275-163
7-275-209
7-289-064
7-289-109
7-275-164
7-275-2 10
7-289-065
7-289-110
7-275-165
7-275-211
7-289-066
7-289-111
7-275-166
7-275-212
7-289-067
7-289-112
7-275-167
7-275-213
7-289-068
7-289-113
7-275-168
7-275-214
7-289-069
7-289-114
7-275-169
7-275-2 15
7-289-070
7-289-115
7-275-170
7-275-216
7-289-071
7-289-116
7-275-17 1
7-275-218
7-289-072
7-289-122
7-275-172
7-275-220
7-289-073
7-289-123
7-275-173
7-275-222
7-289-074
7-289-124
7-275-174
7-288-137
7-289-075
7-289-125
7-275-175
7-288-138
7-289-076
7-289-126
7-275-176
7-288-139
7-289-077
7-289-127
7-275-177
7-288-140
7-289-078
7-289-128
7-275-179
7-288-141
7-289-079
7-289-129
7-275-180
7-288-142
7-289-081
7-289-220
7-275-181
7-289-002A
7-289-082
7-289-221
7-275-182
7-289-025
7-289-083
7-289-223
7-275-183
7-289-030
7-289-084
7-289-224
7-275-184
7-289-037
7-289-085
7-289-225
7-275-185
7-289-04 1
7-289-086
7-289-226
7-289-227
7-290-084
7-290-179
7-290-230
7-289-228
7-290-086
7-290-180
7-290-231
7-290-002B
7-290-087
7-290-181
7-290-232
7-290-003
7-290-090
7-290-182
7-290-233
7-290-004
7-290-09 1
7-290-183
7-290-234
7-290-005
7-290-093
7-290-184
7-290-235
7-290-006
7-290-095
7-290-185
7-290-236
7-290-007
7-290-096
7-290-186
7-290-237
53
7-290-008
7-290-097
7-290-187
7-290-23 8
7-290-009
7-290-099
7-290-188
7-290-239
7-290-010
7-290-100
7-290-189
7-290-240
7-290-011
7-290-102
7-290-190
7-290-241
7-290-012
7-290-108
7-290-191
7-290-242
7-290-0 13
7-290-116
7-290-192
7-290-243
7-290-014
7-290-117
7-290-193
7-290-244
7-290-0 1 8B
7-290-118
7-290-194
7-290-245
7-290-026
7-290-131
7-290-200
7-290-246
7-290-027
7-290-132
7-290-202
7-290-247
7-290-027A
7-290-138
7-290-203
7-290-248
7-290-027E
7-290-140
7-290-204
7-290-249
7-290-036
7-290-145
7-290-205
7-290-250
7-290-039
7-290-156
7-290-206
7-290-251
7-290-047
7-290-157
7-290-207
7-290-252
7-290-058
7-290-158
7-290-208
7-290-253
7-290-064
7-290-159
7-290-209
7-290-254
7-290-065
7-290-160
7-290-210
7-290-255
7-290-066
7-290-16 1
7-290-211
7-290-256
7-290-067
7-290-162
7-290-212
7-290-257
7-290-068
7-290-163
7-290-213
7-290-258
7-290-069
7-290-164
7-290-215
7-290-259
7-290-070
7-290-165
7-290-216
7-290-260
7-290-071
7-290-166
7-290-217
7-290-261
7-290-072
7-290-167
7-290-218
7-290-262
7-290-073
7-290-168
7-290-219
7-290-263
7-290-074
7-290-169
7-290-220
7-290-264
7-290-075
7-290-170
7-290-221
7-290-265
7-290-076
7-290-171
7-290-222
7-290-266
7-290-077
7-290-172
7-290-223
7-290-267
7-290-078
7-290-173
7-290-224
7-290-268
7-290-079
7-290-174
7-290-225
7-290-269
7-290-080
7-290-175
7-290-226
7-290-270
7-290-082
7-290-176
7-290-227
7-290-271
7-290-083
7-290-177
7-290-228
7-290-272
7-290-084
7-290-178
7-290-229
7-290-273
7-290-274
7-290-328
7-290-372
7-290-416
7-290-275
7-290-329
7-290-373
7-290-417
7-290-276
7-290-331
7-290-374
7-290-418
7-290-277
7-290-332
7-290-375
7-290-419
7-290-278
7-290-33 3
7-290-376
7-290-420
7-290-279
7-290-334
7-290-377
7-290-42 1
7-290-280
7-290-33 5
7-290-378
7-290-422
7-290-28 1
7-290-336
7-290-379
7-290-423
7-290-282
7-290-33 7
7-290-3 80
7-290-424
7-290-283
7-290-338
7-290-381
7-290-425
7-290-284
7-290-33 9
7-290-3 82
7-290-426
7-290-285
7-290-340
7-290-3 83
7-290-427
7-290-286
7-290-341
7-290-384
7-290-428
7-290-290
7-290-342
7-290-3 85
7-290-43 0
7-290-292
7-290-343
7-290-3 86
7-290-431
7-290-294
7-290-344
7-290-3 87
7-290-432
7-290-301
7-290-345
7-290-388
7-290-433
7-290-302
7-290-346
7-290-389
7-290-434
7-290-303
7-290-347
7-290-390
7-291-001
7-290-304
7-290-348
7-290-391
7-291-001X
7-290-305
7-290-349
7-290-392
7-291-002
54
7-290-306
7-290-350
7-290-393
7-291-003
7-290-307
7-290-351
7-290-394
7-291-004
7-290-308
7-290-352
7-290-395
7-291-005
7-290-309
7-290-353
7-290-396
7-291-006
7-290-310
7-290-354
7-290-397
7-291-007
7-290-311
7-290-355
7-290-398
7-291-008
7-290-3 12
7-290-356
7-290-399
7-291-011
7-290-313
7-290-357
7-290-400
7-291-012
7-290-314
7-290-358
7-290-401
7-291-013
7-290-315
7-290-359
7-290-402
7-291-014
7-290-316
7-290-360
7-290-403
7-291-016
7-290-317
7-290-361
7-290-404
7-291-017
7-290-318
7-290-362
7-290-405
7-291-018
7-290-319
7-290-363
7-290-406
7-291-019
7-290-320
7-290-364
7-290-407
7-291-020
7-290-321
7-290-365
7-290-408
7-291-021
7-290-322
7-290-366
7-290-409
7-291-022
7-290-323
7-290-367
7-290-410
7-291-023
7-290-324
7-290-368
7-290-411
7-291-024
7-290-325
7-290-369
7-290-412
7-291-025
7-290-326
7-290-370
7-290-414
7-291-026
7-290-327
7-290-371
7-290-415
7-291-027
7-291-029
7-291-067
7-291-117
7-291-169
7-291-030
7-291-068
7-291-118
7-291-170
7-291-030B
7-291-068A
7-291-119
7-291-171
7-291-030D
7-291-068B
7-291-120
7-291-172
7-291-031
7-291-069
7-291-121
7-291-173
7-291-032
7-291-070
7-291-122
7-291-174
7-291-033
7-291-071
7-291-123
7-291-175
7-291-034
7-291-072
7-291-124
7-291-176
7-291-035
7-291-073
7-291-125
7-291-177
7-291-036A
7-291-074
7-291-126
7-291-178
7-291-036B
7-291-075
7-291-127
7-291-179
7-291-036C
7-291-076
7-291-128
7-291-180
7-291-036D
7-291-076A
7-291-130
7-291-181
7-291-036E
7-291-078
7-291-138
7-291-182
7-291-036F
7-291-079
7-291-139
7-291-183
7-291-036H
7-291-079A
7-291-140
7-291-185
7-291-036I
7-291-079B
7-291-141
7-291-187
7-291-036J
7-291-080
7-291-142
7-291-191
7-291-036K
7-291-081
7-291-143
7-291-193
7-291-037
7-291-083
7-291-144
7-291-195
7-291-038
7-291-085
7-291-145
7-291-197
7-291-039
7-291-086
7-291-146
7-291-198
7-291-040
7-291-087
7-291-147
7-291-199
7-291-041
7-291-088
7-291-148
7-291-203
7-291-042
7-291-089
7-291-149
7-291-207
7-291-043
7-291-090
7-291-150
7-291-209
7-291-044
7-291-092
7-291-151
7-292-001
7-291-045
7-291-093
7-291-152
7-292-002
7-291-046
7-291-094
7-291-153
7-292-003
7-291-047
7-291-100
7-291-154
7-292-004
7-291-048
7-291-102
7-291-155
7-292-005
7-291-050
7-291-103
7-291-156
7-292-006
7-291-051
7-291-104
7-291-157
7-292-007
7-291-052
7-291-105
7-291-158
7-292-008
7-291-053
7-291-107
7-291-159
7-292-009
55
7-291-056
7-291-108
7-291-160
7-292-010
7-291-057
7-291-109
7-291-161
7-292-011
7-291-059
7-291-110
7-291-162
7-292-012
7-291-060
7-291-111
7-291-163
7-292-013
7-291-061
7-291-112
7-291-164
7-292-014
7-291-062
7-291-113
7-291-165
7-292-015
7-291-064
7-291-114
7-291-166
7-292-016
7-291-065
7-291-115
7-291-167
7-292-017
7-291-066
7-291-116
7-291-168
7-292-018
7-292-0 19
7-292-067
7-292-113
7-292-164
7-292-020
7-292-068
7-292-114
7-292-166
7-292-02 1
7-292-069A
7-292-1 14A
7-292-167
7-292-022
7-292-069B
7-292-1 14B
7-292-168
7-292-023
7-292-070
7-292-115
7-292-169
7-292-025
7-292-07 1
7-292-116
7-292-170
7-292-027
7-292-071A
7-292-117
7-292-174
7-292-031
7-292-072
7-292-118
7-292-176
7-292-032
7-292-073
7-292-119
7-292-180
7-292-033
7-292-074
7-292-120
7-292-184
7-292-034
7-292-076
7-292-120A
7-292-188
7-292-034A
7-292-076A
7-292-123
7-292-190
7-292-035
7-292-078
7-292-124
7-292-192
7-292-036
7-292-079
7-292-125
7-292-194
7-292-037
7-292-080
7-292-127
7-292-196
7-292-038
7-292-081
7-292-128
7-292-198
7-292-039
7-292-082
7-292-129
7-292-200
7-292-040
7-292-083
7-292-130A
7-292-202
7-292-042
7-292-086
7-292-130C
7-292-204
7-292-043
7-292-087
7-292-131
7-292-206
7-292-044
7-292-088
7-292-133
7-292-208
7-292-045
7-292-089A
7-292-134
7-293-166
7-292-046
7-292-090
7-292-135
7-304-006
7-292-047
7-292-091
7-292-135A
7-304-037
7-292-048
7-292-092
7-292-136
7-304-039
7-292-049
7-292-093
7-292-137
7-304-040
7-292-050
7-292-095
7-292-138
7-304-044
7-292-051
7-292-096
7-292-139
7-304-050
7-292-052
7-292-097
7-292-141
7-304-051
7-292-053
7-292-098
7-292-142
7-305-001
7-292-054
7-292-099
7-292-143
7-305-001A
7-292-054A
7-292-101
7-292-144
7-305-001D
7-292-055
7-292-102
7-292-146
7-305-002
7-292-056
7-292-102A
7-292-147
7-305-002A
7-292-057
7-292-103
7-292-148
7-305-003
7-292-058
7-292-103A
7-292-150
7-305-004
7-292-060
7-292-104
7-292-152
7-305-006
7-292-060A
7-292-105
7-292-153
7-305-006A
7-292-060B
7-292-106
7-292-154
7-305-007
7-292-061
7-292-108
7-292-156
7-305-008
7-292-062
7-292-109
7-292-158
7-305-008A
7-292-063
7-292-110
7-292-160
7-305-009
7-292-064
7-292-111
7-292-161
7-305-011
7-292-066
7-292-112
7-292-162
7-305-013
7-305-016
7-305-066
7-305-121
7-305-173
7-305-017
7-305-070
7-305-122
7-305-174
7-305-020
7-305-078
7-305-123
7-305-175
7-305-021
7-305-079
7-305-124
7-305-176
56
7-305-022
7-305-080
7-305-125
7-305-177
7-305-023
7-305-081
7-305-126
7-305-178
7-305-024
7-305-082
7-305-127
7-305-179
7-305-025
7-305-083
7-305-128
7-305-180
7-305-026
7-305-084
7-305-129
7-305-181
7-305-027
7-305-085
7-305-130
7-305-183
7-305-028
7-305-086
7-305-131
7-305-185
7-305-029
7-305-087
7-305-132
7-305-189
7-305-030
7-305-088
7-305-133
7-305-190
7-305-031
7-305-089
7-305-135
7-305-191
7-305-032
7-305-090
7-305-136
7-305-192
7-305-033
7-305-091
7-305-137
7-305-193
7-305-034
7-305-092
7-305-138
7-305-194
7-305-035
7-305-093
7-305-139
7-305-195
7-305-036
7-305-094
7-305-140
7-305-196
7-305-037
7-305-095
7-305-141
7-305-197
7-305-038
7-305-096
7-305-142
7-305-198
7-305-039
7-305-097
7-305-143
7-305-199
7-305-040
7-305-098
7-305-144
7-305-200
7-305-041
7-305-099
7-305-145
7-305-201
7-305-042
7-305-100
7-305-146
7-305-202
7-305-043
7-305-101
7-305-147
7-305-203
7-305-044
7-305-102
7-305-151
7-305-204
7-305-045
7-305-103
7-305-155
7-305-205
7-305-046
7-305-104
7-305-156
7-305-206
7-305-047
7-305-105
7-305-157
7-305-207
7-305-048
7-305-106
7-305-158
7-305-208
7-305-049
7-305-107
7-305-159
7-305-209
7-305-050
7-305-108
7-305-160
7-305-210
7-305-051
7-305-109
7-305-161
7-305-211
7-305-052
7-305-110
7-305-162
7-305-212
7-305-053
7-305-112
7-305-163
7-305-213
7-305-054
7-305-113
7-305-164
7-305-214
7-305-055
7-305-114
7-305-166
7-305-215
7-305-056
7-305-115
7-305-167
7-305-216
7-305-057
7-305-116
7-305-168
7-305-217
7-305-058
7-305-117
7-305-169
7-305-218
7-305-059
7-305-118
7-305-170
7-305-219
7-305-060
7-305-119
7-305-171
7-305-220
7-305-062
7-305-120
7-305-172
7-305-221
7-305-222
7-305-281
7-305-329
7-305-375
7-305-223
7-305-282
7-305-330
7-305-376
7-305-225
7-305-283
7-305-33 1
7-305-377
7-305-227
7-305-285
7-305-332
7-305-378
7-305-229
7-305-287
7-305-333
7-305-379
7-305-23 1
7-305-289
7-305-334
7-305-380
7-305-233
7-305-290
7-305-335
7-305-381
7-305-235
7-305-291
7-305-336
7-305-382
7-305-237
7-305-292
7-305-337
7-305-383
7-305-239
7-305-293
7-305-338
7-305-384
7-305-241
7-305-294
7-305-339
7-305-385
7-305-243
7-305-295
7-305-340
7-305-387
7-305-245
7-305-296
7-305-341
7-305-388
7-305-247
7-305-297
7-305-343
7-305-389
7-305-251
7-305-298
7-305-345
7-305-390
7-305-252
7-305-299
7-305-346
7-305-392
7-305-253
7-305-300
7-305-347
7-305-394
57
7-305-254
7-305-302
7-305-348
7-305-396
7-305-255
7-305-303
7-305-349
7-306-002
7-305-256
7-305-304
7-305-350
7-306-003
7-305-257
7-305-305
7-305-351
7-306-004
7-305-258
7-305-306
7-305-352
7-306-005
7-305-259
7-305-307
7-305-353
7-306-006
7-305-260
7-305-308
7-305-354
7-306-007
7-305-261
7-305-309
7-305-355
7-306-008
7-305-262
7-305-310
7-305-356
7-306-009
7-305-263
7-305-311
7-305-357
7-306-011
7-305-264
7-305-312
7-305-358
7-306-01 1A
7-305-265
7-305-313
7-305-359
7-306-012
7-305-266
7-305-314
7-305-360
7-306-013
7-305-267
7-305-315
7-305-361
7-306-014
7-305-268
7-305-316
7-305-362
7-306-015
7-305-269
7-305-317
7-305-363
7-306-016
7-305-270
7-305-318
7-305-364
7-306-017
7-305-271
7-305-319
7-305-365
7-306-018
7-305-272
7-305-320
7-305-366
7-306-019
7-305-273
7-305-321
7-305-367
7-306-020
7-305-274
7-305-322
7-305-368
7-306-021
7-305-275
7-305-323
7-305-369
7-306-022
7-305-276
7-305-324
7-305-370
7-306-023
7-305-277
7-305-325
7-305-371
7-306-024
7-305-278
7-305-326
7-305-372
7-306-025
7-305-279
7-305-327
7-305-373
7-306-026
7-305-280
7-305-328
7-305-374
7-306-027B
7-306-029
7-306-071
7-306-152
7-306-202
7-306-031
7-306-072A
7-306-153
7-306-203
7-306-032
7-306-073
7-306-154
7-306-204
7-306-033
7-306-075
7-306-155
7-306-205
7-306-037
7-306-076
7-306-156
7-306-206
7-306-038
7-306-077
7-306-157
7-306-207
7-306-040
7-306-078
7-306-158
7-306-208
7-306-040B
7-306-079A
7-306-159
7-306-209
7-306-042
7-306-080
7-306-160
7-306-210
7-306-043
7-306-08 1
7-306-161
7-306-211
7-306-045
7-306-082
7-306-162
7-306-212
7-306-046
7-306-083
7-306-163
7-306-213
7-306-047
7-306-084
7-306-164
7-306-214
7-306-048
7-306-085
7-306-165
7-306-215
7-306-049
7-306-086
7-306-166
7-306-216
7-306-050
7-306-088
7-306-167
7-306-217
7-306-051
7-306-089
7-306-168
7-306-218
7-306-051A
7-306-090
7-306-169
7-306-222
7-306-052
7-306-091
7-306-170
7-306-226
7-306-053
7-306-092
7-306-171
7-306-227
7-306-054
7-306-098
7-306-172
7-306-228
7-306-055
7-306-101
7-306-173
7-306-229
7-306-056
7-306-102
7-306-175
7-306-230
7-306-057
7-306-106
7-306-077
7-306-231
7-306-058
7-306-108
7-306-179
7-306-232
7-306-059
7-306-110
7-306-181
7-306-233
7-306-060
7-306-111
7-306-183
7-306-234
7-306-062A
7-306-117
7-306-185
7-306-235
7-306-063
7-306-119
7-306-186
7-306-236
7-306-063C
7-306-123
7-306-187
7-306-237
58
7-306-063F
7-306-129
7-306-188
7-306-238
7-306-063G
7-306-131
7-306-189
7-306-239
7-306-064
7-306-133
7-306-190
7-306-240
7-306-064A
7-306-137
7-306-191
7-306-241
7-306-064B
7-306-141
7-306-192
7-306-242
7-306-064C
7-306-143
7-306-193
7-306-243
7-306-064D
7-306-144
7-306-194
7-306-244
7-306-065
7-306-145
7-306-195
7-306-245
7-306-065A
7-306-146
7-306-196
7-306-246
7-306-066
7-306-147
7-306-197
7-306-247
7-306-067
7-306-148
7-306-198
7-306-248
7-306-068
7-306-149
7-306-199
7-306-249
7-306-069
7-306-150
7-306-200
7-306-250
7-306-070
7-306-151
7-306-201
7-306-251
7-306-252
7-307-157
7-307-204
7-307-253
7-306-253
7-307-158
7-307-205
7-307-254
7-306-254
7-307-159
7-307-206
7-307-255
7-306-255
7-307-160
7-307-207
7-307-256
7-306-258
7-307-161
7-307-208
7-307-257
7-306-260
7-307-162
7-307-209
7-307-258
7-306-261
7-307-163
7-307-210
7-307-259
7-306-263
7-307-164
7-307-211
7-307-260
7-306-265
7-307-165
7-307-212
7-307-261
7-306-266
7-307-166
7-307-213
7-307-262
7-306-267
7-307-167
7-307-214
7-307-263
7-306-268
7-307-168
7-307-215
7-307-264
7-307-001A
7-307-169
7-307-216
7-307-265
7-307-005
7-307-170
7-307-217
7-307-266
7-307-006
7-307-171
7-307-218
7-307-267
7-307-007
7-307-172
7-307-219
7-307-268
7-307-008
7-307-173
7-307-220
7-307-269
7-307-013
7-307-174
7-307-221
7-307-270
7-307-131
7-307-175
7-307-222
7-307-271
7-307-132
7-307-176
7-307-223
7-307-272
7-307-133
7-307-177
7-307-224
7-307-273
7-307-134
7-307-181
7-307-225
7-307-274
7-307-135
7-307-182
7-307-226
7-307-275
7-307-136
7-307-183
7-307-227
7-307-276
7-307-137
7-307-184
7-307-228
7-307-277
7-307-138
7-307-185
7-307-229
7-307-278
7-307-139
7-307-186
7-307-230
7-307-279
7-307-140
7-307-187
7-307-231
7-307-280
7-307-141
7-307-188
7-307-232
7-307-281
7-307-142
7-307-189
7-307-233
7-307-282
7-307-143
7-307-190
7-307-234
7-307-283
7-307-144
7-307-191
7-307-235
7-307-284
7-307-145
7-307-192
7-307-236
7-307-285
7-307-146
7-307-193
7-307-237
7-307-286
7-307-147
7-307-194
7-307-238
7-307-287
7-307-148
7-307-195
7-307-239
7-307-288
7-307-149
7-307-196
7-307-241
7-307-289
7-307-150
7-307-197
7-307-243
7-307-290
7-307-151
7-307-198
7-307-247
7-307-295
7-307-152
7-307-199
7-307-248
7-307-296
7-307-153
7-307-200
7-307-249
7-307-297
7-307-154
7-307-201
7-307-250
7-307-298
7-307-155
7-307-202
7-307-251
7-307-299
59
7-307-156
7-307-203
7-307-252
7-307-300
7-307-301
7-308-094
7-308-139
7-308-212
7-307-303
7-308-095
7-308-140
7-308-213
7-307-304
7-308-096
7-308-141
7-308-214
7-307-305
7-308-097
7-308-142
7-308-215
7-307-306
7-308-098
7-308-143
7-308-216
7-307-307
7-308-099
7-308-144
7-308-217
7-307-308
7-308-100
7-308-145
7-308-218
7-307-309
7-308-102
7-308-146
7-308-219
7-307-310
7-308-103
7-308-147
7-308-220
7-307-311
7-308-104
7-308-148
7-308-221
7-307-312
7-308-105
7-308-149
7-308-222
7-307-313
7-308-106
7-308-150
7-308-223
7-307-314
7-308-107
7-308-151
7-308-224
7-307-315
7-308-108
7-308-152
7-308-225
7-307-316
7-308-109
7-308-153
7-308-226
7-307-317
7-308-110
7-308-154
7-308-227
7-307-318
7-308-111
7-308-155
7-308-229
7-307-319
7-308-112
7-308-156
7-308-230
7-307-320
7-308-113
7-308-157
7-308-231
7-307-321
7-308-114
7-308-159
7-308-232
7-307-322
7-308-115
7-308-160
7-308-233
7-307-323
7-308-116
7-308-161
7-308-234
7-307-324
7-308-117
7-308-162
7-308-235
7-307-325
7-308-118
7-308-163
7-308-236
7-307-326
7-308-119
7-308-164
7-308-237
7-307-328
7-308-120
7-308-165
7-308-238
7-307-329
7-308-121
7-308-166
7-308-239
7-307-330
7-308-122
7-308-195
7-308-240
7-307-331
7-308-123
7-308-196
7-308-241
7-307-332
7-308-124
7-308-197
7-308-242
7-307-333
7-308-125
7-308-198
7-308-243
7-307-334
7-308-126
7-308-199
7-308-244
7-307-338
7-308-127
7-308-200
7-308-245
7-307-340
7-308-128
7-308-201
7-308-246
7-307-343
7-308-129
7-308-202
7-308-247
7-307-344
7-308-130
7-308-203
7-308-248
7-307-345
7-308-131
7-308-204
7-308-249
7-307-346
7-308-132
7-308-205
7-308-250
7-308-033
7-308-133
7-308-206
7-308-251
7-308-035
7-308-134
7-308-207
7-308-252
7-308-090
7-308-135
7-308-208
7-308-253
7-308-091
7-308-136
7-308-209
7-308-254
7-308-092
7-308-137
7-308-210
7-308-255
7-308-093
7-308-138
7-308-211
7-308-256
7-308-257
7-308-303
7-319-071
7-319-115
7-308-258
7-308-304
7-319-072
7-319-116
7-308-259
7-308-306
7-319-073
7-319-117
7-308-260
7-309-090
7-319-074
7-319-118
7-308-261
7-309-091
7-319-075
7-319-119
7-308-262
7-309-092
7-319-076
7-319-120
7-308-263
7-309-093
7-319-077
7-319-121
7-308-264
7-309-094
7-319-078
7-319-122
7-308-265
7-309-095
7-319-079
7-319-123
7-308-266
7-309-096
7-319-080
7-319-124
7-308-267
7-309-097
7-319-081
7-319-125
7-308-268
7-309-098
7-319-082
7-319-126
60
7-308-270
7-309-099
7-319-083
7-319-127
7-308-271
7-309-100
7-319-084
7-319-128
7-308-272
7-309-101
7-319-085
7-319-129
7-308-273
7-309-102
7-319-086
7-319-130
7-308-274
7-309-103
7-319-087
7-319-131
7-308-275
7-309-104
7-319-088
7-319-132
7-308-276
7-309-105
7-319-089
7-319-133
7-308-277
7-309-106
7-319-090
7-319-134
7-308-278
7-309-107
7-319-091
7-319-135
7-308-279
7-309-108
7-319-092
7-319-136
7-308-280
7-309-109
7-319-093
7-319-137
7-308-281
7-309-110
7-319-094
7-319-138
7-308-282
7-309-111
7-319-095
7-319-139
7-308-283
7-309-112
7-319-096
7-319-140
7-308-284
7-309-113
7-319-097
7-319-141
7-308-285
7-309-114
7-319-098
7-319-142
7-308-286
7-319-013
7-319-099
7-319-143
7-308-287
7-319-016
7-319-100
7-319-144
7-308-288
7-319-018
7-319-101
7-319-145
7-308-289
7-319-031
7-319-102
7-319-146
7-308-290
7-319-059
7-319-103
7-319-147
7-308-291
7-319-060
7-319-104
7-319-148
7-308-292
7-319-061
7-319-105
7-319-149
7-308-293
7-319-062
7-319-106
7-319-150
7-308-294
7-319-063
7-319-107
7-3 19-15 1
7-308-295
7-319-064
7-319-108
7-319-152
7-308-296
7-319-065
7-319-109
7-319-153
7-308-297
7-319-066
7-319-110
7-319-154
7-308-298
7-319-067
7-319-111
7-319-155
7-308-299
7-319-068
7-319-112
7-319-156
7-308-300
7-319-069
7-319-113
7-319-157
7-308-302
7-319-070
7-319-114
7-319-158
7-319-159
7-319-465
7-320-086
7-320-136
7-319-160
7-319-466
7-320-087
7-320-137
7-319-161
7-319-467
7-320-088
7-320-138
7-319-162
7-319-468
7-320-089
7-320-139
7-319-163
7-319-469
7-320-090
7-320-140
7-319-164
7-320-005
7-320-09 1
7-320-14 1
7-319-165
7-320-047
7-320-092
7-320-142
7-319-166
7-320-048
7-320-093
7-320-143
7-319-429
7-320-049
7-320-094
7-320-144
7-3 19-43 0
7-320-050
7-320-095
7-320-145
7-319-431
7-320-051
7-320-096
7-320-146
7-319-432
7-320-052
7-320-097
7-320-147
7-3 19-43 3
7-320-053
7-320-098
7-320-148
7-319-434
7-320-054
7-320-104
7-320-149
7-319-435
7-320-055
7-320-105
7-320-151
7-319-436
7-320-056
7-320-106
7-320-152
7-319-437
7-320-057
7-320-107
7-320-153
7-319-438
7-320-058
7-320-108
7-320-154
7-319-439
7-320-059
7-320-109
7-320-155
7-319-440
7-320-060
7-320-110
7-320-156
7-319-441
7-320-06 1
7-320-111
7-320-157
7-319-442
7-320-062
7-320-112
7-320-158
7-319-443
7-320-063
7-320-113
7-320-159
7-319-444
7-320-064
7-320-114
7-320-160
7-319-445
7-320-065
7-320-115
7-320-16 1
61
7-319-446
7-320-066
7-320-116
7-320-162
7-319-447
7-320-067
7-320-118
7-320-163
7-319-448
7-320-068
7-320-119
7-320-164
7-319-449
7-320-070
7-320-120
7-320-165
7-319-450
7-320-071
7-320-121
7-320-166
7-319-451
7-320-072
7-320-122
7-320-167
7-319-452
7-320-073
7-320-123
7-320-168
7-319-453
7-320-074
7-320-124
7-320-169
7-319-454
7-320-075
7-320-125
7-320-170
7-319-455
7-320-076
7-320-126
7-320-17 1
7-319-456
7-320-077
7-320-127
7-320-172
7-319-457
7-320-078
7-320-128
7-320-173
7-319-458
7-320-079
7-320-129
7-320-174
7-319-459
7-320-080
7-320-130
7-320-175
7-319-460
7-320-081
7-320-131
7-320-176
7-319-461
7-320-082
7-320-132
7-320-178
7-319-462
7-320-083
7-320-133
7-320-179
7-319-463
7-320-084
7-320-134
7-320-180
7-319-464
7-320-085
7-320-135
7-320-181
7-320-182
7-320-284
7-321A-027
7-321A-071
7-320-183
7-320-285
7-321A-028
7-321A-072
7-320-184
7-320-286
7-321A-029
7-321A-073
7-320-185
7-320-287
7-321A-030
7-321A-074
7-320-186
7-320-288
7-321A-03 1
7-321A-075
7-320-187
7-320-289
7-321A-032
7-321A-076
7-320-188
7-320-290
7-321A-033
7-321A-077
7-320-189
7-320-291
7-321A-034
7-321A-080
7-320-190
7-320-292
7-321A-035
7-321A-082
7-320-191
7-320-293
7-321A-036
7-322-005
7-320-234
7-320-294
7-321A-037
7-322-005B
7-320-235
7-320-295
7-321A-038
7-322-007
7-320-236
7-320-296
7-321A-039
7-322-009
7-320-237
7-320-297
7-321A-040
7-322-014
7-320-238
7-320-298
7-321A-041
7-322-015
7-320-239
7-320-299
7-321A-042
7-322-061
7-320-240
7-320-300
7-321A-043
7-322-062
7-320-241
7-320-301
7-321A-044
7-322-063
7-320-242
7-320-302
7-321A-045
7-322-064
7-320-243
7-320-303
7-321A-046
7-322-065
7-320-244
7-320-304
7-321A-047
7-322-066
7-320-245
7-320-305
7-321A-048
7-322-067
7-320-246
7-320-306
7-321A-049
7-322-068
7-320-247
7-320-307
7-321A-050
7-322-069
7-320-248
7-320-308
7-321A-051
7-322-070
7-320-264
7-320A-008
7-321A-052
7-322-071
7-320-266
7-320A-010
7-321A-053
7-322-072
7-320-267
7-321A-001B
7-321A-054
7-322-073
7-320-268
7-321A-004
7-321A-055
7-322-074
7-320-269
7-321A-005
7-321A-056
7-322-075
7-320-270
7-321A-006
7-321A-057
7-322-076
7-320-271
7-321A-007
7-321A-058
7-322-078
7-320-272
7-321A-009
7-321A-059
7-322-079
7-320-273
7-321A-01 1
7-321A-060
7-322-080
7-320-274
7-321A-012
7-321A-061
7-322-081
7-320-275
7-321A-013
7-321A-062
7-322-082
7-320-276
7-321A-014
7-321A-063
7-322-083
7-320-277
7-321A-016
7-321A-064
7-322-084
62
7-320-278
7-321A-018
7-321A-065
7-322-085
7-320-279
7-321A-020
7-321A-066
7-322-086
7-320-280
7-321A-022
7-321A-067
7-322-087
7-320-281
7-321A-023
7-321A-068
7-322-088
7-320-282
7-321A-025
7-321A-069
7-322-089
7-320-283
7-321A-026
7-321A-070
7-322-090
7-322-091
7-322-140
7-322-190
7-322-235
7-322-092
7-322-141
7-322-191
7-322-236
7-322-093
7-322-142
7-322-192
7-322-237
7-322-094
7-322-143
7-322-193
7-322-238
7-322-095
7-322-144
7-322-194
7-322-239
7-322-096
7-322-145
7-322-195
7-322-240
7-322-097
7-322-146
7-322-196
7-322-241
7-322-098
7-322-147
7-322-197
7-322-242
7-322-099
7-322-148
7-322-198
7-322-243
7-322-100
7-322-149
7-322-199
7-322-244
7-322-10 1
7-322-151
7-322-200
7-322-245
7-322-102
7-322-152
7-322-201
7-322-246
7-322-103
7-322-153
7-322-202
7-322-247
7-322-104
7-322-154
7-322-203
7-322-248
7-322-105
7-322-155
7-322-204
7-322-249
7-322-106
7-322-156
7-322-205
7-322-250
7-322-107
7-322-158
7-322-206
7-322-251
7-322-108
7-322-160
7-322-207
7-322-252
7-322-109
7-322-161
7-322-208
7-322-253
7-322-110
7-322-162
7-322-209
7-322-254
7-322-116
7-322-163
7-322-210
7-322-255
7-322-117
7-322-164
7-322-211
7-322-256
7-322-118
7-322-165
7-322-212
7-322-257
7-322-119
7-322-166
7-322-213
7-322-258
7-322-120
7-322-167
7-322-214
7-322-259
7-322-121
7-322-168
7-322-215
7-322-260
7-322-122
7-322-169
7-322-216
7-322-261
7-322-123
7-322-170
7-322-217
7-322-262
7-322-124
7-322-17 1
7-322-218
7-322-263
7-322-125
7-322-172
7-322-219
7-322-264
7-322-126
7-322-173
7-322-220
7-322-265
7-322-127
7-322-174
7-322-221
7-322-266
7-322-128
7-322-175
7-322-222
7-322-268
7-322-129
7-322-176
7-322-223
7-322-270
7-322-130
7-322-177
7-322-224
7-322-271
7-322-131
7-322-178
7-322-225
7-322-273
7-322-132
7-322-179
7-322-226
7-322-275
7-322-133
7-322-180
7-322-227
7-322-276
7-322-134
7-322-181
7-322-228
7-322-277
7-322-135
7-322-182
7-322-229
7-322-278
7-322-136
7-322-185
7-322-230
7-322-279
7-322-137
7-322-187
7-322-23 1
7-322-280
7-322-13 8
7-322-18 8
7-322-232
7-322-281
7-322-139
7-322-189
7-322-234
7-322-282
7-322-283
7-322-335
7-322-383
7-322A-017
7-322-284
7-322-336
7-322-384
7-322A-018
7-322-285
7-322-337
7-322-385
7-322A-019
7-322-286
7-322-341
7-322-386
7-322A-020
7-322-287
7-322-342
7-322-3 87
7-322A-021
7-322-28 8
7-322-343
7-322-388
7-322A-022
7-322-289
7-322-344
7-322-3 89
7-322A-023
63
7-322-290
7-322-345
7-322-390
7-322A-024
7-322-29 1
7-322-346
7-322-39 1
7-322A-025
7-322-293
7-322-347
7-322-392
7-322A-026
7-322-294
7-322-348
7-322-393
7-322A-027
7-322-295
7-322-349
7-322-394
7-322A-028
7-322-296
7-322-350
7-322-395
7-322A-029
7-322-297
7-322-351
7-322-396
7-322A-030
7-322-299
7-322-352
7-322-397
7-322A-03 1
7-322-305
7-322-353
7-322-398
7-322A-032
7-322-306
7-322-354
7-322-399
7-322A-033
7-322-307
7-322-355
7-322-400
7-322A-034
7-322-308
7-322-356
7-322-40 1
7-322A-036
7-322-309
7-322-357
7-322-402
7-322A-037
7-322-310
7-322-35 8
7-322-403
7-322A-038
7-322-311
7-322-359
7-322-404
7-322A-039
7-322-313
7-322-360
7-322-405
7-322A-040
7-322-314
7-322-36 1
7-322-406
7-322A-041
7-322-315
7-322-362
7-322-407
7-322A-042
7-322-316
7-322-363
7-322-408
7-322A-043
7-322-317
7-322-364
7-322-409
7-322A-044
7-322-318
7-322-365
7-322-4 10
7-322A-045
7-322-319
7-322-366
7-322A-001
7-322A-046
7-322-320
7-322-367
7-322A-002
7-322A-047
7-322-32 1
7-322-368
7-322A-003
7-322A-048
7-322-322
7-322-369
7-322A-004
7-322A-049
7-322-323
7-322-370
7-322A-005
7-322A-050
7-322-324
7-322-37 1
7-322A-006
7-322A-051
7-322-325
7-322-372
7-322A-007
7-322A-052
7-322-326
7-322-373
7-322A-008
7-322A-055
7-322-327
7-322-374
7-322A-009
7-322A-056
7-322-328
7-322-375
7-322A-010
7-322A-057
7-322-329
7-322-376
7-322A-01 1
7-322A-058
7-322-330
7-322-378
7-322A-012
7-322A-059
7-322-331
7-322-379
7-322A-013
7-322A-060
7-322-332
7-322-380
7-322A-014
7-322A-061
7-322-333
7-322-381
7-322A-015
7-322A-062
7-322-334
7-322-382
7-322A-016
7-322A-063
7-322A-064
7-336-020
7-336-071
7-336-130
7-322A-065
7-336-021
7-336-072
7-336-131
7-322A-066
7-336-022
7-336-073
7-336-132
7-322A-067
7-336-023
7-336-074
7-336-133
7-322A-068
7-336-024
7-336-075
7-336-134
7-322A-069
7-336-025
7-336-076
7-336-135
7-322A-070
7-336-026
7-336-077
7-336-136
7-322A-071
7-336-027
7-336-078
7-336-137
7-322A-072
7-336-028
7-336-079
7-336-138
7-322A-073
7-336-029
7-336-080
7-336-139
7-322A-074
7-336-030
7-336-081
7-336-140
7-322A-075
7-336-031
7-336-082
7-336-141
7-322A-076
7-336-032
7-336-083
7-336-142
7-322A-077
7-336-033
7-336-084
7-336-143
7-322A-078
7-336-034
7-336-085
7-336-144
7-322A-079
7-336-035
7-336-086
7-336-146
7-322A-080
7-336-036
7-336-087
7-336-147
7-322A-081
7-336-037
7-336-088
7-336-148
7-322A-083
7-336-038
7-336-089
7-336-149
7-322A-084
7-336-039
7-336-090
7-336-150
64
7-322A-085
7-336-040
7-336-091
7-336-151
7-322A-086
7-336-041
7-336-092
7-336-152
7-322A-087
7-336-042
7-336-093
7-336-153
7-322A-088
7-336-043
7-336-094
7-336-154
7-322A-089
7-336-044
7-336-095
7-336-155
7-322A-090
7-336-045
7-336-096
7-336-156
7-322A-091
7-336-046
7-336-097
7-336-157
7-322A-092
7-336-047
7-336-098
7-336-158
7-322A-093
7-336-048
7-336-099
7-336-159
7-322A-094
7-336-049
7-336-100
7-336-160
7-322A-095
7-336-050
7-336-101
7-336-161
7-322A-096
7-336-051
7-336-102
7-336-162
7-322A-097
7-336-052
7-336-103
7-336-163
7-322A-098
7-336-053
7-336-104
7-336-164
7-322A-099
7-336-054
7-336-105
7-336-165
7-322A-100
7-336-055
7-336-106
7-336-166
7-323-001
7-336-056
7-336-122
7-336-167
7-323-003
7-336-057
7-336-123
7-336-168
7-323-014
7-336-058
7-336-124
7-336-169
7-323-024
7-336-066
7-336-125
7-336-170
7-323-026
7-336-067
7-336-126
7-336-171
7-324-005
7-336-068
7-336-127
7-336-172
7-324-021
7-336-069
7-336-128
7-337-004A
7-336-019
7-336-070
7-336-129
7-337-041
7-337-042
7-337-087
7-337-132
7-337-193
7-337-043
7-337-088
7-337-133
7-337-194
7-337-044
7-337-089
7-337-134
7-337-195
7-337-045
7-337-090
7-337-135
7-337-196
7-337-046
7-337-091
7-337-136
7-337-197
7-337-047
7-337-092
7-337-137
7-337-198
7-337-048
7-337-093
7-337-138
7-337-199
7-337-049
7-337-094
7-337-139
7-337-200
7-337-050
7-337-095
7-337-140
7-337-201
7-337-051
7-337-096
7-337-141
7-337-202
7-337-052
7-337-097
7-337-142
7-337-203
7-337-053
7-337-098
7-337-143
7-337-204
7-337-054
7-337-099
7-337-144
7-337-205
7-337-055
7-337-100
7-337-145
7-337-206
7-337-056
7-337-101
7-337-146
7-337-208
7-337-057
7-337-102
7-337-147
7-337-209
7-337-058
7-337-103
7-337-148
7-337-210
7-337-059
7-337-104
7-337-149
7-337-211
7-337-060
7-337-105
7-337-150
7-337-212
7-337-061
7-337-106
7-337-151
7-337-213
7-337-062
7-337-107
7-337-152
7-337-214
7-337-063
7-337-108
7-337-153
7-337-215
7-337-064
7-337-109
7-337-154
7-337-216
7-337-065
7-337-110
7-337-155
7-337-217
7-337-066
7-337-111
7-337-156
7-337-218
7-337-067
7-337-112
7-337-157
7-337-219
7-337-068
7-337-113
7-337-158
7-337-220
7-337-069
7-337-114
7-337-159
7-337-221
7-337-070
7-337-115
7-337-160
7-337-222
7-337-071
7-337-116
7-337-161
7-337-223
7-337-072
7-337-117
7-337-179
7-337-224
7-337-073
7-337-118
7-337-180
7-337-225
7-337-075
7-337-119
7-337-181
7-337-226
65
7-337-076
7-337-120
7-337-182
7-337-227
7-337-077
7-337-121
7-337-183
7-337-228
7-337-078
7-337-122
7-337-184
7-337-229
7-337-079
7-337-123
7-337-185
7-337-230
7-337-080
7-337-124
7-337-186
7-337-23 1
7-337-081
7-337-125
7-337-187
7-337-232
7-337-082
7-337-126
7-337-188
7-337-233
7-337-083
7-337-127
7-337-189
7-337-234
7-337-084
7-337-129
7-337-190
7-337-235
7-337-085
7-337-130
7-337-191
7-337-236
7-337-086
7-337-131
7-337-192
7-337-237
7-337-238
7-337-283
7-337-330
7-339-196
7-337-239
7-337-284
7-337-33 1
7-339-197
7-337-240
7-337-285
7-337-332
7-339-198
7-337-241
7-337-286
7-337-333
7-339-199
7-337-242
7-337-287
7-337-334
7-339-200
7-337-243
7-337-288
7-337-335
7-339-201
7-337-244
7-337-289
7-337-336
7-339-202
7-337-245
7-337-290
7-337-337
7-339-203
7-337-246
7-337-294
7-339-044
7-339-204
7-337-247
7-337-295
7-339-068
7-339-205
7-337-248
7-337-296
7-339-069
7-339-206
7-337-249
7-337-297
7-339-071
7-339-207
7-337-250
7-337-298
7-339-079
7-339-208
7-337-251
7-337-299
7-339-100
7-339-230
7-337-252
7-337-300
7-339-101
7-339-23 1
7-337-253
7-337-301
7-339-118
7-339-232
7-337-254
7-337-302
7-339-119
7-339-233
7-337-256
7-337-303
7-339-125
7-339-234
7-337-257
7-337-304
7-339-126
7-339-235
7-337-258
7-337-305
7-339-138
7-339-236
7-337-259
7-337-306
7-339-142
7-339-237
7-337-260
7-337-307
7-339-173
7-339-238
7-337-261
7-337-308
7-339-174
7-339-239
7-337-262
7-337-309
7-339-175
7-339-240
7-337-263
7-337-310
7-339-176
7-339-241
7-337-264
7-337-311
7-339-177
7-339-242
7-337-265
7-337-312
7-339-178
7-339-243
7-337-266
7-337-313
7-339-179
7-339-244
7-337-267
7-337-314
7-339-180
7-339-245
7-337-268
7-337-315
7-339-181
7-339-246
7-337-269
7-337-316
7-339-182
7-339-247
7-337-270
7-337-317
7-339-183
7-339-248
7-337-271
7-337-318
7-339-184
7-339-249
7-337-272
7-337-319
7-339-185
7-339-250
7-337-273
7-337-320
7-339-186
7-339-251
7-337-274
7-337-321
7-339-187
7-339-252
7-337-275
7-337-322
7-339-188
7-340-052
7-337-276
7-337-323
7-339-189
7-340-053
7-337-277
7-337-324
7-339-190
7-340-054
7-337-278
7-337-325
7-339-191
7-340-055
7-337-279
7-337-326
7-339-192
7-340-056
7-337-280
7-337-327
7-339-193
7-340-057
7-337-281
7-337-328
7-339-194
7-340-058
7-337-282
7-337-329
7-339-195
7-340-059
7-340-060
7-340-107
7-340-155
7-341-033
7-340-061
7-340-108
7-340-156
7-341-034
66
7-340-062
7-340-109
7-340-157
7-341-035
7-340-063
7-340-110
7-340-158
7-341-036
7-340-064
7-340-111
7-340-159
7-341-037
7-340-065
7-340-112
7-340-160
7-341-038
7-340-066
7-340-113
7-340-161
7-341-039
7-340-067
7-340-114
7-340-162
7-341-040
7-340-068
7-340-115
7-340-163
7-341-041
7-340-069
7-340-116
7-340-164
7-341-042
7-340-070
7-340-117
7-340-165
7-341-043
7-340-071
7-340-118
7-340-166
7-341-044
7-340-072
7-340-119
7-340-167
7-341-045
7-340-073
7-340-120
7-340-168
7-341-046
7-340-074
7-340-121
7-340-169
7-341-047
7-340-078
7-340-122
7-340-170
7-341-048
7-340-079
7-340-123
7-340-171
7-341-049
7-340-080
7-340-124
7-340-172
7-341-050
7-340-081
7-340-125
7-340-173
7-341-051
7-340-082
7-340-126
7-340-174
7-341-052
7-340-083
7-340-127
7-340-175
7-341-053
7-340-084
7-340-128
7-340-176
7-341-054
7-340-085
7-340-129
7-340-177
7-341-055
7-340-086
7-340-130
7-340-178
7-341-056
7-340-087
7-340-13 1
7-340-179
7-341-057
7-340-088
7-340-132
7-340-180
7-341-058
7-340-089
7-340-133
7-340-181
7-341-059
7-340-090
7-340-134
7-341-002
7-341-060
7-340-091
7-340-139
7-341-017
7-341-062
7-340-092
7-340-140
7-341-018
7-341-063
7-340-093
7-340-141
7-341-019
7-341-064
7-340-094
7-340-142
7-341-020
7-341-065
7-340-095
7-340-143
7-341-021
7-341-066
7-340-096
7-340-144
7-341-022
7-341-067
7-340-097
7-340-145
7-341-023
7-341-068
7-340-098
7-340-146
7-341-024
7-341-069
7-340-099
7-340-147
7-341-025
7-341-070
7-340-100
7-340-148
7-341-026
7-341-071
7-340-101
7-340-149
7-341-027
7-341-072
7-340-102
7-340-150
7-341-028
7-341-073
7-340-103
7-340-151
7-341-029
7-341-074
7-340-104
7-340-152
7-341-030
7-341-076
7-340-105
7-340-153
7-341-031
7-341-077
7-340-106
7-340-154
7-341-032
7-341-078
7-341-079
7-341-124
7-341-169
7-341-215
7-341-080
7-341-125
7-341-170
7-341-216
7-341-081
7-341-126
7-341-171
7-341-217
7-341-082
7-341-127
7-341-172
7-341-218
7-341-083
7-341-128
7-341-173
7-341-219
7-341-084
7-341-129
7-341-174
7-341-220
7-341-085
7-341-130
7-341-175
7-341-221
7-341-087
7-341-131
7-341-176
7-341-222
7-341-088
7-341-132
7-341-177
7-341-223
7-341-089
7-341-133
7-341-178
7-341-224
7-341-090
7-341-134
7-341-179
7-341-225
7-341-091
7-341-135
7-341-180
7-341-226
7-341-092
7-341-136
7-341-181
7-341-227
7-341-093
7-341-137
7-341-182
7-341-228
7-341-094
7-341-138
7-341-183
7-341-229
67
7-341-095
7-341-140
7-341-184
7-341-230
7-341-096
7-341-141
7-341-185
7-341-231
7-341-097
7-341-142
7-341-186
7-341-232
7-341-098
7-341-143
7-341-187
7-341-233
7-341-099
7-341-144
7-341-188
7-341-234
7-341-100
7-341-145
7-341-189
7-341-235
7-341-101
7-341-146
7-341-190
7-341-236
7-341-102
7-341-147
7-341-191
7-341-237
7-341-103
7-341-148
7-341-192
7-341-238
7-341-104
7-341-149
7-341-193
7-341-239
7-341-105
7-341-150
7-341-194
7-341-240
7-341-106
7-341-151
7-341-195
7-341-241
7-341-107
7-341-152
7-341-196
7-341-242
7-341-108
7-341-153
7-341-197
7-341-243
7-341-109
7-341-154
7-341-198
7-341-244
7-341-110
7-341-155
7-341-199
7-341-245
7-341-111
7-341-156
7-341-200
7-341-246
7-341-112
7-341-157
7-341-201
7-341-247
7-341-113
7-341-158
7-341-202
7-341-248
7-341-114
7-341-159
7-341-205
7-341-249
7-341-115
7-341-160
7-341-206
7-341-250
7-341-116
7-341-161
7-341-207
7-341-251
7-341-117
7-341-162
7-341-208
7-341-252
7-341-118
7-341-163
7-341-209
7-341-253
7-341-119
7-341-164
7-341-210
7-341-254
7-341-120
7-341-165
7-341-211
7-341-256
7-341-121
7-341-166
7-341-212
7-341-258
7-341-122
7-341-167
7-341-213
7-341-259
7-341-123
7-341-168
7-341-214
7-345-001
7-345-002
7-345-046
7-345-093
7-346-029
7-345-003
7-345-047
7-345-094
7-346-031
7-345-004
7-345-048
7-345-095
7-346-032
7-345-005
7-345-049
7-345-096
7-346-03 3
7-345-006
7-345-050
7-345-097
7-346-034
7-345-007
7-345-051
7-345-098
7-346-03 5
7-345-008
7-345-053
7-345-099
7-346-03 6
7-345-009
7-345-054
7-345-100
7-346-037
7-345-010
7-345-055
7-345-101
7-346-038
7-345-011
7-345-056
7-345-102
7-346-039
7-345-012
7-345-057
7-345-105
7-346-040
7-345-013
7-345-058
7-345-106
7-346-041
7-345-014
7-345-059
7-345-107
7-346-042
7-345-015
7-345-060
7-345-108
7-346-043
7-345-016
7-345-061
7-345-109
7-346-044
7-345-017
7-345-062
7-345-110
7-346-045
7-345-018
7-345-063
7-345-111
7-346-046
7-345-019
7-345-064
7-345-112
7-346-047
7-345-020
7-345-065
7-345-113
7-346-048
7-345-02 1
7-345-066
7-345-114
7-346-049
7-345-022
7-345-067
7-345-115
7-346-050
7-345-023
7-345-068
7-345-116
7-346-051
7-345-024
7-345-070
7-345-117
7-346-052
7-345-025
7-345-071
7-345-118
7-346-053
7-345-026
7-345-073
7-345-119
7-346-054
7-345-027
7-345-074
7-345-120
7-346-055
7-345-028
7-345-075
7-345-12 1
7-346-056
7-345-029
7-345-076
7-345-122
7-346-057
68
7-345-030
7-345-077
7-345-124
7-346-058
7-345-031
7-345-078
7-346-00 1
7-346-059
7-345-032
7-345-079
7-346-001B
7-346-060
7-345-033
7-345-080
7-346-002
7-346-061
7-345-034
7-345-081
7-346-005
7-346-062
7-345-035
7-345-082
7-346-016
7-346-063
7-345-036
7-345-083
7-346-019
7-346-064
7-345-03 7
7-345-084
7-346-020
7-346-066
7-345-03 8
7-345-085
7-346-02 1
7-346-067
7-345-03 9
7-345-086
7-346-022
7-346-068
7-345-040
7-345-087
7-346-023
7-346-069
7-345-041
7-345-088
7-346-024
7-346-070
7-345-042
7-345-089
7-346-025
7-346-07 1
7-345-043
7-345-090
7-346-026
7-346-072
7-345-044
7-345-09 1
7-346-027
7-346-073
7-345-045
7-345-092
7-346-028
7-346-074
7-346-075
7-346-119
7-347-062
7-348-027
7-346-076
7-346-120
7-347-063
7-348-029
7-346-077
7-346-121
7-347-064
7-348-030
7-346-078
7-346-122
7-347-065
7-348-031
7-346-079
7-346-123
7-347-066
7-348-032
7-346-080
7-346-124
7-347-067
7-348-033
7-346-081
7-346-125
7-347-068
7-348-034
7-346-082
7-346-126
7-347-069
7-348-035
7-346-083
7-346-127
7-347-070
7-348-036
7-346-084
7-346-128
7-347-071
7-348-037
7-346-085
7-346-129
7-347-072
7-348-03 8
7-346-086
7-346-130
7-347-073
7-348-039
7-346-087
7-346-131
7-347-074
7-348-040
7-346-088
7-346-132
7-347-075
7-348-041
7-346-089
7-346-133
7-347-076
7-348-042
7-346-090
7-346-135
7-347-077
7-348-043
7-346-091
7-346-136
7-347-078
7-348-044
7-346-092
7-346-137
7-347-079
7-348-045
7-346-093
7-346-138
7-347-080
7-348-046
7-346-094
7-346-13 9
7-347-081
7-348-047
7-346-095
7-346-140
7-347-082
7-348-048
7-346-096
7-346-14 1
7-347-083
7-348-049
7-346-097
7-346-142
7-347-084
7-348-050
7-346-098
7-346-143
7-347-085
7-348-051
7-346-099
7-346-144
7-347-086
7-348-052
7-346-100
7-346-145
7-347-087
7-348-053
7-346-101
7-346-146
7-347-088
7-348-054
7-346-102
7-346-148
7-347-089
7-348-055
7-346-103
7-346-149
7-347-090
7-348-056
7-346-104
7-346-150
7-347-094
7-348-057
7-346-105
7-346-151
7-347-095
7-348-058
7-346-106
7-346-152
7-347-096
7-348-059
7-346-107
7-346-153
7-347-097
7-348-060
7-346-108
7-346-154
7-347-098
7-348-061
7-346-109
7-346-155
7-347-099
7-348-062
7-346-110
7-347-005
7-348-0 19
7-348-063
7-346-111
7-347-0 14
7-348-020
7-348-064
7-346-112
7-347-024
7-348-02 1
7-348-065
7-346-113
7-347-050
7-348-022
7-348-066
7-346-114
7-347-05 8
7-348-023
7-348-067
7-346-115
7-347-059
7-348-024
7-348-068
69
7-346-116
7-347-060
7-348-025
7-348-069
7-346-117
7-347-06 1
7-348-026
7-348-070
7-346-118
7-347-062
7-348-027
7-348-074
7-348-076
7-349-085
7-349-129
7-364-104
7-348-078
7-349-086
7-349-130
7-364-105
7-349-043
7-349-087
7-349-131
7-364-106
7-349-044
7-349-088
7-349-132
7-364-107
7-349-045
7-349-089
7-349-133
7-364-108
7-349-046
7-349-090
7-349-134
7-364-109
7-349-047
7-349-091
7-349-135
7-364-110
7-349-048
7-349-092
7-349-136
7-364-111
7-349-049
7-349-093
7-349-137
7-364-112
7-349-050
7-349-094
7-349-13 8
7-364-113
7-349-051
7-349-095
7-349-139
7-364-114
7-349-052
7-349-096
7-349-140
7-364-115
7-349-053
7-349-097
7-349-142
7-364-116
7-349-054
7-349-098
7-349-144
7-364-117
7-349-055
7-349-099
7-362-047
7-364-118
7-349-056
7-349-100
7-364-074
7-364-119
7-349-057
7-349-101
7-364-075
7-364-120
7-349-058
7-349-102
7-364-076
7-364-121
7-349-059
7-349-103
7-364-077
7-364-122
7-349-060
7-349-104
7-364-078
7-364-123
7-349-061
7-349-105
7-364-079
7-364-124
7-349-062
7-349-106
7-364-080
7-364-125
7-349-063
7-349-107
7-364-081
7-364-126
7-349-064
7-349-108
7-364-082
7-364-127
7-349-065
7-349-109
7-364-083
7-364-128
7-349-066
7-349-110
7-364-084
7-364-129
7-349-067
7-349-111
7-364-085
7-364-130
7-349-068
7-349-112
7-364-086
7-364-13 1
7-349-069
7-349-113
7-364-087
7-364-132
7-349-070
7-349-114
7-364-088
7-364-133
7-349-071
7-349-115
7-364-089
7-364-134
7-349-072
7-349-116
7-364-090
7-364-135
7-349-073
7-349-117
7-364-091
7-364-136
7-349-074
7-349-118
7-364-092
7-364-137
7-349-075
7-349-119
7-364-094
7-364-138
7-349-076
7-349-120
7-364-095
7-364-139
7-349-077
7-349-121
7-364-096
7-364-140
7-349-078
7-349-122
7-364-097
7-364-141
7-349-079
7-349-123
7-364-098
7-364-143
7-349-080
7-349-124
7-364-099
7-364-144
7-349-081
7-349-125
7-364-100
7-364-145
7-349-082
7-349-126
7-364-101
7-364-146
7-349-083
7-349-127
7-364-102
7-364-147
7-349-084
7-349-128
7-364-103
7-364-148
7-364-149
7-365-031
7-365-075
7-364-150
7-365-032
7-365-076
7-364-151
7-365-033
7-365-077
7-364-152
7-365-034
7-365-078
7-364-153
7-365-035
7-365-079
7-364-154
7-365-036
7-365-080
7-364-155
7-365-037
7-365-081
7-364-156
7-365-038
7-365-082
7-364-157
7-365-039
7-365-083
7-364-158
7-365-040
7-365-084
70
7-364-159
7-365-041
7-365-085
7-364-160
7-365-042
7-365-086
7-364-161
7-365-043
7-365-087
7-364-162
7-365-044
7-365-088
7-364-163
7-365-045
7-365-089
7-364-164
7-365-046
7-365-090
7-364-165
7-365-047
7-365-091
7-364-166
7-365-048
7-365-092
7-364-167
7-365-049
7-365-093
7-364-168
7-365-050
7-365-094
7-364-169
7-365-051
7-365-095
7-364-170
7-365-052
7-365-096
7-364-171
7-365-053
7-365-097
7-365-003
7-365-054
7-365-098
7-365-011
7-365-055
7-365-099
7-365-012
7-365-056
7-365-100
7-365-013
7-365-057
7-365-101
7-365-014
7-365-058
7-365-102
7-365-015
7-365-059
7-365-103
7-365-016
7-365-060
7-365-104
7-365-017
7-365-061
7-365-105
7-365-018
7-365-062
7-365-106
7-365-019
7-365-063
7-366-003
7-365-020
7-365-064
7-257-014
7-365-021
7-365-065
7-257-015
7-365-022
7-365-066
7-255-014
7-365-023
7-365-067
7-257-016
7-365-024
7-365-068
7-365-025
7-365-069
7-365-026
7-365-070
7-365-027
7-365-071
7-365-028
7-365-072
7-365-029
7-365-073
7-365-030
7-365-074
SECTION 2. [EFFECTIVE DATE.]
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval.
SECTION 3.
[CONFLICTS.] All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed.
Subpart B
Related Laws*
* Editors Note: Printed in this subpart are local acts and local constitutional amendments pertaining to the City of Sugar Hill. The source of each section is stated in the history note following the section. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state
71
statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Sec. 1. General homestead exemption.
Sec. 2. Tax exemption for elderly persons.
Sec. 3. Homestead exemption for low income elderly disabled persons.
Sec. 1. General homestead exemption.
(a) Each resident of the City of Sugar Hill is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Sugar Hill ad valorem taxes for any city purposes, including but not limited to taxes to retire bonded indebtedness, in the amount of $2,000.00 of the assessed value of that resident's homestead, as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40, except that land which is included in that homestead and which exceeds one acre shall not have the value thereof exempt under this section.
(b) In accordance with subsection (c) of this section, the governing authority of the Gwinnett County or its designee shall provided certificate and application forms for the exemption granted by this section and shall require with the initial application such other information as may be necessary to determine the eligibility of the owner for the exemption.
(c) The taxpayer shall be entitled to the exemption granted by this section if the taxpayer has properly claimed, and it is determined that he is entitled to, the corresponding exemption provided by Gwinnett County. The taxpayer shall cause his taxes for Gwinnett County purposes to be claimed and returned as proved in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1, but this section specifically alters O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1 for City of Sugar Hill tax purposes.
(d) After any such owner has filed the proper documents and has been allowed the exemption provided in this section, it shall not be necessary that he make application thereafter for any subsequent year; and such exemption shall continue to be allowed to such owner. It shall be the duty of any resident of the City of Sugar Hill who has claimed the homestead exemption provided for in this section to notify the governing authority of the Gwinnett County or its designee in the event he becomes ineligible for any reason to receive such homestead exemption.
(e) The exemptions granted by this section shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption from City of Sugar Hill ad valorem taxes.
(f) The exemptions granted by this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1991.
(g) The exemptions granted by this section shall not apply to or affect any county taxes for county purposes, county school district taxes for educational purposes, or state taxes.
(1991 Ga. Laws (Act No. 245), page 4675, §§ 1—7).
Sec. 2. Tax exemption for elderly persons.
72
(a) Each resident of the City of Sugar Hill who is 65 years of age or over is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Sugar Hill ad valorem taxes for any city purposes, including but not limited to taxes to retire bonded indebtedness, in the amount of $2,000.00 of the assessed value of that resident's homestead, as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40], except that land which is included in that homestead and which exceeds one acre shall not have the value thereof exempt under this Act. The value of the homestead in excess of the amount exempted by this section shall remain subject to taxation.
(b) In accordance with Section 3 of this Act [subsection (c) hereof], the governing authority of the City of Sugar Hill or its designee shall provide certificate and application forms for the exemption granted by this Act and shall require with the initial application such other information as may be necessary to determine the eligibility of the owner for the exemption.
(c) The taxpayer shall be entitled to the exemption granted by this Act if the taxpayer has properly claimed, and it is determined that he or she is entitled to, the corresponding exemption provided by Gwinnett County. The exemption granted by this Act shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1.
(d) After any such owner has filed the proper documents and has been allowed the exemption provided in this Act, it shall not be necessary that he or she make application thereafter for any subsequent year; and such exemption shall continue to be allowed to such owner. It shall be the duty of any resident of the City of Sugar Hill who has claimed the homestead exemption provided for in this Act to notify the governing authority of the City of Sugar Hill or its designee in the event such resident becomes ineligible for any reason to receive such homestead exemption.
(e) The exemption granted by this Act shall be in addition to any other homestead exemption from City of Sugar Hill ad valorem taxes.
(f) The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994.
(g) The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any county taxes for county purposes, county school district taxes for educational purposes, or state taxes. (1994 Ga. Laws (Act No 839), page 4194, §§ 1--7)
Sec. 3. Homestead exemption for low income elderly disabled persons.
Any other provisions of this Constitution to the Contrary notwithstanding, each resident of the City of Sugar Hill who is 62 years of age or over and who does not have an income from all sources, including the income of all members of the family living in the home of said residents, exceeding $5,000.00 per annum, and each resident of the City of Sugar Hill who is totally disabled and who does not have an income from all sources, including the income of all members of the family living in the home of said resident, exceeding $5,000.00 per annum, is
73
hereby granted an exception of $2,000.00 on his homestead from all ad valorem taxation by the City of Sugar Hill as long as any such resident of the City of Sugar Hill actually occupies said homestead as his residence. Provided, however, under this provision, there shall be no more than one (1) $2,000.00 exemption per homestead. The value of the homestead in excess of the above exempted amount shall remain subject to ad valorem taxation by the City of Sugar Hill. Any such resident shall not receive the benefits of such homestead exemption unless he files an affidavit with the governing authority of the City of Sugar Hill, or with a person designated by the governing authority of the City of Sugar Hill, giving his age and the amount of income which he receives and income which members of his family living in his home receive and such additional information relative to receiving the benefits of such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Sugar Hill, or the person designated by the governing authority of the City of Sugar Hill, to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Sugar Hill, or the person designated by the said governing authority, shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. The exemption provided for herein shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1974.
(1974 Ga. Laws, page 1722)
Editors Note: The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945), art. VII, § I, ¶ IV was continued in effect by 1987 Ga. Laws, page 5297.
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
This table shows the location of the sections of amendments to the Charter. The Charter is derived from the 1975 Ga. Laws page 3232, as amended, 2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 19) page 3546.
Ga. Laws Year Page Act No. Section this Charter
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE
This table shows the location of Georgia Laws found in the Related Laws.
Georgia Laws Year
Page
Act No.
Section
Related Laws Section
1974
1722
3
1991
4675
245
1
1
1994
4194
839
1
2
PART II
CODE OF ORDINANCES Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, references in Code.
Sec. 1-4. Effect of repeal or expiration of Code
74
section.
Sec. 1-5. Amending the Code.
Sec. 1-6. Supplementation of Code.
Sec. 1-7. General penalty; continuing violations.
Sec. 1-8. Severability of Code.
Sec. 1-9. Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
Sec. 1-10. Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code.
Sec. 1-11. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia," may be so cited.
(Code 1988, § 1-1)
State Law References: Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto.
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(a), (b).
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general.
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time,
75
having due regard to all the circumstances.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(5).
Charter. The term "charter" means the Charter of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, as amended. City. The term "city" means the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3).
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply.
(2) The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination.
(3) The term "either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination.
Council, city council. The term "council" or "city council" means the city council of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
County. The term "county" means Gwinnett County, Georgia.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act.
76
Following. The term "following" means next after.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(8).
Gender. Words of one gender includes all other genders.
State Law References: Gender, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(4).
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(5)
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a servant, agent or employee.
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive.
State Law References: Definition of "may," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(10).
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the city.
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(1 1).
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Number. The singular and plural number include the other, unless expressly excluded.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(6).
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(12).
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended.
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city.
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land.
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual.
State Law References: Definition of "person," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(14).
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property
77
except real property.
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(15).
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(16).
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate.
Real property. The term "real property" include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory.
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia.
Street or road. The term "street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the city, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof.
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State Law References: Tense of words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(7).
Week. The term "week" means seven days.
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(23).
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(24).
(Code 1988, §§ 1-2, 1-3)
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, references in Code.
(a) The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided,
78
shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(b) The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references, charter references, related law references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect.
(c) All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.
(Code 1988, § 1-4)
Sec. 1-4. Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section.
(a) The repeal of a Code section, ordinance or resolution, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
(b) When any ordinance which repealed a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided; provided, however, this section shall have no applicability to a declaration by a court of competent jurisdiction that same is invalid or void.
(Code 1988, § 1-5)
Sec. 1-5. Amending the Code.
(a) All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or as omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as the Code and subsequent ordinances omitted are readopted as a new Code by the council.
(b) Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by specific reference to the
79
section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ______________ of The Code of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, is hereby amended by deleting the following words from said section, to wit: "___________" and by substituting the following words therefore, to wit:
"____________". (The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired.)
(c) In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used. "The Code of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or subsection or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section shall read as follows... . " (The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired.)
(d) All sections, chapters or provisions sought to be revealed must be specifically repealed by section, chapter or provision number, as the case may be.
(Code 1988, § 1-6)
Sec. 1-6. Supplementation of Code.
(a) Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete, or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
80
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections to " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
(5) Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code.
(d) In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Sec. 1-7. General penalty; continuing violations.
(a) In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means:
(1) Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance;
(2) Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or
(3) Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(b) In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is to be provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee.
(c) Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense.
(d) The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise or other administrative sanctions.
81
(e) Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief.
(Code 1988, § 1-8)
State Law References: Limitation on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-25-6(a)(2).
Sec. 1-8. Severability of Code.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in
Sec. 1-9. Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of the Code of the city, as amended, and ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-10. Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code.
(a) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.
(b) The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.
Sec. 1-11. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any of the following ordinances or portions of ordinances, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code:
(1) Amending the City Charter.
(2) Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness.
(3) Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement.
82
(4) Granting any right or franchise.
(5) Making or approving any appropriation or budget.
(6) Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code.
(7) Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan.
(8) Providing for development regulations.
(9) Providing for buffer, landscape or tree regulations.
(10) Levying or imposing any special assessment.
(11) Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley.
(12) Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision.
(13) Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes or fees in lieu of taxes not codified in this Code.
(14) Rezoning property or amending the zoning map or otherwise pertaining to zoning.
(15) Adopting or amending the 2000 Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
(16) That is temporary, although general in effect.
(17) That is special, although permanent in effect.
(18) The purpose of which has been accomplished.
Chapter 2 ADMINISTRATION*
* State Law References: Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq.
Article I. In General Sec. 2-1. Obstructing, abusing, failing to obey officials.
Sec. 2-2. Office hours.
Sec. 2-3. Public records--Availability.
Sec. 2-4. Same --Examination; copies.
Sec. 2-5. Check signature policy; use of credit cards.
Sec. 2-6. Prohibited contracts.
83
Sec. 2-7. In-service training of employees.
Secs. 2-8--2-30. Reserved.
Article II. Mayor and Council
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2-31. Election; terms.
Sec. 2-32. Qualification for office.
Sec. 2-33. Administrative resolutions.
Sec. 2-34. Giving directions to employees who are subject to appointment and removal by city manager.
Secs. 2-35--2-65. Reserved.
Division 2. Meetings Sec. 2-66. Times; open to public.
Sec. 2-67. Notice of special meetings.
Sec. 2-68. Duty to attend.
Sec. 2-69. Robert's Rules of Order.
Sec. 2-70. Presiding officer.
Sec. 2-71. Agenda.
Sec. 2-72. Minutes.
Sec. 2-73. Presentation of matters for consideration.
Sec. 2-74. Presentation and enactment of ordinances.
Sec. 2-75. Questions of order, appeals.
Sec. 2-76. Elections.
Secs. 2-77--2-110. Reserved.
Article III. Officers and Employees
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2-111. Oath of office described.
Secs. 2-112--2-145. Reserved.
Division 2. City Clerk Sec. 2-146. Term of office; removal.
Sec. 2-147. Powers and duties.
Secs. 2-148--2-180. Reserved.
Sec. 2-181. Powers and duties.
Sec. 2-182. Authority to sell or convey parcel of city owned property.
Sec. 2-183. Removal from office.
Secs. 2-184--2-205. Reserved.
Division 4. City Attorney Sec. 2-206. Qualifications and appointment.
Sec. 2-207. Oath.
Sec. 2-208. Powers and duties.
Sec. 2-209. Compensation.
Secs. 2-210--2-230. Reserved.
Division 5. Code of Ethics Sec. 2-23 1. Purpose of division.
Sec. 2-232. Scope of persons covered.
Sec. 2-233. Definitions.
Sec. 2-234. Standards of conduct.
Sec. 2-235. Prohibition of conflict of interest.
Sec. 2-236. Exemptions.
84
Sec. 2-237. Violations of division; penalty.
Secs. 2-238--2-270. Reserved.
Article IV. Boards and Commissions
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2-271. Conflict of interest policy for members of boards, commissions and authorities.
Secs. 2-272--2-295. Reserved.
Division 2. Recreation Board Sec. 2-296. Composition, appointment and tenure.
Sec. 2-297. Vacancies.
Sec. 2-298. Compensation.
Sec. 2-299. Officers; rules of procedure.
Sec. 2-300. Incorporation of state law.
Sec. 2-301. Powers and duties.
Sec. 2-302. Staffing, contracts and expenditures.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. Obstructing, abusing, failing to obey officials.
No person shall in any manner oppose or obstruct by acts or menace any officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his duties, or strike, assault, molest or abuse said officer or employee, and no person shall refuse and fail to obey an order or instruction of such officer or employee.
(Code 1988, § 2-1)
State Law References: Obstructing certain public officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-20-24 et seq.; assault and battery, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-20 et seq.
Sec. 2-2. Office hours.
All city offices shall be open between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays and shall be closed on Saturday, Sunday, and on such legal holidays as are determined by the council to be holidays for the city.
(Code 1988, § 2-2)
Sec. 2-3. Public records --Availability.
All city records, except those which by order of a court of competent jurisdiction or by provisions of state or federal law are privileged or prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by any member of the public during regular office offices as set forth in this Code, and such inspections and copying shall be in accordance
85
with the provisions of state law relating to public records.
State Law References: Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.
Sec. 2-4. Same--Examination; copies.
(a) Rules for copying; request forms. Any person may examine in the clerk's office, or in a place specifically designated by the clerk for such examination, any paper or document which is a part of the public records of the city, and may copy same. The clerk may impose such reasonable rules as may be required from time to time in order to assure the preservation and safety of original documents and papers. The clerk may adopt a reasonable form to be used and require its usage for requests for examination and copying of public records. Provided, however, that nothing shall prevent the reasonable access by members of the public to records required by law to be available to the public.
(b) Time limit. Any person may examine and obtain copies of the public records of the city in accordance with the terms of the provisions of state law regarding inspections and copying of public records. If the cumulative number of pages desired by a person to be copied during any one day exceeds five, the clerk shall not be required to make the copies while the person is waiting, but may make such copies within two working days after the request is received. If the clerk cannot reasonably make the copies while the person is waiting because more than five pages have been so requested, because of equipment failure during the day within which the request is received, because of a reasonable doubt by the clerk as to whether the document requested is a public record, or for any other substantive reason, at the request of the person desiring the copies, the clerk shall mail the copies to such person after they have been made, at no additional cost for postage. Provided, however, that nothing herein shall require the city or the clerk to make any photo or machine copies of any papers or documents nor to permit the same to be done where the city does not have equipment available which is operative and capable of making such copies or where the copying of an original paper or document with a machine might, in the opinion of the clerk, damage the original, nor shall the city be required to permit an original paper or document to be taken from the immediate presence of the clerk, deputy clerk or some other person designated by the clerk for such purpose. The clerk may adopt a reasonable form to be used and required its usage to make copies of public records.
(c) Waiver of copying fees. Copying fees shall be waived when the requester is acting in capacity of a council or board member and having requested records related to the business of that board, authority, commission, or council for which the requester is a member. This waiver shall not be valid for requests of copies relative to other boards, authorities, commissions, or city council for which the requester is not a duty elected or appointed member in good standing.
(Code 1988, § 2-4; Ord. of 4-12-1999)
86
State Law References: Copies of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71.
Sec. 2-5. Check signature policy; use of credit cards.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism to facilitate an orderly systematic process for check signatures.
(b) Objective. The objective of this section is to place total responsibility upon city manager for enforcement and implementation of check signature policy.
(c) Guidelines.
(1) All checks require two signatures.
(2) The mayor and city manager are responsible for check signatures when both officials are available.
(3) The city manager's signature is required on all checks except in the absence of the city manager when a check is required to complete a transaction.
(4) Upon absence, the city manager shall designate the city clerk to sign checks with the mayor. Should the mayor or city clerk be absent, the mayor pro tem's signature is required if available. Should the mayor and city clerk be absent, one of the following staff members shall sign checks with the mayor pro tem:
a. Deputy clerk;
b. City accountant;
c. Personnel officer.
Upon the city manager's return, a copy of all checks signed shall be submitted to the city manager.
(5) During the mayor's absence, the city manager and city clerk shall sign checks. If the city clerk is absent, the city manager and mayor pro tem, if available, shall sign checks.
(d) Credit cards. All sums due the city including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees, permit fees and registration fees, may be paid by the use of credit cards. The city manager shall establish the procedures for acceptance of credit card payments for amounts due the city. The city manager is authorized to enter into agreements with credit card issuers to facilitate the acceptance of credit card
87
payments by the city.
(Code 1988, § 2-5; Ord. of 11-11-1996; Amd. of 4-2000, § 2-5)
Sec. 2-6. Prohibited contracts.
(a) Prohibited contracts. The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a current or former member of the governing authority and/or a current or former employee or with a business in which a member of the current or former governing authority and/or a current or former employee has a substantial financial interest. For purposes of this article, a substantial financial interest is defined as an ownership interest of ten percent or more. This restriction shall apply for a period of 12 months after the member of the governing authority or employee has left his or her position with the city, but shall not apply in the case of:
(1) The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds;
(2) The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the vicinity for such loan.
(3) Contracts entered into in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6;
(4) Contracts for services which are awarded pursuant to sealed competitive bids subsequent to an advertised competitive bid process in accordance with the purchasing ordinance of the city;
(5) Contracts entered into under circumstances which constitute an emergency situation; provided that a written record explaining the emergency is prepared by the mayor and submitted to the council at its next regular meeting and thereafter kept on file;
(6) The purchasing or contracting with a business at which a current or former official and/or a current or former employee is an employee, provided that official and/or employee has no substantial financial interest or proprietary position with the business;
(7) When the city had a contract with such a person or business prior to the member and/or employee leaving office and that person did not influence the city to enter that contract in anticipation of personal gain;
(8) The business received the contract for having the lowest and best bid
88
pursuant to the purchasing procedures established by the city and the person did not represent the business in its discussions with or submissions to the mayor and council.
(b) Restrictions for current or former members and/or current or former employees of governing authority. No person who is a current member of the governing authority of the city and/or employee of the city or who has been a member of the governing authority and/or employee of the city within the past 12-month period shall attempt to influence the city to award a contract or take any official action which would result in personal financial gain for the person or any individual or business with whom the person has a substantial financial interest.
(c) Use of property or services. No current or former official and/or current or former employee shall request, use or permit the use of any city-owned or city-supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor or service for himself or any other person or private entity; provided, however, that no current or former official and/or employee is prohibited from requesting, using, or permitting the use of any city-owned or city-supported property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor, or service which as a matter of city policy is made available to the public at large or which is provided as a matter of stated public policy for the use of current or former officials and/or current or former employees in the conduct of official city business.
(Code 1988, § 2-6; Ord. of 2-12-1996)
Sec. 2-7. In-service training of employees.
Each department shall:
(1) Provide an employee with a copy of his job description as written by the personnel office.
(2) During each job evaluation, review job description with employee.
(3) Department heads or supervisors shall have at least one day of in-service training per month with employees on the above procedures.
(4) Department heads or supervisor shall have at least one day of safety training per month with employees in order to address specific areas which effect the safety of his department. This training will not replace the training required by the safety committee which is given by the city manager’s administrative assistant.
(5) The drug enforcement officer shall present training sessions on a regular basis in order for the city to receive a drug free work place status from G.M.A.
89
(6) Attendance records will be kept of each training session for job procedures, safety meetings, and substance abuse.
(7) Certificates of attendance will be issued and placed in employee personnel files after each day of in-service training.
(Code 1988, § 2-7; Ord. of 11-11-1996)
Sec. 2-8. Zoning related applications and public hearings.
The Department of Planning and Zoning shall establish a deadline by which applications for Annexation, Rezoning, Special Use Permits, Change of Zoning Conditions, or Variances shall be submitted to and received by the Department. The Department shall not accept any such applications unless they are complete and satisfy all requirements placed on such applications by state law or city ordinance. If an applicant amends their application within one week of the scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission or the Mayor and Council, the application shall be tabled until the next available agenda. The Department shall place the first six (6) of such applications submitted and accepted by the Department on the agenda of the Planning Commission and Mayor and Council in the order in which such applications were accepted. Once six (6) such applications have been accepted and placed on the agenda of a Planning Commission meeting and Mayor and Council meeting, any other applications submitted and accepted will be placed on the next available agenda.
Secs. 2-9--2-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. MAYOR AND COUNCIL
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-31. Election; terms.
(a) There shall be a municipal election biennially in the odd years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. The official terms of the mayor and council members shall be four years so as to comply with state law.
(b) On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2005 and every four years thereafter, the successors to the position of mayor and such two council members who hold seats 1 and 2 (the seat currently held by Nick Thompson shall be post 1; the seat currently held by Ron Johnson shall be post 2) shall serve terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the day of the first organizational meeting in January following their election.
(c) On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2003 and every four years thereafter, the successors to the position of such three
90
council members who hold seats 3, 4, and 5 (the seat currently held by Steve Edwards shall be post 3; the seat currently held by Meg Avery shall be post 4; the seat currently held by Kim Hall shall be post 5) shall be elected and shall serve terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the day of the first organizational meeting in January following their election.
State Law References: Elections generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.
Sec. 2-32. Qualification for office.
Any person whose principal place of residence is within the corporate limits of the city and who is both a qualified voter of the city and at least 18 years of age at the time of election shall be eligible for the office of mayor or councilperson. Should any elected official cease to maintain the principal place of residence of such official within the city during the term of office of such official, such office shall thereby become vacant. (Code 1988, § 2-22)
State Law References: Qualifications for electors, O.C.G.A. § 2 1-2-216.
Sec. 2-33. Administrative resolutions.
Matters purely administrative in nature not constituting an ordinance that affects the welfare of the city as a whole, such as appointment of persons to serve on temporary or permanent committees or boards, may be done by the passage of an administrative resolution which can be moved, seconded and passed at the meeting of the council at which meeting it is introduced. Such a resolution shall become effective at the time after its adoption as is set forth therein or, if no later time is set forth in it, immediately following its adoption. A veto by the mayor of an administrative resolution must be made immediately following and at the same meeting of its adoption. The council may override such a veto in the same manner as it would the veto of an ordinance.
(Code 1988, § 2-25)
Sec. 2-34. Giving directions to employees who are subject to appointment and removal by city manager.
Except for inquiry and investigation, the mayor and council shall deal with city employees who are subject to appointment and removal by the city manager solely through the city manager and shall not give orders or directions to any such employee, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. (Code 1988, § 2-26)
Secs. 2-35--2-65. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
MEETINGS
Sec. 2-66. Times; open to public.
91
The council shall hold its regular work session meeting on the first Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the council. The council shall hold its regular council meeting on the second Monday of each month at 7:30 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the council. The Mayor may convene the council for a special meeting whenever, in the opinion of the mayor or at least two council members, business requires a special meeting. All meetings of the council shall be open to the public unless closed in accordance with the provisions of state law.
Amend. June, 2009.
92
Sec. 2-67. Notice of special meetings.
Special meetings of the city council shall be called in accordance with the provisions of the city Charter and the applicable laws of the state. The person taking the minutes shall record in the minutes of the meeting the names of the persons attending, the manner by which notice was given and shall attach a copy of the written notice to the minutes, and the date and time of giving of notice to each of the mayor and councilpersons. If an objection is made as to any aspect of the notice of the meeting, there shall be noted in the minutes the nature of the objection and the person making it.
(Code 1988, § 2-42)
State Law References: Notice of special meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d).
Sec. 2-68. Duty to attend.
It shall be the duty of each member of the council to attend each meeting of the council, unless such member is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance.
(Code 1988, § 2-43)
Sec. 2-69. Robert's Rules of Order.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, 10th Edition shall govern the conduct of council meetings.
(Code 1988, § 2-44)
Sec. 2-70. Presiding officer.
(a) Mayor, mayor pro tem. The mayor shall preside at all regular and special meetings of the council. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall preside. The person presiding shall have no vote on matters before the council for consideration except in the case of a tie vote, in which case the deciding vote may be cast by the presiding person.
(b) Special appointments. The presiding officer may, with the consent of a majority of the councilpersons and voting, appoint a person who is an elected official of the city to preside for a portion or all of any meeting of the council. (As an example of such a special appointment, but without in anyway binding the presiding officer to make such appointment, at any time the presiding officer may appoint the chairman of the planning commission to preside during a public hearing before the council on a matter involving the zoning ordinance, or may appoint the city manager to preside during consideration of an administrative matter.) Any such temporary presiding officer shall have no vote.
(c) Commencement of meetings. The presiding officer shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special, or called meeting, and shall immediately call the council to order.
(Code 1988, §§ 2-45, 2-46)
Sec. 2-71. Agenda.
93
(a) Routine. Each meeting of the council shall follow in substantial form the agenda set forth herein:
(1) Call to order;
(2) Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag of the United States of America;
(3) Invocation;
(4) Approval of the agenda;
(5) Approval of minutes immediately preceding regular council meeting and of any intervening special meetings;
(6) Reports of the Council;
a. City Attorney’s report
b. Council Member’s reports
c. Mayor’s report
d. City Clerk’s report
e. City Manager’s report
(7) Consent Agenda
(8) Old Business
(9) Citizen and guests comments
(10) New Business
(11) Executive session on matters allowed by law, if necessary
(12) Public action on any executive session matters
(13) Adjournment
(Amd. of 6-2002, § 2-49, Amd. Of 2-24-05); Amend. June, 2009
State Law References: Agenda, O.C.G.A. tit. 50.
(b) Modification. The presiding officer may, with the consent of a majority of the councilpersons present, deviate from the established agenda in the following respects:
(1) By waiving the reading of the minutes of the prior meetings;
(2) By changing the order of the established agenda items; and/or
(3) As to special meetings only, by deleting all agenda items expect item (a)(1), the matter for which the special meeting was called, and item (a)(13).
(c) Preparation. The City Clerk or her designee shall prepare a written agenda by 12:00 Noon on the Friday immediately preceding the first Monday and the Friday immediately preceding the second Monday of each month. The agenda shall follow, in substantial form, the routine set forth in subsection (a) of this section, and shall include all matters known that will be considered by the mayor and council at their regularly scheduled meeting on the following Monday. The mayor, city manager, city clerk, city attorney or council member desiring to present any matter to the council for its consideration at a regular meeting shall so advise the clerk by at least 12:00 noon on the Friday immediately preceding the first or second Monday of each month so as to allow the clerk to include said items on the agenda. Any person or persons other than those listed above desiring to present any matter to the council for its consideration may only do so with the consent of the mayor or at least one council member, who shall notify the clerk to include the item on the agenda. If an
94
item is to appear on the agenda for the regularly scheduled council meeting on the second Monday of the month and it is not required to be discussed or is not subject to a public hearing or public comment, the item may be placed on a consent agenda with unanimous approval of the mayor and council. If an item is placed on the consent agenda, the city clerk shall include a brief description of the item on the agenda. Any items placed on the consent agenda may be removed at the request of any council member or the mayor. If an item is removed from the consent agenda, it shall be moved to the end of the Old Business or New Business section of the agenda, as appropriate. No matter will be considered by the mayor and council at a meeting which is not on the published written agenda, unless the change to the agenda is approved by unanimous consent of the council members present at the meeting. After the agenda is finalized, the city clerk shall make the agenda and all pertinent papers and the facts available to the mayor and council and the general public in accordance with state law and city policy. Amend. June, 2009
(d) Posting. After the written agenda has been prepared, it shall be provided to each council member, the mayor, the city manager, and the city attorney. Additionally, the agenda shall be posted on the public information board adjacent to the entrance to City Hall and shall remain there throughout the meeting. A sufficient number of copies of the agenda shall be available near the entrance to the city council meeting room and the agenda shall be available to the general public and shall remain available throughout the meeting. Amend. June, 2009
Sec. 2-72. Minutes.
The clerk, a deputy clerk, or some other person designated by the clerk in the absence of the clerk or deputy clerk, shall attend each council meeting, shall accurately record the subject of each matter introduced for consideration by the council, shall note the name of the person seconding same, the names of each person moving and seconding any matter in connection with each such ordinance or resolution, and the number of "ayes" and "nays" for each ballot taken. The minutes of all public meetings shall be kept on record and shall be available for inspection and copying as provided by state law regarding public records. Minutes of meetings properly closed to the public shall be maintained as required by state law.
(Code 1988, § 2-50)
State Law References: Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.
Sec. 2-73. Presentation of matters for consideration.
(a) Public participation. Attendance at council meetings by the public is encouraged. Participation of persons at council meeting shall be in the discretion of the presiding officer; provided, however, that no person shall be denied any constitutional rights including those rights relating to free speech and public assembly.
(b) Rules for getting a specific matter considered at a meeting. Any person other than the mayor, city manager, city clerk, city attorney or council member desiring a specific matter to be considered by the council at a regular or special meeting of the council shall: Amend. June, 2009
95
(1) Under the provisions of and within the time specified by section 2-71(c) above, submit to the clerk the matter sought to be placed on the agenda. The clerk shall notify the mayor and council of the matter requested to be placed on the agenda. The matter will only be placed on the agenda if approved by the mayor or at least one councilperson. The city clerk shall notify said person whether the matter has secured approval of the mayor or a councilperson or if the matter has failed to secure the approval of the mayor or a councilperson; and
(2) If the matter has been approved to be placed on the agenda, the person submitting the matter shall advise the clerk at such time of the name of the person who shall be speaking as a proponent of the matter, the approximate number of persons anticipated to attend the meeting for the express purpose of supporting or opposing the matter, and the approximate length of time the person will wish to have to present the matter to the council.
(c) Number of persons to speak as proponents and opponents; exception. On any matter other than public hearings on zoning matters or in which state law requires otherwise, no more than three persons, other than councilpersons, shall be permitted to speak as proponents for, or the same number as opponents of any matter before the council for consideration, and no more than 15 minutes may be taken for the support or opposition of each such matter. Provided, however, the presiding officer, with the consent of the council, may reduce or increase the number of persons speaking for or against a particular matter and the time allocated for same. Each citizen speaking during citizen's and guest's comments shall limit their remarks to three minutes. (Amd. of 6- 2002, § 2-51)
Sec. 2-74. Presentation and enactment of ordinances.
(a) Only a member of the mayor and council, the city manager, the city clerk or the city attorney may introduce an ordinance. Amen. June, 2009
(b) Each proposed ordinance shall be in writing.
(c) After adoption each ordinance shall be promptly presented to the mayor for approval. (Code 1988, § 2-52; Amd. of 6-2002, § 2-52)
Sec. 2-75. Questions of order, appeals.
The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any councilperson who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the council in the manner provided by Robert's Rules of Order for appealing from decisions of presiding officers.
(Code 1988, § 2-53)
Sec. 2-76. Elections.
All elections by the council shall be by ballot, and a majority vote of the whole
96
council shall be necessary to an election.
(Code 1988, § 2-54)
Sec. 2-77. Decorum of Meetings.
In order to encourage, promote and ensure lawful, orderly and efficient meetings of the Mayor and Council of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
The Council of the City of Sugar Hill hereby ordains:
Section 1. It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to willfully or knowingly.
(a) Enter a meeting room of the Mayor and Council of the City of Sugar Hill which has been set aside or designated by the Mayor and Council of the City for a public meeting or executive session with the intent to disrupt the orderly conduct of the official business of the City;
(b) Utter loud, threatening, or abusive language, or to engage in any disorderly or disruptive conduct at any place at which the Mayor and Council of the City is meeting in a public meeting or an executive session;
(c) Disturb or interrupt any meeting of the Mayor and Council of the City.
For purposes of this Section the use of obscene or profane language; threatening, abusive, or intimidating gestures; physical violence or the threat thereof; or other loud or boisterous behavior which the presiding officers or a majority of the Council shall determine is causing a disruption of the Council meeting and a subsequent failure to comply with any lawful decision of the presiding officer or of a majority of the City Council, shall constitute a disturbance.
Section 2. Any person desiring to speak at a meeting of the Mayor and Council of the City shall obtain recognition of the Mayor or other presiding officer before speaking. Any person not a member of the Council or an employee or appointed official of the City who desires to address the Council, shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer and then shall stand, state the name and address of such person in an audible tone of voice for the record and direct the remarks to the Council as a body rather than to any particular member.
Section 3. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit any member of the City Council from speaking, subject to the rules of order, and nothing herein shall prohibit any City Officer or employee from asking for recognition and making a comment or suggestion at any time during the public City Council proceedings.
Section 4. Any person or persons violating any provision of this Ordinance may be subject to ejection from the meeting room for the remainder of the meeting, citation to the Municipal Court of the City of Sugar Hill, or any combination thereof. The presiding officer or a majority of the Council may decide, within their sound discretion, whether such person or persons should be subject to citation, whether such person or persons shall be ejected from the meeting room, or both.
97
Section 5. The City Manager is charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance. The City Manager at the direction of the presiding officer or a majority of the Council members shall enforce the provisions of this Ordinance against any person or persons violating this Ordinance. All citations issues hereunder shall be to the Municipal Court of Sugar Hill.
Section 6. Any person found guilty of a violation of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each such offense. At the discretion of the Municipal Court the use of alternative punishments rather than fines may be used. Such options may include, but are not limited to: community service, counseling, or anger management classes. It is also within the discretion of the Municipal Court to place more than one sanction upon the violator.
Section 7. Should any section of this Ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or of any part thereof that is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 8. All ordinances and parts of ordinances heretofore adopted which are in irreconcilable conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
Secs. 2-78-2-110. Reserved.
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-111. Oath of office described.
(a) All officers and employees required by Charter or some other provision of law to take an oath of office shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths:
"I, _______, do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Charter and Ordinances of the City of Sugar Hill, and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of during my continuance therein, so help me God."
(b) The officer or employee shall also take any oath required by state law, and the oath shall be filed as required by state law.
(Code 1988, § 2-81)
Secs. 2-112--2-145. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
98
CITY CLERK
Sec. 2-146. Term of office; removal.
The city clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. The city council may remove the city clerk at any time with or without cause. If the city council votes to remove the city clerk from office, the city clerk shall be notified in writing of such determination at least ten days, excluding weekends, in advance of the date of such removal, except that the city council may take any and all authority away from the city clerk, provided the city clerk receives compensation for a period of at least 30 days following such notice of removal. (Code 1988, § 2-102; Ord. of 2-19-1994; Amd. No. 9811-01, 11-11-1998)
Sec. 2-147. Powers and duties.
(1) To attend all meetings of the council in person or by designation of an alternate if approved by the council.
(2) To keep correct and full minutes of the proceedings of the council together with all ordinances and resolutions passed by it, in a properly indexed book or register kept for that purpose or cause the same to be done. The city clerk shall codify each ordinance and resolution and shall distribute and provide such codifications in accordance with provisions of state law.
(3) To receive all applications or petitions made to the city and to place them before the mayor and council at the meeting of council next succeeding the receipt thereof, or otherwise as required by the council.
(4) To issue all licenses, and keep a record thereof, and all badges and permits authorized by the council, if so requested by the council.
(5) To attend all sessions of the municipal court or, with the prior approval of the council, designate an alternate to so attend.
(6) To keep an execution docket in which shall be entered the names of all persons tried and fined by the municipal court, the nature of the offense, date of trial, amount of fine and return of the city manager or his designee thereon.
(7) To issue all summonses, processes and subpoenas to witnesses that may be necessary in the enforcement of this Code or other rules, regulations and ordinances of the council.
(8) To be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression of documents whenever required.
(9) To perform such additional duties as directed by the council by duly enacted
99
ordinance or resolution.(Code 1988, § 2-104)
Secs. 2-148-2-180. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
CITY MANAGER
Sec. 2-181. Powers and duties.
The city manager shall have the following powers and the duties:
(1) To be responsible for supervising all paid employees of the city.
a. The city manager’s authority to supervise employees under his control shall include the ability to hire, discipline or dismiss any such employee within the limits created under the city’s personnel policies. The city manager shall be responsible for supervision and control of the city clerk and all employees reporting to the city clerk; however, the city manager shall not have the authority to hire, discipline or dismiss the city clerk or to alter the duties and responsibilities of the city clerk as provided by the Charter. The city manager may make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding hiring, disciplinary and termination decisions relating to the city clerk. The city manager shall not have the ability to hire or fire any city official who holds a position created by the city Charter and directly appointed by the mayor and council, including but not limited to the municipal court judge, city attorney, city accountant, superintendent of elections and voter registrar.
b. The city manager shall have the authority to promulgate and implement personal practices and procedures necessary for the orderly administration of personnel matters within the city. The procedures shall apply to all employees under the control of the city manager. The city manager shall not promulgate or implement any personnel practices or procedures pursuant to the authority granted in this section which would have the effect of changing the status of any employee of the city to any designation other than an employee at will. In addition, no personnel practices or procedures shall be adopted by the city manager pursuant to the authority granted in this section which would limit or prohibit the mayor and city council from exercising the legal authority granted to the mayor and city council pursuant to article II, section 2.18 of the Charter of Sugar Hill, which authorizes the mayor and council to exercise ultimate final authority over the administrative affairs of the city.
(2) To prepare and present to the mayor and council in an annual report of the city’s affairs, including a summary of reports for department heads, and
100
such other reports as the council may require.
(3) To sign and execute all contracts, deeds or bonds of the city, duly authorized by the council and permitted by the city Charter or by state law.
(4) To investigate, examine or inquire into, either by him or by any employee or person designated by him for that purpose, the affairs or operation of any department of the city, including the power to employ consultants and professional counsel, when so authorized by the council, to aid in such investigations, examination or inquiries.
(5) To set aside, in his discretion, any action taken by a department head and supersede the department head in the functions of that office.
(6) To direct any department to perform the work for any other department and to authorize any department head or officer responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates serving under such person.
(7) To perform the functions of the tax collector as specified in section 3.15 of the city Charter.
(8) To see that all the laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully enforced.
(9) To attend all meetings of the council with the right to take part in all discussions, but shall not be allowed to vote.
(10) To prepare and submit to the city council, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practical, the amount allocated to each department of the city government and the reasoning for such estimated expenditures.
(11) To keep current accounts, at all times, showing the fiscal condition of the city, including the current and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand, and anticipated revenue of all municipal funds and accounts.
(12) To keep all council members fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city.
(13) To fix all salaries and compensation of the city employees lawfully employed by him, subject to guidelines as established by the council.
(14) To examine all proposed contacts to which the city may be a party, and sign on behalf of the city any contracts authorized by the council, except where the council directs that some other office or officer shall do so.
101
(15) To supervise the performance of all contracts made for work for the city and advise the council on the progress of such work.
(16) To make all purchases of supplies, material and equipment for the city and see that the same are received as contracted for; provided, that if an individual purchase in excess of $100.00 is involved, prior approval of council shall be necessary and the opportunity for competitive bids shall be given, after reasonable advertisement thereof.
(17) To conduct all sales, which the council may authorize, of personal property belonging to the city which has become unnecessary or unfit for city use.
(18) To keep a current inventory showing all real and personal property of the city and its location, value and condition.
(19) To see to the publication of all notices, ordinances, notices of public hearings or other documents required by law to be published.
(20) To prepare for the election officials, all notices, ballots and supplies necessary in connection with municipal elections.
(21) To prepare and have custody of all municipal records required by law to be kept by the city and not required to be kept by any specific officer.
(22) To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city Charter, or required by ordinance, resolution or action of the council.
(23) To prepare the agendas for the regular and special meetings of the council and to post appropriate notices of such meetings.
(24) To act as the administrator in the interpretation and enforcement of the city’s zoning ordinance.
(25) To assist all boards, authorities, commissions and committees from time to time, created by the council, as requested by the council.
(26) To serve and perform the duties of the city marshal.
(Code 1988, § 2-113; Ord. Of 2-19-1994; Ord. Of 12-13-1999(1))
Sec. 2-182. Authority to sell or convey parcel of city owned property.
(a) The city manager is hereby authorized to sell and convey parcels of property owned by the city which are narrow strips of land, so shaped or so small as to be incapable of being used independently as zoned or under applicable subdivision or other development ordinances or as streets whether this property is owned in fee by the city or has been obtained
102
by grant of easement. The property may be sold to abutting property owners where such sales and conveyances facilitate the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Such sales shall not require the use of an auction or solicitation of sealed bids, however, for any such sale each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and shall have an opportunity to present a proposal of purchase for said property to the city.
(b) Upon receipt of any such proposals from any abutting property owners, the city shall be authorized to negotiate with such property owners, and the city council shall by motion authorize the sale of any such property and establish the sales price.
(c) This division is adopted in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6(g).
(Ord. of 12-13-1999(2))
Sec. 2-183. Removal from office.
The city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. The city council may remove the city manager at any time with or without cause. If the city council votes to remove the city manager from office, the city manager shall be notified in writing of such determination at least ten days, excluding weekends, in advance of the date of such removal, except that the city council may take any and all authority away from the city manager, provided the city manager receives compensation for a period of at least 30 days following such notice of removal.
(Code 1988, § 2-114; Ord. of 2-19-1994; Ord. of 10-10-1994; Amd. No. 9811-02, 11-11-1998)
Sec. 2-184. Compensation.
The city manager shall be compensated in such amount and in such manner as the council shall from time to time authorize and approve, including such fringe benefits that may be included therein; provided, however, that the council may not reduce the compensation to a person serving as city manager, after the appointment of such person, without the prior written consent of such person.
(Code 1988, § 2-114; Ord. of 2-19-1994)
Secs. 2-185 – 2-199 Reserved
ARTICLE V
Municipal Court
Sec. 2-200.
The internal operating procedures of the Gwinnett Judicial Circuit’s Indigent Defense
103
Program as accepted by the Gwinnett County Indigent Defense Committee on January 30, 2002, and as ordered by the Superior Court of Gwinnett County on January 30, 2002, the State Court of Gwinnett County on February 7, 2002, the Magistrate Court of Gwinnett County on February 17, 2002, the Gwinnett Circuit Juvenile Court on February 7, 2002, and the Recorder’s Court of Gwinnett County on February 7, 2002, a copy of which is hereby set forth as Exhibit “A” is hereby adopted as the official policy of the City of Sugar Hill as modified herein.
Sec. 2-201.
All references to the “County” or any office of the County including, but not limited to, the Administrative Office of the Courts, in Exhibit “A” shall be considered to be references to the City of Sugar Hill. All references to the “Committee” or “Governing Committee” in Exhibit “A” with respect to the selection of panel attorneys for the Municipal Court of the City of Sugar Hill and the processing and consideration of invoices from attorneys shall be considered to be references to the Municipal Court of the City of Sugar Hill.
Sec. 2-203.
The panel of attorneys from which appointments may be made by the Municipal Court of the City of Sugar Hill may be compiled by periodically soliciting attorneys who are on the panel of qualified attorneys created by the Gwinnett County Indigent Defense Governing Committee. The Sugar Hill panel of attorneys need not be categorized as in Part X Exhibit “A”. Any attorney on the County’s panel of attorneys who is involuntarily removed for cause pursuant to Section 10.4(B) of Exhibit “A” hereto shall be ineligible for appointment by the Municipal Court of the City of Sugar Hill. Any other qualified attorney not appearing on the County’s panel of qualified attorneys may request his or her inclusion on the Sugar Hill panel and may be included on the Sugar Hill panel if found to be qualified by the Chief Municipal Court Judge. Any attorney accepting an appointment by the Municipal Court of the City of Sugar Hill shall be required to comply with the guidelines and standards applicable to panel attorneys and other appointed counsel set forth in Exhibit “A”, as modified herein.
Sec. 2-204.
Any fee or expense invoice submitted by appointed counsel shall be submitted to the Municipal Court Clerk and shall be reviewed by the Sugar Hill Municipal Court Judge who made the appointment or the Chief Judge, whose decision regarding Sugar Hill panel attorneys, payment of fees, expenses, and costs shall be final and may not be appealed except as may be provided by law.
Sec. 2-205.
To the extent that Exhibit “A” assumes a standard for determining an indigent defendant’s right to appointed counsel inconsistent with the holding of Alabama v. Shelton, it shall be the policy of the City of Sugar Hill to apply the standards of Alabama v. Shelton.
Sec. 2-206.
104
The term “appeal” as used in Section 8.2 and Section 3 of Exhibit “A” shall be construed to include a petition for certiorari to be filed in the Superior Court of Gwinnett County after a conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Sugar Hill. However, unless otherwise ordered by the Municipal Court, any appointment of counsel by the Municipal Court of Sugar Hill as terminate upon the entry of an order binding the case over to a court of record prior to any adjudication of the merits of the case by the Municipal Court.
Sec. 2-207.
The Municipal Court Clerk shall maintain a list of attorneys deemed eligible for appointment by the Chief Municipal Court Judge. The Municipal Court Clerk shall provide a form for requesting appointed counsel to any defendant in a case pending in the Municipal Court and shall forward any such form or other request for appointed counsel to the Chief Judge of the Municipal Court. If no such forms have been developed or are not available at the time a request for appointed counsel is made, the Clerk shall notify the Chief Judge of such request.
Sec. 2-208.
The Chief Judge of the Municipal Court of Sugar Hill may develop internal operating procedures and forms and other documents as may be necessary to effectuate this ordinance and/or resolution.
Sec. 2-209.
This Article shall become effective upon the date of its adoption.
DIVISION 4.
CITY ATTORNEY Sec. 2-206. Qualifications and appointment.
The city attorney shall be appointed by the council, and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. No person shall be so appointed unless he is a member in good standing of the state bar and has been actively engaged in the practice of law for at least three years preceding his appointment.
(Code 1988, § 2-121)
Sec. 2-207. Oath.
105
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the city attorney shall take the oath prescribed by this Code for city officers.
(Code 1988, § 2-122)
Sec. 2-208. Powers and duties.
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in such capacity shall:
(1) Advise the council or its committees, or any city officer, when requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of business.
(2) Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the council, any committee thereof, the city manager or the mayor, and assist in keeping the Code of the city up-do-date and properly indexed.
(3) Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to him by the council, any of its committees, by any city officer or the mayor.
(4) Prepare, when authorized by the mayor or council, all charges and complaints against, and appear in the municipal court in the prosecution of every person charged with a violation of this Code or a city ordinance or of any regulations adopted under authority of the city Charter, and see to full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city.
(5) Defend any and all suits and actions at law or equity brought against the city, unless otherwise directed by council.
(6) Keep records of the following, which records shall forever remain the property of the city;
a. All suits in which the city has or had an interest, giving the names of the parties, the nature of the action, the disposition of the case or its status, if pending, and the briefs of counsel; and
b. All written opinions prepared by the city attorney and all certificates or abstracts of title furnished by him to the city, or any department or official thereof.
(7) Render such other legal services as may be requested by the mayor or council. (Code 1988, § 2-123)
Sec. 2-209. Compensation.
The city attorney shall regularly submit to the council a bill for his services, itemizing the type of work performed for the city and the number of hours engaged in each type of work during
106
the time for which the bill was submitted.
(Code 1988, § 2-124)
Secs. 2-210--2-230. Reserved.
DIVISION 5.
CODE OF ETHICS*
* State Law References: Ethics in Government Act, O.C.G.A. § 2 1-5-1 et seq.
Sec. 2-231. Purpose of division.
(a) It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, the regulations of this division are adopted.
(b) This division has the following purposes:
(1) To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials;
(2) To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city;
(3) To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters which affect the city, and
(4) To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms.
(c) The provisions of this division shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. (Ord. of 11-13-2000, art. I)
Sec. 2-232. Scope of persons covered.
The provisions of this division shall be applicable to all members of the city council, planning and zoning commission, board of zoning appeals, all advisory commissions and committee members. (Ord. of 11-13-2000, art. II)
107
Sec. 2-233. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
City official or official, unless other expressly defined, means the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, assistant city managers, city clerk, deputy city clerks, whether such person is salaried, hired or elected, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as it may be amended from time to time. City official, unless otherwise expressly defined, includes individuals appointed by the mayor and city council to all city commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this division by the city council.
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body.
Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action.
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted.
Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of any city official.
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value.
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a council member in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions is incidental to the extent that the council member would be affected in common with the general public.
Substantial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity:
(1) The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity;
(2) Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12
108
months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or 10% of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less;
(3) The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or
(4) The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or more.
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, art. III)
Sec. 2-234. Standards of conduct.
(a) No council member or member of any board or commission shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities.
(b) No council member or member of a board or commission, in any matter before the council, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote.
(c) No council member or member of a board or commission shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or any board or commission.
(d) No council member or commissioner shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law.
(e) No council member or member of any board or commission shall enter into any contract with the city except as specifically authorized by state statutes. Any council member or member of a board or commission who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing to the city council and the city clerk.
(f) All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain.
(g) Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law.
(h) No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a city official or employee, if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair in judgment or performance of city duties.
109
(i) If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the board or commission on which he serves or to his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer.
(j) No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes,
except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public.
(k) No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large.
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, art. IV)
Sec. 2-235. Prohibition of conflict of interest.
A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity, or property in which the official or employee has a substantial interest; in addition, a city official or employee who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city of the entity. Where the interest of a city official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official or employee may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest.
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, art. V)
Sec. 2-236. Exemptions.
This Code shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency.
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, art. VI)
Sec. 2-237. Violations of division; penalty.
(a) Any persons violating any provisions of this policy are subject to:
(1) Written and oral reprimand by the council, board, commission or committee of which said violator is a member;
(2) A fine greater than $100.00 but less than $500.00 to be imposed by the council, commission, board or committee of which the violator is
110
a member;
(3) Request for resignation by the council, board, committee or commission of which the violator is a member.
(b) Each council, board, commission or committee shall have authority to establish rules and regulations to impose said penalties.
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, art. VIII)
Secs. 2-238--2-270. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-271. Conflict of interest policy for members of boards, commissions and authorities.
(a) No member of any board, commission or authority of the city shall knowingly:
(1) Engage in any business or transaction, or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties;
(2) Engage in or accept private employment, or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties;
(3) Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he is engaged without proper legal authorization; or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others;
(4) Accept any valuable gifts, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm or corporation which to his knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body of which he is a member;
(5) Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; and
(6) Vote or otherwise participate in any matter in which he has a financial
111
interest.
(b) Any member of a board, commission or authority of the city who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. Any member of a board, commission or authority of the city who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to such agency or entity.
(c) No member of a board, commission or authority of the city shall use property owned by such entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such entity.
(d) No member of a board, commission or authority of the city shall continue in such a capacity upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office.
(e) Any member of a board, commission or authority of the city who conceals a financial interest or violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in his position and such violation shall constitute cause for dismissal as contemplated by section 3.11(e) of the Charter of the city.
(f) Any member of a board, commission or authority of the city who is dismissed, as described in subsection (e) above, shall be ineligible for appointment by the city government to any board, commission or authority for a period of three years thereafter.
(Code 1988, § 2-141; Res. of 1-11-1988)
Secs. 2-272--2-295. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
RECREATION BOARD*
* State Law References: Recreation boards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5.
Sec. 2-296. Composition, appointment and tenure.
The Sugar Hill Recreation Board shall consist of five persons appointed by the mayor. Except for the initial appointments, the terms of the members shall be for five years each. The five members first appointed shall be appointed for terms of one member to expire each year.
(Code 1988, § 2-191)
Sec. 2-297. Vacancies.
Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled by the mayor, who also shall remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing.
112
(Code 1988, § 2-192)
Sec. 2-298. Compensation.
The members of the recreation board shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed at the discretion of the mayor and council for actual expenses incurred in connection with the discharge of their official duties.
(Code 1988, § 2-193)
Sec. 2-299. Officers; rules of procedure.
Immediately after their appointment, the members of the recreation board shall meet and elect one of their members president and elect a secretary treasurer from its membership or by appointment of an officer or employee of the city. The board shall adopt rules and regulations to govern its proceedings and keep a correct record thereof, which shall be a public record.
(Code 1988, § 2-194)
Sec. 2-300. Incorporation of state law.
The recreation board shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth under O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 64 (O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.).
(Code 1988, § 2-195)
Sec. 2-301. Powers and duties.
The recreation board shall establish, conduct and maintain a recreation system for the city in such a way as to employ the leisure of the people in a wholesome and constructive manner. In particular, it shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) To provide for, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, indoor recreation centers, and other recreational facilities owned or controlled by the city.
(2) To recommend the setting aside, leasing or acquisition of lands or buildings within or without the city limits for use as parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, or for other recreational purposes,
and to provide for the maintenance and improvement of such areas.
(3) To cooperate with the local school board in the establishment, conduct and maintenance of a recreation system.
(4) To submit a budget request annually to the council for approval.
(5) To submit an annual report to the council, which shall include a financial statement of money received and expended and a description of all activities sponsored by the board during the year.
113
(6) To exercise such other powers and duties as may be delegated to it from time to time by the mayor and council.
(7) To keep a permanent record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record.
(8) To hold meetings, all of which shall be open to the public. (Code 1988, § 2-196)
Sec. 2-302. Staffing, contracts and expenditures.
The recreation board may appoint such employees and staff as it deems necessary for its work and may contract with planners and other consultants for such service as it may require, provided that such appointments and contracts are approved in advance by the mayor and council. Only the mayor and council shall enter into contracts with the bureau of state planning and community affairs for planning monies or with any other state or federal agencies for project or planning matters. Any expenditures of the recreation board, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated and approved for this purpose by the mayor and council. (Code 1988, § 2-197)
Chapters 3--5
RESERVED
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; general powers of municipalities relative to alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-2, 3-3-7, 3-4-49, 3-4-50, 3-4-80 et seq., 3-5-40 et seq., 3-5-80 et seq., 3-6-40, 3-6-60, 3-7-40 et seq.
Article I.
In General
Secs. 6-1--6-20. Reserved.
Article II. Retail Sale of Malt Beverages
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6-21. On-premises consumption; consumption in public places.
Secs. 6-22--6-40. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 6-41. Required; fee; excise tax.
Sec. 6-42. Application.
Sec. 6-43. Restrictions on issuance.
Sec. 6-44. Issuance.
Sec. 6-45. Display.
Sec. 6-46. Termination and renewal.
114
Sec. 6-47. Revocation, suspension, etc.
Secs. 6-48--6-70. Reserved.
Division 3. Operational Requirements and Restrictions
Sec. 6-71. Change of location.
Sec. 6-72. Licenses nontransferable.
Sec. 6-73. Duplicate licenses.
Sec. 6-74. License required for each location.
Sec. 6-75. Separate license required for each business on premises.
Sec. 6-76. Penalties.
Sec. 6-77. Compliance with state law.
Sec. 6-78. Hours and Days of Sale.
Secs. 6-79--6-100. Reserved.
Article III. Retail Sale of Wine
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6-101. On-premises consumption; consumption in public places.
Secs. 6-102--6-135. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 6-136. Required; fee; excise tax.
Sec. 6-137. Application.
Sec. 6-138. Restrictions on issuance.
Sec. 6-139. Issuance.
Sec. 6-140. Display.
Sec. 6-141. Termination and renewal.
Sec. 6-142. Revocation, suspension, etc.
Sec. 6-143. Change of location.
Sec. 6-144. Licenses nontransferable.
Sec. 6-145. Duplicate licenses.
Sec. 6-146. License required for each location.
Sec. 6-147. Separate license required for each business on premises.
Sec. 6-148. Violations.
Sec. 6-149. Compliance with state law.
Sec. 6-150. Hours and Days of Sale.
Sec. 6-151--6-175. Reserved.
Article IV. Sale of Malt Beverages and Wine For Consumption on the Premises
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6-176. Sale of malt beverages at public golf course; authorization.
Sec. 6-177. Purpose of article.
Sec. 6-178. Definitions.
Sec. 6-179. Compliance with article required.
Sec. 6-180. Penalties; continuing violation.
Sec. 6-181--6-210. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 6-2 11. Required within the incorporated areas of the city; license a privilege.
Sec. 6-212. Separate application and separate license for each location of sale.
Sec. 6-2 13. Form of application to be prescribed by city authorities.
115
Sec. 6-2 14. Application for license permitting the sale of alcoholic malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises.
Sec. 6-215. Application; form; content; process; deposit.
Sec. 6-216. Filing of bonds by applicants for license.
Sec. 6-2 17. Investigation of applicant; report.
Sec. 6-218. Payment of taxes and other debts to the city.
Sec. 6-219. Issuance of license to persons with prior conviction prohibited; exception.
Sec. 6-220. General qualifications.
Sec. 6-221. Change in relationships and/or ownership interest.
Sec. 6-222. City clerk, members of alcoholic beverage review board prohibited from interest in license.
Sec. 6-223. Annual renewal.
Sec. 6-224. Grounds for suspension or revocation of license.
Sec. 6-225. Acceptance and consideration of application after rejection or revocation.
Sec. 6-226. False information in application.
Sec. 6-227. Restriction upon transfers.
Sec. 6-228. Application for new license in existing license location.
Sec. 6-229. Application; data; information; requirement for.
Sec. 6-230. Other licenses.
Sec. 6-23 1. Annual fees for sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises.
Sec. 6-232--6-255. Reserved.
Division 3. Alcoholic Beverage Review Board
Sec. 6-256. Established; duties.
Sec. 6-257. Composition.
Sec. 6-258. Hearings.
Sec. 6-259. Notice.
Secs. 6-260--6-280. Reserved.
Division 4. Operational Requirements and Restrictions
Sec. 6-281. Gambling on premises prohibited.
Sec. 6-282. Solicitation prohibited.
Sec. 6-283. Types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited. Sec. 6-284. "Happy hour" promotions and sales.
Sec. 6-285. Consumption dealers to buy only from licensed wholesalers; minimum legal container; sales off-premises prohibited.
Sec. 6-286. Retail consumption dealers to store inventory only on premises.
Sec. 6-287. Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages.
Sec. 6-288. Display of licenses.
Sec. 6-289. Licensees to maintain a copy of this article; employees to be familiar with its terms; responsibility of licensee for violations.
Sec. 6-290. Premises open for inspection.
Sec. 6-291. Exterior advertisement prohibited.
Sec. 6-292. Sales restricted to premises only.
Sec. 6-293. Time limit for commencement of business in licensee's establishment; forfeiture for non-use.
Sec. 6-294. Completion of proposed licensed premises.
Sec. 6-295. Automatic revocation of city license.
Sec. 6-296. Removal of signs.
Sec. 6-297. Revocation upon violation of any provision of this article.
Sec. 6-298. Regulations as to employees of licensees.
Sec. 6-299. Employment of persons with prior convictions prohibited. Sec. 6-300. Issuance of licenses limited to designated area.
Sec. 6-301. Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent.
Sec. 6-302. Distance from schools, churches,
116
residences.
Sec. 6-303. Hours of sale.
Sec. 6-304. Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions.
Sec. 6-305. Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession by persons under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages; use of false identification; proper identification; dispensing, serving, selling, or handling by persons under 21 years of age in the course of employment; seller's actions upon receiving false identification.
Sec. 6-306. Alcoholic beverages in public places.
Secs. 6-307--6-330. Reserved.
Division 5. Beer and/or Wine Wholesaler Licensing and Regulations
Sec. 6-33 1. Special provisions applicable to wholesale purchase.
Sec. 6-332. Annual fees for wholesalers.
Sec. 6-333. Excise tax: levied, amount, payment, duties of dealers and wholesalers.
Sec. 6-334. Requirements of wholesalers.
Sec. 6-335. Retailers to purchase from licensed wholesalers only.
Sec. 6-336. Regulations governing retail storage.
Sec. 6-337. Invoices.
Sec. 6-338. Revocation or suspension of license.
Sec. 6-339. Production of records.
Sec. 6-340. Penalties and enforcement.
Secs. 3-341--3-360. Reserved.
Article V. Sale of Spirituous Liquor for On-Premises Consumption
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6-361. Purpose of article.
Sec. 6-362. Definitions.
Sec. 6-363. Sale within the incorporated areas of the city; license a privilege.
Sec. 6-364. Compliance with article required. Sec. 6-365. Sale at public golf course.
Secs. 6-366--6-385. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 6-386. Separate application and separate license for each location of sale.
Sec. 6-387. Authorities of city to prescribe appropriate form.
Sec. 6-388. Application for license permitting the sale of alcoholic spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises.
Sec. 6-389. Application.
Sec. 6-390. Filing of bonds by applicants for license.
Sec. 6-391. Investigation of applicant; report.
Sec. 6-392. Payment of taxes and other debts to the city.
Sec. 6-393. Issuance of license to persons with prior conviction prohibited; exception.
Sec. 6-394. General qualifications.
Sec. 6-395. Change in relationships and/or ownership interest.
Sec. 6-396. City clerk, members of alcoholic beverage review board prohibited from interest in license.
Sec. 6-397. Annual renewal.
Sec. 6-398. Suspension or revocation; notice hearing; refund.
Sec. 6-399. Suspension of license; causes.
Sec. 6-400. Application; data; information.
Sec. 6-401. Issuance of licenses limited to designated area.
Sec. 6-402. Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent.
Sec. 6-403. Annual fees for sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises.
Secs. 6-404--6-425. Reserved.
Division 3. Operational Requirements and Restrictions
117
Sec. 6-426. Gambling on premises prohibited.
Sec. 6-427. Solicitation prohibited.
Sec. 6-428. Types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited.
Sec. 6-429. "Happy hour" promotions and sales.
Sec. 6-430. Bring your own bottle ("brown bagging") prohibited.
Sec. 6-431. Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises.
Sec. 6-432. Purchase restricted; requirements of wholesalers generally; minimum legal container; sales off-premises prohibited.
Sec. 6-433. Regulations governing retail storage.
Sec. 6-434. Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages.
Sec. 6-435. Display of licenses.
Sec. 6-436. Licensees to maintain a copy of this article; employees to be familiar with its terms; responsibility of licensee for violations.
Sec. 6-437. Exterior advertisement prohibited.
Sec. 6-438. Sales restricted to premises only.
Sec. 6-439. Acceptance and consideration of application after rejection or revocation.
Sec. 6-440. Time limit for commencement of business in licensee's establishment; forfeiture for nonuse.
Sec. 6-441. Completion of proposed licensed premises.
Sec. 6-442. Removal of signs.
Sec. 6-443. Restriction upon transfers.
Sec. 6-444. Application for new license in existing license location.
Sec. 6-445. Employees of licensees to be fingerprinted; procedure.
Sec. 6-446. Regulations as to employees of licensees.
Sec. 6-447. Employment of persons with prior convictions prohibited.
Sec. 6-448. Distance from schools, churches, residences.
Sec. 6-449. Hours of sale.
Sec. 6-450. Other licenses.
Sec. 6-451. Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions.
Sec. 6-452. Sales to underage persons, incompetents, drunkards prohibited.
Sec. 6-453. Furnishing of alcoholic beverages to underage persons.
Sec. 6-454. Purchase, consumption or possession by or for underage persons.
Sec. 6-455. Misrepresentation of age by persons under 21 years of age.
Sec. 6-456. Alcoholic beverages in public places.
Sec. 6-457. Special provisions applicable to wholesale purchase.
Sec. 6-458. Annual fees for wholesalers.
Sec. 6-459. Requirements of wholesalers.
Sec. 6-460. Retailers to purchase from licensed wholesalers only.
Sec. 6-461. Invoices.
Sec. 6-462. Production of records.
Sec. 6-463. Penalty for violation of article; enforcement.
Secs. 6-464--6-485. Reserved.
Division 4. Alcoholic Beverage Review Board
Sec. 6-487. Composition.
Sec. 6-488. Hearings.
Sec. 6-489. Notice.
Secs. 6-490—6-510. Reserved.
118
Division 5. Excise Tax
Sec. 6-511. Excise tax: levied, amount, payment, duties of dealers and wholesalers.
Sec. 6-512. Excise tax on sale of spirituous liquor by the drink.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 6-1--6-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
RETAIL SALE OF MALT BEVERAGES*
* State Law References: Malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 6-21. On-premises consumption; consumption in public places.
No person may sell malt beverages, at retail or otherwise, for consumption on the premises, including the building lot on which such premises are located, and no person may consume malt beverages in any public place within the city, except as provided in this chapter.
(Code 1988, § 3-21; Ord. of 7-11-1994)
Secs. 6-22--6-40. Reserved.
DISION 2. LICENS
119
E*
* State Law References: Local licensing of sales of alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.
Sec. 6-41. Required; fee; excise tax.
Each retail dealer of malt beverages, as same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 who does business within this city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk, and shall pay an annual license fee of $500.00 for this privilege. In addition, there is hereby set and levied on the sale of malt beverages within this city an excise tax in the amount on the basis of the sums and determinations set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 which excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by the wholesale dealer as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-881. (Code 1988, § 3-22)
Sec. 6-42. Application.
(a) Contents. Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this article shall submit an application for such license to the city clerk, which application shall conform to the requirements of chapter 18, article I of this Code and shall contain the name and home address of each shareholder owning a beneficial interest of more than 40 percent of the issued and outstanding shares, if a corporation, together with the address of the principal office and registered agent of the corporation.
(b) Recommendation of city manager. The city clerk shall forward a copy of any application for a license received under this article to the city manager within 48 hours of the time of receipt of the application. The city manager shall make a recommendation thereon, favorable or otherwise, and shall return such recommendation to the city clerk within 14 days after receiving a copy of the application.
(c) Referral to city council. If the applicant is denied the issuance of a license under the provisions of this chapter by the council, the applicant shall not be given consideration for a license at the same location for 180 days from the date of denial by the council.
(d) Publication of notice. No application for license for the sale of malt beverages within this city shall be acted upon by the council until after notice shall have been run in a meeting at which such application is to be presented and considered. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant and the location of the proposed business, and shall be run at the applicant's expense.
(e) Factors for council consideration. The council, in passing upon an initial application for a license for the retail sale of malt beverages, at the final meeting thereon, shall be guided by the following factors as to whether to grant or deny such application:
120
(1) The proximity of other establishments selling malt beverages to the proposed location.
(2) The character of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location.
(3) The proximity of churches, schools and playgrounds to the proposed location.
(4) Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons.
(5) Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom.
(6) The feelings and attitudes of the citizens residing in the area adjacent to the proposed location.
(7) The information set forth in the application.
(8) Whether any malt beverage license previously issued for such location was ever revoked for cause by the council.
(9) Whether the applicant has ever sold malt beverages illegally in the city..
(Code 1988, § 3-23; Amd. of 7-2002)
Sec. 6-43. Restrictions on issuance.
(a) No license shall be issued for the retail sale of malt beverages in accordance with this article unless the following conditions are met:
(1) The sale of malt beverages may not be done as a primary business, but can be done only as an incidental part of another existing on-going business, so that the sale of malt beverages, at retail, shall consist of not more than 20 % of the gross revenue realized from the overall operation of the business conducted from such location.
(2) Premises from which the business of retail sale of malt beverages is conducted shall contain at least 2,000 square feet of floor space including the operation of the malt beverage business and the other business to which it is incidental, and such premises shall be kept in full compliance, at all times, in a safe and sanitary condition, and in accordance with all laws and ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or
121
sale of food for human consumption.
(3) Any premises for which a license is initially issued for retail sales of malt beverages shall be no closer than a distance of 75 feet from the property line of any then-existing church, school, licensed day care facility or college. The distances in the subsection shall be measured in accordance with the definition and method set forth in Section 6-178 of this Chapter. The distance requirements in this subsection shall not be interpreted to be in conflict with the minimum distances set forth in Georgia Statutes. The distances in this s subsection shall never be less than those distances required by Georgia Statutes and in all cases in which the distances in this subsection are greater than those provided by Georgia Statutes then the distances set forth in this subsection shall control.
(b) No license shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with all minimum building codes adopted by the city.
(c) It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense any alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to the retail sale of malt beverages, from or at a drive-in, drive-thru, drive-up, or service bay, window or other facility. Further, curb service is expressly prohibited.
(Code 1988, § 3-24; Ord. of 7-9-1990; Amd. of 5-2002, Amd. of 10-9-06, Amd. of 10-18-06); Amend. March, 2011.
State Law References: Location restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 1.
Sec. 6-44. Issuance.
(a) Upon the express approval of the council, the city clerk shall issue a business license to the applicant for the retail sale of malt beverages, which license shall reflect thereon the nature of the business so authorized, and shall bear the date of issuance and the signature of the mayor and the city clerk.
(b) The granting of a license for the retail sale of malt beverages under the provisions of this article shall be deemed a privilege only, and nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in such business.
(c) If the applicant is denied the issuance of a license under the provisions of this article by the council, the applicant may not apply for a license at the same location for a period of 90 days from the date of denial by the council. If an applicant is denied the issuance of a license under the provisions of this article for a second time, then the applicant may not apply for a license at the same location for a period of 180 days from the date of denial by the council.
(Code 1988, § 3-25)
Sec. 6-45. Display.
122
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a business licensed under this article to keep such license posted in a conspicuous place on the premises used for such business at all times.
(Code 1988, § 3-26)
Sec. 6-46. Termination and renewal.
(a) Termination date. All licenses for the retail sale of malt beverages shall terminate on December 31 of each year.
(b) Renewal date. Each licensee authorized to make retail sales of malt beverages shall make a typewritten application for renewal on or before November 15 of each calendar year, which application shall contain substantially the same information as the initial application and be accompanied by all required fees.
(c) Refunds. An applicant for renewal of a license hereunder shall be entitled to a refund of fees tendered if he withdraws his application for renewal prior to final action on the same by the council.
(Code 1988, § 3-27)
Sec. 6-47. Revocation, suspension, etc.
The council, after affording the licensee notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, may, if it finds this article to have been violated by the licensee, his agent or employee, revoke such license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the council may deem necessary.
(Code 1988, § 3-28)
Secs. 6-48--6-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS
Sec. 6-71. Change of location.
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any business licensed for the retail sale of malt beverages may not be changed without the prior approval of the council, and any such change shall not, under any circumstances, be made if to do so would place the licensee in violation of any of the provisions of this article or any other ordinance or law then in effect in this city.
123
(Code 1988, § 3-29(a))
Sec. 6-72. Licenses nontransferable.
All licenses issued hereunder shall be personal to the licensee to whom issued, and may not be transferred.
(Code 1988, § 3-29(b))
Sec. 6-73. Duplicate licenses.
A duplicate license shall be issued by the city clerk to replace a previously issued license which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing of a sworn affidavit attesting to such fact and the payment of a fee of $25.00 to the city clerk.
(Code 1988, § 3-29(c))
Sec. 6-74. License required for each location.
For the purposes of this article, each branch establishment or location wherein a representative of the owner is employed and is authorized to transact business for such owner shall be deemed a separate place of business for which a separate license shall be required, and the issuance of a license to a licensee for a conduct of the business of the retail sale of malt beverages shall be restricted to the one location shown on the application, regardless of the number of locations or branches which might otherwise be operated by the licensee.
(Code 1988, § 3-29(d))
Sec. 6-75. Separate license required for each business on premises.
A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall be required to obtain a separate business license for the conduct of each such business for which a license is required, and the issuance of the license for the retail sale of malt beverages shall not authorize the licensee to operate any business from the same location without an appropriate business license for each such separate business.
(Code 1988, § 3-29(e))
Sec. 6-76. Penalties.
No person may sell malt beverages, at retail or otherwise, without having first obtained a valid license under the provisions of this article and unless such license remains valid and in effect at all times during which such person shall be conducting such business. Any person who shall violate this or any other provision of this article shall, upon conviction therefore, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, any and all of such penalties to be imposed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court or such other judicial office as shall have jurisdiction to try such case. (Code 1988, § 3-30)
Sec. 6-77. Compliance with state law.
124
All licensees for the sale of malt beverages under the provisions of this article shall, at all times, comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 3 and any violation of any provision therein shall constitute a violation of this article.
(Code 1988, § 3-31)
Section 6-78. Hours and days of sale.
(a) No retail license holder holding a license under this article shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any beer or malt beverage except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. on Sunday.
(b) No retail license holder shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any beer or malt beverage at any time in violation of state law, local ordinance or regulation, or special order of the Mayor and Council.
Amend. November, 2011.
Sec. 6-79 Growlers
(a) The sale of growlers in compliance with this article is authorized for establishments authorized to sell alcoholic beverages, excluding distilled spirits, by the package. The term "growler" means a bottle made of glass or other material customary to the industry provided that the bottle is capable of being sealed with a cap and then sealed with a plastic collar for the purpose of complying with open container laws, and further provided that the bottle does not exceed sixty-eight (68) ounces and is filled by a licensee or employee of the licensed establishment from a keg.
(b) The filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or other provisions of this chapter.
(c) Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler.
(d) Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition.
(e) Consumption on the premises is strictly prohibited. However, samples may be made available, but shall not exceed three (3) ounces in volume nor shall any one individual be offered more than four (4) samples within a twenty-four (24) hour period.
(f) Growlers may not be sold at any establishment engaged in the sale of distilled spirits.
(g) The sale of growlers shall require the payment of the annual license fee of $500.00 from the local license holder and the payment of excise taxes as required and set forth in Sec. 6-41
(h) The sale of growlers shall be exempt from the requirement found in Sec. 6-
125
43 (a)(1). Unless otherwise exempted by this section, the requirements of this article
shall apply to the sale of growlers.
August 11, 2014
6-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
RETAIL SALE OF WINE*
* State Law References: Wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-101. On-premises consumption; consumption in public places.
No person may sell wines, at retail or otherwise, for consumption on the premises, including the building lot on which such premises are located, and no person may consume wine in any public place within the city, except as provided in this chapter.
(Code 1988, § 3-41; Ord. of 7-11-1994)
Secs. 6-102--6-135. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LICENSE*
* State Law References: Local licensing of sales of alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.
Sec. 6-136. Required; fee; excise tax.
Each retail dealer of wines, as same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 who does business within this city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk and shall pay an annual license fee of $500.00 for this privilege. In addition, there is hereby set and levied on the sale of wines within this city an excise tax in the amount on the basis of the sums and determinations set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60, which excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by the wholesale dealer as set forth in said O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60.
(Code 1988, § 3-42)
Sec. 6-137. Application.
126
(a) Contents. Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this article shall submit an application for such license to the city clerk, which application shall conform to the requirements of chapter 18, article I of this Code.
(b) Recommendation of city manager. The city clerk shall forward a copy of any application for a license received under this article to the city manager within 48 hours of the time of receipt of the application. The city manager shall make a recommendation thereon, favorable or otherwise, and shall return such recommendation to the city clerk within 14 days after receiving a copy of the application.
(c) Referral to city council. Upon the receipt of the recommendation of the city manager as hereinabove provided, the city clerk shall forward such recommendation and application to the council for consideration and action at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(d) Publication of notice. No application for license for the sale of wines within this city shall be acted upon by the council until after notice shall have been run in a meeting at which such application is to be presented and considered. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant and the location of the proposed business, and shall be run at the applicant's expense.
(e) Factors for council consideration. The council, in passing upon an initial application for a license for the retail sale of wines, at the final meeting thereon, shall be guided by the following factors as to whether to grant or deny such application:
(1) The proximity of other establishments selling wines to the proposed location.
(2) The character of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location.
(3) The proximity of churches, schools and playgrounds to the proposed location.
(4) Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons.
(5) Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom.
(6) The feelings and attitudes of the citizens residing in the area adjacent to the proposed location.
(7) The information set forth in the application.
(8) Whether any wine license previously issued for such location was ever revoked for cause by the council.
127
(9) Whether the applicant has ever sold wines illegally in the city. (Code 1988, § 3-43)
Sec. 6-138. Restrictions on issuance.
(a) No license shall be issued for the retail sale of wines in accordance with this article unless the following conditions are met:
(1) The sale of wines may not be done as a primary business, but can be done only as an incidental part of another existing on-going business, so that the sale of wines, at retail, shall consist of not more than 20 percent of the gross revenue realized from the overall operation of the business conducted from such location.
(2) Premises from which the business of retail sale of wines is conducted shall contain at least 2,000 square feet of floor space including the operation of the wine business and the other business to which it is incidental, and such premises shall be kept in full compliance, at all times, in a safe and sanitary condition, and in accordance with all laws, and ordinances regulating the conditions of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption.
(3) Any premises for which a license is initially issued for retail sales of wines shall be no closer than a distance of 75 feet from the property line of any then-existing church, school, licenses day care facility or college. The distances in the subsection shall be measured in accordance with the definition and method set forth in Section 6-178 of this Chapter. The distance requirements in this subsection shall not be interpreted to be in conflict with the minimum distances set forth in Georgia Statutes. The distances in this subsection shall never be less than those distances required by Georgia Statutes and in all cases in which the distances in this subsection are greater than those provided by Georgia Statutes then the distances set forth in this subsection shall control.
(b) No license shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with all minimum standard building codes adopted by the city.
(c) It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense any alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to the retail sale of wine, from or at a drive-in, drive-thru, drive-up, or service bay, window or other facility. Further curb service is expressly prohibited.
(Code 1988, § 3-44; Ord. of 7-9-1990; Amd. of 6-2000); Amend. March, 2011
State Law References: Location restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 1.
Sec. 6-139. Issuance.
(a) Upon the express approval of the council, the city clerk shall issue a business license to the applicant for the retail sale of wines, which license shall reflect thereon the nature of
128
the business so authorized, and shall bear the date of issuance and the signature of the mayor and the city clerk.
(b) The granting of a license for the retail sale of wines under the provisions of this article shall be deemed a privilege only, and nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in such business.
(c) If the applicant is denied the issuance of a license under the provisions of this article by the council, the applicant may not apply for a license at the same location for a period of 90 days from the date of denial by the council. If an applicant is denied the issuance of a license under the provisions of this article for a second time, then the applicant may not apply for a license at the same location for a period of 180 days from the date of denial by the council.
(Code 1988, § 3-45; Amd. of 5-2002)
Sec. 6-140. Display.
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a business licensed under this article to keep such license posted in a conspicuous place on the premises used for such business at all times.
(Code 1988, § 3-46)
Sec. 6-141. Termination and renewal.
(a) Termination date. All licenses for the retail sale of wines shall terminate on the last day of December of each year.
(b) Renewal date. Each licensee authorized to make retail sales of wines shall make a typewritten application for renewal on or before November 15 of each calendar year, which application shall contain substantially the same information as the initial application and be accompanied by all required fees.
(c) Refunds. An applicant for renewal of a license hereunder shall be entitled to a refund of fees tendered if he withdraws his application for renewal prior to a final action on the same by the council. (Code 1988, § 3-47)
Sec. 6-142. Revocation, suspension, etc.
The council, after affording the licensee notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, may, if it finds this article to have been violated by the licensee, his agent or employee, revoke such license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place of licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the council may deem necessary.
(Code 1988, § 3-48)
Sec. 6-143. Change of location.
129
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any business licensed for the retail sale of wines may not be changed without the prior approval of the council, and any such change shall not, under any circumstances, be made if to do so would place the licensee in violation of any of the provisions of this article or any other ordinance or law then in effect in the city.
(Code 1988, § 3-49(a))
Sec. 6-144. Licenses nontransferable.
All licenses issued hereunder shall be personal to the licensee to whom issued, and may not be transferred.
(Code 1988, § 3-49(b))
Sec. 6-145. Duplicate licenses.
A duplicate license shall be issued by the city clerk to replace a previously issued license which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing of a sworn affidavit attesting to such fact and the payment of a fee of $25.00 to the city clerk.
(Code 1988, § 3-49(c))
Sec. 6-146. License required for each location.
For the purposes of this article, each branch establishment or location wherein a representative of the owner is employed and is authorized to transact business for such owner shall be deemed a separate place of business for which a separate license shall be required, and the issuance of a license to a licensee for a conduct of the business of the retail sale of wines shall be restricted to the one location shown on the application, regardless of the number of locations or branches which might otherwise be operated by the licensee.(Code 1988, § 3-49(d))
Sec. 6-147. Separate license required for each business on premises.
A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall be required to obtain a separate business license for the conduct of each such business for which a license is required, and the issuance of the license for the retail sale of wines shall not authorize the licensee to operate any business from the same location without an appropriate business license for each such separate business.
(Code 1988, § 3-49(e))
Sec. 6-148. Violations.
No person may sell wines, at retail or otherwise, without having first obtained a valid license under the provisions of this article unless such license remains valid and in effect at all times during which such person shall be conducting such business. Any person who shall violate this or any other provision of this article shall, upon conviction therefore, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, any and all of such penalties to be imposed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court or such other judicial officer as shall have jurisdiction to try such case.
130
(Code 1988, § 3-50)
Sec. 6-149. Compliance with state law.
All licenses for the sale of wines under the provisions of this article shall, at all times, comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 3 (O.C.G.A. § 3-101 et seq.) and any violation of any provision therein shall constitute a violation of this article.
(Code 1988, § 3-51)
Section 6-150. Hours and days of sale.
(a) No retail license holder holding a license under this article shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any wine except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. on Sunday.
(b)No retail license holder shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any wine at any time in violation of state law, local ordinance or regulation, or special order of the Mayor and Council.
Amend. November, 2011.
Sec. 6-151. Ancillary wine tasting license.
(a) The holder of a license for the retail sale of wine (package only) from the City and a valid current wine license from the State shall be eligible for an ancillary wine tasting license for only the location stated on its license to provide samples of wine offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section.
(b) Wine samples shall be offered only as part of a wine tasting conducted for instructional or educational purposes.
(c) The holder of an ancillary wine tasting license may conduct instructional or educational sampling classes for a period that does not exceed two (2) consecutive hours. The license holder shall be permitted to conduct instructional or educational sampling classes not to exceed six (6) times per calendar year.
(d) Samples of wine shall not exceed two (2) ounces and no customer shall be permitted to consume more than eight (8) ounces in any two (2) hour period.
(e) Wine tasting is permitted only within an enclosed area of the premises with a single means of ingress and egress for that area. The applicant’s proposed measures to segregate the wine tasting area and proposed staffing and oversight plans for conducting a wine tasting shall be submitted to the City Clerk for review and approval.
(f) Wine bottles shall be opened only by the licensee or an employee, and samples shall be poured only by the licensee or an employee.
131
(g) No containers of wine that have been opened shall be removed from the licensed premises.
(h) All wines utilized for tasting purposes shall be obtained from a licensed retail or wholesale dealer.
(i) Wine tastings shall comply with all laws and regulations pertaining to the distribution and sale of alcoholic beverages in the State and City.
(j) The annual fee for an ancillary wine tasting license shall be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), which may be revised from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city council.
June, 2012
Secs. 6-152 – 6-175. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
SALE OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES*
* State Law References: Malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-176. Sale of malt beverages at public golf course; authorization.
Notwithstanding any provisions set forth in this chapter to the contrary, the city or its authorized representative shall be authorized to sell at retail malt beverages by the drink as part of the offering of food and drink for retail sale incident to the operation of the public golf course owned and operated by the city. The city or its authorized representative shall comply with all applicable state laws regarding the sale of retail malt beverages by the drink at the public golf course.
(Code 1988, § 3-52; Ord. of 5-9-1994)
Sec. 6-177. Purpose of article.
This article has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control for the licensing and sales of wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises; to protect and preserve
schools and churches; to give effect to existing land use; and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar
132
suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining the stability of neighborhoods and property values; and to protect against the evils of concentration of the businesses serving malt beverages and wine in one family and/or in one corporation and to prevent undesirable persons in engaging in or having any interest in the sale of alcoholic beverages.
(Code 1988, § 3-59; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-178. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Adequate parking means that the parking furnished complies with the requirements of the city's zoning ordinance.
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, spirituous liquors as defined herein, distilled spirit, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine.
Art shop is a retail business devoted exclusively to providing art education that is limited to instruction in painting, sculpture and similar crafts; or to selling and displaying portraits, paintings, sculptures, art supplies and similar art work and crafts. An art shop shall not allow activities that would cause the business to be an "adult entertainment establishment" as defined in chapter 18, article VIII of this Code.
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
Brewpub is a restaurant in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed subject to state law barrel production limitations for retail consumption on the premises and sold solely in draft form.
Business area means any area which is correspondingly zoned in accordance with the city's zoning ordinance.
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. Clerk means the person holding the official title of clerk for the city.
College means only such state, county, city, church, or other colleges as teach the subjects
133
commonly taught in the common colleges of the state and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught.
Distance means the wall of the structure where alcohol is sold to the closest property line of the nearest church, school, daycare facility or college. (Should said business that sell alcohol be part of a larger building, the measurement shall be from the wall of the business where alcohol is sold, as if it were the only business in the building). Distance shall be measured in a straight line along the most direct and shortest possible route regardless any obstacles that may be present.
Distilled spirits means and includes any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines.
Event facility means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where special events including, but not limited to, weddings, wedding receptions, private parties and similar events are held and which provides meals or food services in connection with such events. Any such facility shall be equipped with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining facilities and shall have a seating capacity of at least fifty (50) people. The event facility shall be capable of preparing, cooking and serving meals and other food products associated with its special events on site. Any such establishment shall derive at least seventy-five (75) percent of its total annual gross sales from rental for special events and the service of meal and food products in connection with such special events. The revenues received from alcohol sales shall never exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total annual gross sales for any such facility. Any such facility open to the public for the service of at least one (1) meal per day for three (3) or more days per week shall be considered a restaurant and not an event facility.
Amend. April, 2011.
Family means and includes any person related to the holder of a license issued under the provisions of this article within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to the law of the state.
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy.
Hotel shall mean a building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge restaurant in their privileges [premises], and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel thereunder.
License means the authorization by the appropriate government officials of the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages.
134
Licensee means a person or persons, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under the terms of this article.
Liter means metric measurement currently used by the United States.
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in hotels as defined herein with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a capacity of at least 50 persons.
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporations, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public.
Premises shall mean the definite closed or apportioned- in locality whether a room, shop or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold.
Private residence means a house or dwelling where not less than one or more than three families customarily reside and shall not include an apartment house having facilities for housing four or more families and any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of any application hereunder.
Restaurant means public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity of at least 50 people, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incident thereto. The business shall derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared food or meals.
Retail sales means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public.
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other subjects are taught.
Wholesaler means any person, firm or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale, any alcoholic beverages as defined herein.
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes,
135
combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section.
(Code 1988, § 3-62; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-179. Compliance with article required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within the city without having first complied with the provisions of this article. (Code 1988, § 3-64; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-180. Penalties; continuing violation.
Except as otherwise stated in this article, any person who violates any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day the violation continues constitutes a separate offense. (Code 1988, § 3-60; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Secs. 6-181--6-210. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LICENSE*
* State Law References: Local licensing of sales of alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.
Sec. 6-211. Required within the incorporated areas of the city; license a privilege.
(a) Malt beverages and wine may be sold within the incorporated areas of the city under a license granted by the appropriate government officials as governed by the terms and conditions hereafter provided.
(b) All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry to the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the ordinances of the city and state law.
(c) All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words:
"THIS LICENSE IS A MERE PRIVILEGE SUBJECT TO BEING REVOKED AND ANNULLED, AND IS SUBJECT TO ANY FUTURE ORDINANCES WHICH MAY BE ENACTED"
(Code 1988, § 3-61; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-212. Separate application and separate license for each location of sale.
136
Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses must be issued except as hereinafter set forth.
(Code 1988, § 3-65; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-213. Form of application to be prescribed by city authorities.
All persons, firms or corporations desiring to sell malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises within the city shall make application on the forms prescribed by the appropriate authorities of the city and must follow the procedures applicable to that particular license, as set forth in this article. (Code 1988, § 3-66; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-214. Application for license permitting the sale of alcoholic malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises.
(a) No malt beverages or wine shall be sold for consumption on the premises except under a license granted by the clerk, as provided herein.
(b) Only malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises shall be authorized or licensed under this article.
(Code 1988, § 3-67; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-215. Application; form; content; process; deposit.
(a) All persons desiring to engage in the sale of malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises shall make written application to the clerk for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and provided by the clerk. Such application shall state and/or contain the name and address of the applicant; a plat of the place where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of all partners, whether general or limited; if a corporation, the name of the top three officers and all stockholders holding more than ten percent of the common stock; the names of all individuals other than stockholders and partners who will have an economic interest in the license if issued; and such other appropriate information as may be required by this article or by the clerk, and shall be sworn to by the applicant before filing.
(b) No license hereunder shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. Each applicant for a license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the proposed applicant is a franchise, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with the ordinances of the city; regulations of the state revenue commissioner; the laws of the state; and all other pertinent laws. The proposed building shall
137
also be subject to final inspection and approval when finished by the building inspector. Each building in which the business is to be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. All premises for which a license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein.
(c) Each applicant shall, upon request by the clerk, submit a survey by a registered land surveyor showing compliance with all distance requirements contained herein.
(d) In addition to the completion and submission of the application form as required by this article, such applicant shall attach thereto a completed application form with all attachments and requirements for a state license.
(e) Upon filing of the application with the clerk, the applicant shall deposit in cash or by certified check a processing fee of $250.00 to cover the expense of investigation and processing the application which fee shall not be refundable.
(f) Upon approval, in accordance with the terms of this article of an application for license, the license fee shall be paid by certified check to the clerk prior to the issuance of a license within ten days after approval. The amount of the license fee is listed in section 6-331.
(g) In the event the applicant is denied a license by the state, the license fee shall be refunded. (Code 1988, § 3-68; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-216. Filing of bonds by applicants for license.
(a) All applicants for licenses permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises shall file with the clerk, along with each application, a bond:
(1) Conditioned to pay all sums which may become due by the applicant to the city as taxes, license fees or other changes imposed by this article for the sale of beer and wine; and
(2) Conditioned to pay all penalties which may be imposed upon the applicant for failure to comply with the laws, ordinances and rules and regulations pertaining to alcoholic beverages.
(b) The surety for the bond shall be a surety company licensed to do business in this state and the bond shall be in such form as is acceptable to the clerk.
(1) The bond shall be in the amount of $1,000.00.
(Code 1988, § 3-69; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
138
Sec. 6-217. Investigation of applicant; report.
All applications in which a license permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises shall be investigated by the county police department and a report of said investigation presented to the clerk for consideration with the application.
(Code 1988, § 3-70; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-218. Payment of taxes and other debts to the city.
The clerk shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent or if the applicant owes any other monies to the city. No license shall be issued nor shall a license be renewed until all such debts are paid in full.
(Code 1988, § 3-71; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-219. Issuance of license to persons with prior conviction prohibited; exception.
No license hereunder permitting the sale of malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any person who shall have been convicted or shall have entered a plea of guilty or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application for any felony, misdemeanor of any state or of the United States, or any municipal ordinances except simple traffic violations. The term conviction shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime.
(Code 1988, § 3-72; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-220. General qualifications.
(a) Conditions for granting. No application for a license permitting the sale of malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises shall be granted when the application or investigation by the clerk shows any of the following to exist:
(1) That the applicant is of bad moral character or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made or who has been dishonorably discharged from the armed services of the United States, or fails to demonstrate financial ability;
(2) That the applicant has had any license issued by the city or by any other city in the state, or by any other licensing authority in the state relating to the manufacture, distribution or sale of alcoholic or malt beverages or wine previously revoked within the past ten years;
(3) That the applicant is related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the laws of the state;
(4) That applicant does not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs or that the applicant appears to
139
be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever;
(5) That the applicant is the city clerk or a member of the city’s alcoholic beverage review board or a spouse or minor child of one of the aforesaid persons;
(6) That the applicant is not of legal age and/or a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully permitted for permanent residence;
(7) That operators, managers or clerks or other employees of applicant are of bad moral character;
(8) That corporate or firm applicants are of bad business reputation;
(9) The clerk, in his discretion may consider any extenuating circumstances that may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If, in his judgment, circumstances are such that granting the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application.
(10) The clerk may decline to issue a license when any person having any interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as herein set forth for the licensee.
(b) Decisions to be in writing. All decisions of the clerk either approving or denying a license application shall be stated in writing and a copy of such statement shall be provided to the applicant either personally or by certified mail.
(c) Right to hearing. Whenever the clerk shall deny an application for a license, the applicant shall be notified of the right to a hearing under this article upon timely application.
(Code 1988, § 3-73; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-221. Change in relationships and/or ownership interest.
Any change in any of the relationships and/or ownership interest contained on the application must be filed with the clerk within 30 days after such change is made and the failure to do so shall be grounds for
immediate cancellation and revocation by the clerk of a license or for the immediate dismissal of any application for a license.
(Code 1988, § 3-74; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-222. City clerk, members of alcoholic beverage review board prohibited from interest
140
in license.
It shall be unlawful for the city clerk or any member of the city's alcoholic beverage review board or a spouse or minor child of said person to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license hereunder. (Code 1988, § 3-75; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-223. Annual renewal.
All licensees holding licenses permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises will be required to renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the clerk. (Code 1988, § 3-76; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-224. Grounds for suspension or revocation of license.
(a) A license permitting the sale of malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises may be suspended or revoked by the clerk where the licensee furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license or omitted information required in the application for a license and for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this article. Any failure to notify of the change in any relationship as specified in section 6-22 1 within 30 days after such change is made shall likewise constitute due cause for cancellation, revocation or suspension of a license issued under this article.
(b) Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of section 6-283 or 6-284 of this Code shall be subject to immediate license revocation in addition to all other penalties provided for in this article.
(c) The clerk shall revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period.
(d) The clerk shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension.
(e) The clerk may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this article any time such knowledge becomes known to the clerk.
(f) An act or omission of a licensee, holding a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, who is owner of more than a ten-percent interest in the licensed establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or any provision of this article will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of its license in accordance with the provisions of this article when the clerk determines to the clerk's own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues. Provided, however, in the case of an employee, the clerk must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee, were
141
condoned by the licensee, or where the licensee has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring.
(Code 1988, § 3-89; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-225. Acceptance and consideration of application after rejection or revocation.
When any license or permit authorizing the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is revoked, it shall be unlawful for the appropriate governing officials to accept and/or consider any
application from the same applicant for license within 12 months from the time of such revocation. (Code 1988, § 3-93; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-226. False information in application.
Any material omission from or untrue or misleading information which is contained in an original, renewal or transfer application for a license hereunder shall be cause for the denial or refusal of a license, and if any license has previously been granted under such circumstances, the same shall constitute due cause for revocation of such license. Any failure to notify of the change in any relationship as specified in this article within 30 days after such change is made shall likewise constitute due cause for cancellation, revocation or suspension of a license issued hereunder.
(Code 1988, § 3-99; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-227. Restriction upon transfers.
(a) Licenses for the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided in this section.
(b) In case of the death of any person owning a license issued under this article, or any interest therein, the same may, with the approval of the clerk and subject to the terms of this article, be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or to the heirs at law of the deceased person, if such heirs meet all of the other qualifications contained in this article. The license of such deceased person shall be held by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete execution of his estate and dispose of the license or his interest therein, but in no event to exceed six months.
(c) Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership and to assign his interest in such partnership to one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such withdrawal shall not, however, serve as to bring any new ownership into the partnership, unless all provisions of this article are fully complied with by the new partner.
(d) Should a transfer of the location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any
142
license fee and the new location shall meet all requirements of a new license to be issued under this article, except payment of license and investigation fees.
(e) A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee himself will directly receive none of the additional capital investment. Under this section an additional partner or new stockholder must be approved in accordance with this article. This section only applies to corporations when the new stockholder obtains ten percent or more of the common stock.
(Code 1988, § 3-100; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-228. Application for new license in existing license location.
An application filed under this section shall meet and qualify under all requirements of this article for granting of a new license.
(Code 1988, § 3-101; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-229. Application; data; information; requirement for.
The city clerk shall have authority to prescribe forms for new or renewal applications which are required under this article. All applicants shall furnish all data requested of them by the clerk and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request, shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. The applicants by filing an application for a license permitted under this article agree to produce, for oral interrogation, any person or persons requested by the clerk or the county police department, considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such application and/or license to be issued under this article. The failure to produce such person or persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of any application pending under this article. (Code 1988, § 3-104; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-230. Other licenses.
The licenses and taxes provided for in this article are not levied in lieu of any other license fees or taxes that may be levied upon restaurants, but are in addition thereto.
(Code 1988, § 3-109; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-231. Annual fees for sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises.
(a) Amount. Each licensee holding a license for the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises shall pay an annual fee of $1,500.00. This fee may be amended annually.
(b) Due date. All annual license fees herein shall be paid in advance, on or before
143
January 1 of each year and any new license granted hereunder during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without pro-ration; provided, however, that if a license is granted after July 1, the license fee shall be one - half of the annual license for such calendar year.
(c) Renewal. Any person licensed hereunder shall be required to renew his license on or before January 1 of each year. In addition to any other penalties that may be authorized otherwise, a penalty of ten percent of the license fee shall be imposed for failure to renew the license on or before January 1 of each year. (Code 1988, § 3-116; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
(d) Sec. 6-232. Brewpub licenses.
Sec. 6-232 Brewpub Licenses.
(a) Brewpub is a restaurant in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed subject to state law barrel production limitations for retail consumption on the premises and sold solely in draft form. No person shall be permitted to own or operate a brewpub without first obtaining a license from the city clerk pursuant to the same procedures as are set forth in this article and each brewpub license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements.
(b) A brewpub license authorizes the holder of such license to:
(1) Manufacture on the licensed premises not more than ten thousand (10,000) barrels of beer in a calendar year solely for retail on the premises and solely in draft form;
(2) Operate a restaurant that shall be the sole retail outlet for such beer. Such outlet may offer for sale any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are separately authorized for consumption on the premises by this chapter, including wine, distilled spirits, and malt beverages, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler for consumption on the premises only; and, provided, further, that in addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brewpub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages from licensed wholesalers for consumption on the premises only; and
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, sell up to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) barrels annually of such beer to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution to retailers and retail consumption dealers.
(c) Possession of a brewpub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining another license authorized under this chapter for the same premises.
(e)
(d) A brewpub license does not authorize the holder of such license to sell alcoholic beverages at retail by package for consumption off the premises.
(e) A brewpub licensee shall not offer or permit any free sampling of beer by its customers on the premises.
144
(f) A brewpub licensee shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed as manufacturers, retailers, and, where applicable, wholesalers. For the local excise tax, see Section 6-333.
(g) A brewpub licensee shall pay an annual license fee of $250, which shall be in addition to any other license fees required under this chapter. This section requires that the licensee also hold (and have paid the annual license fee) a license for either the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises or the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises.
(h) Except as set forth above in this section, a brewpub license holder shall be subject to all provisions of this article.
August 11, 2014
6-233. Art shop.
(a) An Art Shop established under this article may:
(1) allow customers to bring in a bottle or bottles of wine and/or beer to be consumed on the premises except on Sundays;
(2) any wine and/or beer served on the premises shall only be served by an employee of the Art Shop otherwise authorized to serve alcoholic beverages under this Chapter;
(3) No customer of an Art Shop shall consume more than two six ounce servings of wine or two twelve ounce servings of beer during a three hour period or four six ounce servings of wine or four twelve ounce servings of beer within a single business day; and
(4) the serving of wine and/or beer in an Art Shop shall be subject to all of the provisions related to the service of other alcoholic beverages under this Chapter, including but not limited to the prohibition of serving wine or beer to anyone under 21 years of age or to anyone intoxicated.
(b) Nothing in this section shall prohibit an Art Shop from serving food provided it meets all of the requirements provided in this City Code and is properly permitted by the City.
(c) The annual license fee for an Art shop shall be $250.00.
August 11, 2014
6-255. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
145
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE REVIEW BOARD
Sec. 6-256. Established; duties.
There is hereby established an alcoholic beverage review board which shall have the duty of hearing appeals from decisions of the clerk denying the issuance or renewal of any license provided for by this article and to hear appeals from the decision of the clerk revoking or suspending any such license provided for by this article.
(Code 1988, § 3-90; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-257. Composition.
The alcoholic beverage review board shall be composed of five citizens of the city appointed by the mayor and council to serve a two-year term.
(Code 1988, § 3-90; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
(a) Right to hearing. No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as provided in this article.
(b) Written notice of denial, suspension or revocation of license. The clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of his order to deny, suspend, or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the clerk may have a review thereof by appeal to the alcoholic review board. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the clerk.
(c) Time frame for hearing. A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the clerk, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses.
(d) Clerk to notify appellant. The findings of the alcoholic review board shall be forwarded to the clerk after the conclusion of the hearing and it shall be the duty of the clerk to notify the appellant of the action of the alcoholic review board.
(e) Grounds for setting aside findings. The findings of the alcoholic review board shall not be set aside unless found to be:
(1) Contrary to law or ordinances;
(2) Unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole; or
146
(3) Unreasonable.
(f) Appeal of findings. The findings of the alcoholic review board shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. (Code 1988, § 3-91; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-259. Notice.
For the purpose of this division, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by registered mail and/or certified mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail.
(Code 1988, § 3-92; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Secs. 6-260--6-280. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS Sec. 6-281. Gambling on premises prohibited.
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punchboards, slot machines or the operation of any scheme for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any place of business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or in any room adjoining the same, owned, leased or controlled by a licensee. No licensee holding a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises shall allow or permit any video game(s) to be placed on the bar in such establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold or delivered to customers. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of a license. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the conducting of lottery activities on the premises provided such activities have been properly approved by the state.
(Code 1988, § 3-77; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-282. Solicitation prohibited.
No retail consumption dealer licensed to sell alcoholic beverages hereunder shall require, permit, suffer, encourage or indulge any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic, or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay any commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agents or manager to solicit for himself or for others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic. (Code 1988, § 3-78; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-283. Types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited.
147
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which malt beverages and wine are offered for sale for consumption on the premises:
(1) To suffer or permit any female person 21 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola thereof.
(2) To suffer or permit any female person 21 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of human female breasts as described in subsection (a)(1) of this section.
(3) To suffer or permit any person 21 years of age or older, while in the premises of said commercial establishment, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, anus or anal cleft.
(4) To suffer or permit any person 21 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, anus, or anal cleft.
(5) To suffer or permit any person 21 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to:
a. Act or perform acts which simulate sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation;
b. Touch, caress, or fondle the breasts, anus or genitals; or
c. Display pubic hair, the anus or vulva.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any female person 21 years of age or older, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which malt beverages and wine are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view that area of the human female breasts at or below the top of the areola thereof, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance or simulate such areas of the female breasts as described herein.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person 21 years of age or older, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which malt beverages and wine are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, anus, or
148
anal cleft, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, anus or anal cleft.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which malt beverages and wine are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to hold, promote or allow any contest, promotion, special night or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the above prohibited conduct.
(e) Nothing in this article adopted by the mayor and council of the city shall be construed to apply to the presentation, showing, or performance of any play, drama, ballet, or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher education, or other similar establishment as a form of an expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. This article specifically applies to establishments licensed by the city, to sell or offer for sale malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises and is intended solely to regulate the conduct of individuals physically present in such establishments.
(Code 1988, § 3-79; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-284. "Happy hour" promotions and sales.
(a) No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall:
(b) Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in a room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner so as to be in view of the paying public and said schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week.
(c) No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this section.
(Code 1988, § 3-80; Ord. Of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-285. Consumption dealers to buy only from licensed wholesalers; minimum legal container; sales off-premises prohibited.
No licensed retail consumption dealer shall buy or arrange to buy or in any way effect the transfer of any alcoholic beverages except from a licensed wholesaler. The sale of alcoholic beverages by the licensee hereunder in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises is expressly prohibited.
(Code 1988, § 3-81; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
149
Sec. 6-286. Retail consumption dealers to store inventory only on premises.
No retail consumption dealer licensed hereunder shall keep any alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. No retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to enter any type of arrangement whereby alcoholic beverages ordered by licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler.
(Code 1988, § 3-82; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-287. Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful for licensees holding a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any manner misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand names of any alcoholic beverage.
(Code 1988, § 3-83; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-288. Display of licenses.
The licenses provided for in this article shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view of the public at the place of business of the licensee.
(Code 1988, § 3-84; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-289. Licensees to maintain a copy of this article; employees to be familiar with its terms; responsibility of licensee for violations.
Each retail consumption dealer hereunder shall keep a copy of this article in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working therein with respect to the terms hereof and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be responsible for any acts of agents or employees which are in violation of this article or of the laws of the state or of the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner, except as provided in this article.
Sec. 6-290. Premises open for inspection.
The business premises of a licensed retail consumption dealer hereunder shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials representing the governing authority authorized to inspect such premises.
(Code 1988, § 3-86; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-291. Exterior advertisement prohibited.
No outdoor advertising or signs with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages, or the prices of such beverages, shall be permitted on the exterior of any retail outlet, or on the windows or elsewhere in the outlet that may be viewed from the outside.
(Code 1988, § 3-87; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
150
Sec. 6-292. Sales restricted to premises only.
No retail consumption dealer shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any person except in said licensee's place of business.
(Code 1988, § 3-88; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-293. Time limit for commencement of business in licensee's establishment; forfeiture for non-use.
(a) All holders of licenses for the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises must, within 12 months after the issuance of said license, open for business, the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within 12 months after the issuance of such license shall serve as cause for the forfeiture of such license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder.
(b) Failure to operate the business authorized by the license referred to in subsection (a) above for a period of six consecutive months after the licensee has begun operation under a license, shall serve as cause for the forfeiture of such license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. (Code 1988, § 3-94; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-294. Completion of proposed licensed premises.
Where a building in which an applicant proposes to operate under a license permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for the consumption on the premises is at the time of the application for such license not in existence, or not yet completed, a license may be issued for such location providing the plans and specifications for the proposed building are filed with the clerk and show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this article and applicable ordinances of the city. No sales shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with said plans and specifications and is in conformity with all other provisions of this article and applicable ordinances of the city and an occupancy permit has been issued.
(Code 1988, § 3-95; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-295. Automatic revocation of city license.
Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell any alcoholic beverages, or suspend or revoke a state retail consumption dealer's license, said action shall automatically serve to revoke the applicable city license issued under the terms of this article without any further action by the mayor and council or any officer of the city. Whenever the judicial system for the state shall convict or accept a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for the sale of alcoholic beverages to an underage person, the license issued by the city to the offending licensee may thereupon be automatically revoked by the clerk.
Sec. 6-296. Removal of signs.
When any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages is revoked, all signs indicating that
151
such beverages may be sold or purchased, shall be immediately removed from the place of business.
(Code 1988, § 3-97; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-297. Revocation upon violation of any provision of this article.
Violation of any of the provisions of this article by the holder of a license issued hereunder shall subject the holder of such license to revocation of said license as provided herein.
(Code 1988, § 3-98; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-298. Regulations as to employees of licensees.
The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a license for the sale of malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises:
(1) No person shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, mix alcoholic beverages, or in any managerial position by an establishment holding a license for the sale of malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises until such person as been fingerprinted and back ground check on said person has been performed by the county police department and the county police department has provided the city clerk with a letter indicating that the person is eligible to hold a pouring permit.
(2) This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy, cook, or dishwasher, and are never allowed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, mix alcoholic beverages or in any way be associated with the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages.
(3) No pouring permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the city clerk and/or county police department and the appropriate fee which has been established by the city and/or the county police department has been paid. A search of the criminal record of the person completing the application shall be conducted by the county police department. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the person through the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall not give rise any presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection unless required by state law or court order.
(4) The county police department or its designee shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person submitting the application for a pouring license. In the event that the person is eligible for a pouring license under this article, the county police department shall issue a letter to the city clerk that the permit has been issued to the person, and stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for the pouring permit, the county police department shall notify the city clerk that the person is not eligible, and
152
the reasons why the person is not eligible, and the city clerk shall notify the person in writing that they are not eligible for the permit, the cause for the denial of the permit, and the person's right to appeal the denial.
(5) No person shall be granted a pouring permit unless it appears to the satisfaction of the county police department and the city clerk that such person has not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling,
illegal possession or sale of controlled substances, illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any other sexually related crime within a period of five years of the date of the application. No person shall be granted a pouring permit who has been convicted, plead guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any federal, state or local law which constitutes a felony within five years of the date of the application. For purposes of this division, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the defendant was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act as amended, however, any such offense shall not be ignored if the defendant violated any terms of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentence in court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender.
(6) A pouring permit shall be issued for a period of one year from the date of the original application. The pouring permit must be in the possession of the employee while the employee is working at the licensed establishment, and must be made available for inspection by members of the county police department or the city manager, city clerk or their designee.
(7) No person shall be issued a pouring permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed, or covered up any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application for the permit. If a permit is denied or revoked under the provisions of this section, no application from the same person shall be accepted for a period of at least six months.
(8) All pouring permits issued through administrative error are considered void and may be terminated and seized by the city manager, city clerk, county police department or their designee.
(9) All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon demand by any county police officer or the city manager or the city clerk or their designee. New employees shall receive a receipt issued by the city clerk or county police department which may be used for a maximum of 30 days from the date of its issue. Replacement permits will be issued within 30 days of the original date of issuance upon payment of one-half of the normal fee for a pouring permit. After 30 days from the original issuance date, a new application and fee must
153
be submitted in order to obtain a replacement permit.
(10) It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license under the terms of this article to file with the city clerk the names of all employees working on the premises and connected with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages along with the employee's social security number, date of birth, home address and home phone number and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees must be filed with the city clerk upon the hiring of a new employee. Copies of these filings shall be provided to the county police department for use in random inspections.
(11) It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license under this article to inspect and verify that each employee has obtained a valid pouring permit and that the permit is in their possession at all times while working at the licensed establishment. Allowing an employee to work in the licensed establishment without possession of a valid pouring permit shall constitute a violation of this article, and both the employee and the licensee shall be subject to penalty for such violation.
(Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 3-102)
Sec. 6-299. Employment of persons with prior convictions prohibited.
No license permitting the retail sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption to any applicant in any
capacity whatsoever, who has been convicted in this state or any other state, or in the United States, or in any other country, within ten years immediately prior to the application for employment of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting of premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly house, illegal dealing in narcotics, sex offenses or other charges related to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors or any crime involving moral turpitude.
(Code 1988, § 3-103; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-300. Issuance of licenses limited to designated area.
No license permitting the retail sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises shall be granted to any applicant hereunder unless the proposed premises for the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is a restaurant, event facility, hotel, or lounge, and is located in the appropriate zoning district permitting such use as provided by the zoning ordinances of the city as now or hereafter amended. Such sales shall be permitted in the following zoning districts: BG, HSB.
(Code 1988, § 3-105; Ord. of 5-28-1994); Amend. April, 2011.
Sec. 6-301. Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent.
No license permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. Where the applicant is a corporation or other business entity other than an individual, the stockholders or joint venturers or principals behind such business must meet the requirements of
154
this section and, in the event any license provided for hereunder shall be issued, such license shall be issued in the name of the corporation and the principal stockholder or principal behind such business entity. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements of this section shall apply to all partners.
(Code 1988, § 3-106; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-302. Distance from churches, schools, day care facilities, colleges.
(a) No license permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises shall be issued under this article if the premises of the applicant is located within a distance of 75 feet of the property line of any church, school, licensed day care facility or college, except as otherwise provided in this section. The distances in this section shall be measured in accordance with the definition and method set forth in Section 6-178 of this Chapter. If an applicant or licensee otherwise qualifies hereunder, he shall be entitled to a license to continue to operate any business described herein in the event that subsequent to the date of granting a license hereunder a church, school, licensed care facility or college is located closer than the distance set forth herein.
(b) Because of the unique nature of the Town Center Overlay District (as set forth on the City’s Official Zoning Map) and the desire to encourage economic redevelopment and economic health and stability of that area, all distance limitations set forth in this section shall be reduced to zero feet for businesses located or proposed to be located in the Town Center Overlay (TCO).
(Code 1988, § 3-107; Ord. of 5-28-1994; Amd. of 6-2000, Amd. of 10-18-06 )
State Law References: Location restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 1.
Sec. 6-303. Hours of sale.
(a) No one holding a license under this article shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises at any time except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. until 1:30 a.m. Monday through Saturday; and in eating establishments which derive at least fifty percent (50%) of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, between 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday.
(Amd. of 02-11-04, Amd. 10-18-06 )
(b) No license holder shall serve alcoholic beverages at any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the Mayor and Council.
(Code 1988, § 3-108; Ord. of 5-28-1994, Amd. of 10-18-06)
State Law References: Days and hours of sale, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-7, 3-3-20.
155
Sec. 6-304. Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions.
No licensee shall employ any person under 21 years of age, in or about the premises where alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale, to sell, take orders for delivery, or to aid or assist in the sale or delivery, directly or indirectly, of alcoholic beverages unless the said person under 21 years of age shall be under the direct supervision of a person who shall be both employed by said establishment and who shall be over 21 years of age.
(Code 1988, § 3-110; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-305. Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession by persons under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages; use of false identification; proper identification; dispensing, serving, selling, or handling by persons under 21 years of age in the course of employment; seller's actions upon receiving false identification.
(a) Except as otherwise authorized by law:
(1) No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age;
(2) No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, attempt to purchase, or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage;
(3) No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage;
(4) No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age; or
(5) No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage.
(b) The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (2), and (4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption:
(1) For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or
(2) At a religious ceremony.
(c) The prohibition contained in subsections (a)(1), (2), and (4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption by a person under 21 years of age when the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent
156
or guardian and such parent or guardian is present.
(d) The prohibitions contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized by state law. The term "proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate and shall not include any traffic citation and complaint form issued by any jurisdiction.
(e) If such condition is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to state law, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from:
(1) Dispensing, serving, selling, or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment;
(2) Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or
(3) Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment.
(f) Testimony by any person under 21 years of age, when given in an administrative or judicial proceeding against another person for violation of any provision of this section, shall not be used in any administrative or judicial proceedings brought against such testifying person under 21 years of age.
(g) In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and to be furnished with proper identification as provided for in subsection (d) of this section in order to verify the age of such person; and the failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly.
(h) Any retailer or retail consumption dealer, or any person acting on behalf of such retailer or retail consumption dealer, who upon requesting proper identification from a person attempting to purchase alcoholic beverages from such retailer or retail consumption dealer pursuant to subsection (h) of this section is tendered a driver's license which indicates that such driver's license is falsified, is not the driver's license of the person presenting it, or that such
157
person is under the age of 21 years, the person to whom said license is tendered shall be authorized to either write down the name, address, and license number or to seize and retain such driver's license and in either event shall immediately thereafter summon a law enforcement officer who shall be authorized to seize the license either at the scene or at such time as the license can be located. The procedures and rules connected with the retention of such license by the officer shall be the same as those provided for the acceptance of a driver's license as bail on arrest for traffic offenses pursuant to state law.
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23.
Sec. 6-306. Alcoholic beverages in public places.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage while in or upon public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots, or other public ways except as otherwise provided or allowed by this Code.
(b) No person shall be in possession of any glass, can or open container containing alcoholic beverages on any thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or any other public way.
(c) No person, firm or corporation licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall permit any person to remove from such premises, any alcoholic beverage.
(d) No person shall have in his possession an open container containing alcoholic beverages while within or on a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, while parked or standing on a public street or public parking lot in the city, or while such vehicle is in motion.
(Code 1988, § 3-115; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
State Law References: Possession of open containers of alcohol in motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-254.
Secs. 6-307--6-330. Reserved.
DIVISION 5.
BEER AND/OR WINE WHOLESALER LICENSING AND REGULATIONS Sec. 6-331. Special provisions applicable to wholesale purchase.
(a) Wholesaler required to be licensed. Any person desiring to sell at wholesale any alcoholic beverages in the city shall make application to the clerk of the city for a license to do so, which application shall be in writing on the prescribed forms and pay any license fee as set by this article.
(b) Wholesaler not to have financial interest in license for retail sale of alcoholic
158
beverages. No person who has any direct financial interest in any license for the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages in the city shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale alcoholic beverage license issued by the city.
(c) Purchases; sales. No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to any person other than a retailer licensed under this article. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business.
(d) Delivery vehicle to be clearly marked. No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle.
(Code 1988, § 3-117; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-332. Annual fees for wholesalers.
Each licensee for wholesale sales shall pay an annual fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). This fee may be amended annually.
(Code 1988, § 3-118; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-333. Excise tax; levied, amount, payment, duties of dealers and wholesalers.
(a) Scope of section. In addition to all other taxes or license fees heretofore or hereafter imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the city in the business of selling alcoholic beverages, there is imposed and levied upon all hereinafter described dealers within the city an excise tax to be computed and collected as hereinafter set forth. The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to the following:
(1) Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental service only; and
(2) Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state or under the Constitution of the United States.
(b) Basis for computation of tax.
(1) The tax levied hereunder shall be computed on the basis of $0.22 per liter for wine sold or delivered as hereinafter set forth. The $0.22 per liter shall be prorated down on fractional parts of liters, so that each bottle or each individual size container shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any such licensee to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any wine on which such tax has not been paid.
159
(2) Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold from a barrel or bulk container, the tax levied hereunder shall be computed at the rate of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15 gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15 gallons. Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces shall be imposed.
(c) Computations, payment, duties or wholesale dealer and distributor. The tax imposed shall be computed and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping, or delivering wine and/or malt beverages to any retail dealer in the city shall, as a condition to the privilege of conducting said business in the city:
(1) Keep and maintain true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of wine and malt beverages to each retail dealer in the city such records to be preserved for a period of not less than one year and to be made available on request for the inspection of any duly authorized representative of the city.
(2) Collect from each retail dealer in the city at time of delivery of wine or malt beverages, the amount of tax due under the terms of this section and hold the same in trust for the city until such tax is remitted to the city as herein provided.
(3) On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, each wholesaler shall make a verified and comprehensive report to the city which shall correctly show and reflect all sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages to or for retail dealers in the city for the calendar month immediately preceding the date of said report. Said report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount of excise tax collected under the terms of this section, and such other reasonable information as may be requested by the city. Said report shall be accompanied by remittance payable to the city for all taxes collected or due, as shown on said report.
(4) The excise tax levied in this section is hereby levied upon the retailer licensed to do business in the city and it is the intent of this section to so levy this tax but to require the payment of the tax at the time of delivery to the retailer by the wholesaler, who shall have the responsibility of remitting the tax to the city on behalf of the retailer on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, as hereinbefore required. In the event the tax due hereunder is not paid on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, a ten percent penalty on the gross tax will be levied by the city against each defaulting retailing licensee for whom the tax is not paid on or before the tenth day of the month.
160
(5) To ensure payment of the excise tax levied hereby and prior to the issuance of any retail alcoholic beverage license in the city, an applicant must post and file with the governing authority of the city, along with his application, a performance bond conditioned upon the faithful observance and performance by the applicant of the rules and regulations contained in this section, and upon the payment of any taxes due to the city. Upon the violation of this section, or any part thereof, such bond will be forfeited as determined by the clerk at a hearing held for that purpose upon three days' written notice given to the licensee concerned. Bond shall be payable to the clerk of the city and shall be in the amount of $1,000.00 and shall be in a form acceptable to the clerk of the city.
(d) Noncompliance by wholesale dealer; distributor. If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports required herein, the city shall notify such dealer or distributor in writing and if the reports are not made and the taxes are not remitted within five days from the date of such notice, such wholesale dealer or distributor shall be prohibited from making any further deliveries in the city and the retail licensees served by such wholesale dealer or distributor for whom the taxes have not been paid shall be subject to having the license suspended or revoked as herein provided.
(e) Unlawful retail sales. It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation to sell at retail within the city malt beverages or wine on which the taxes herein provided for have not been paid.
(f) Unlawful deliveries. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesale dealer or distributor, person, firm or corporation to deliver any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine to any retail dealer in the city without at the time of such delivery collecting the excise taxes herein provided for.
(g) Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article or who shall assist any retail dealer in wine or malt beverages in the city to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes herein provided for shall be guilty of a violation of this section and on conviction thereof in the municipal court shall be fined or sentenced as provided by this article and any such person so convicted shall also be subject to having his license suspended or revoked, if he shall be a licensed dealer in malt beverages and wine at wholesale.
(Code 1988, § 3-119; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
State Law References: Local excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 et seq.
Sec. 6-334. Requirements of wholesalers.
(a) License required. All wholesale dealers or distributors shall be licensed by the state revenue department and shall comply with all laws and regulations of the state revenue department before they sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages in the city.
(b) Delivery to licensed retailers only. Deliveries and sales shall be made only to
161
retailers licensed under the provisions of this article and all deliveries shall be made in conveyances owned and operated by such wholesale dealers or distributors.
(Code 1988, § 3-120; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-335. Retailers to purchase from licensed wholesalers only.
Retail dealers in alcoholic beverages licensed under the provisions of this article shall not buy nor accept deliveries of malt beverages or wine from wholesalers, dealers or distributors, except those who are licensed by the state revenue department.
(Code 1988, § 3-121; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-336. Regulations governing retail storage.
All licensed retailers shall store all malt beverages or wine on the premises for which the license was issued and at no other place. All malt beverages or wine stock shall be available at all times for inspection by the building inspector of the city, or his duly authorized representatives. Any malt beverages or wine found in any retailer's stock that is sold or distributed by a wholesaler who is not licensed in accordance with the laws of the state to make sales and deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation.
(Code 1988, § 3-122; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
(a) Required with every delivery; wholesaler to keep copy and make it available for inspection. Upon each and every delivery by a licensed wholesaler to a licensed retailer, an invoice in triplicate shall be prepared showing the quantities and brands of malt beverages and wine delivered, together with the price thereof and the excise tax due and collected thereon. The original of such invoice shall be delivered by the wholesaler to the retailer simultaneously with such delivery. The wholesaler shall retain the second copy of such invoice and shall keep it for a period of 36 months after the date of delivery and during such 36-month period, such invoices shall be made available for inspection by the clerk of the city, or the duly authorized representative. Upon request of the city, a copy of such invoice shall be attached to any reports requested or required by the city.
(b) Retailer to keep original and make it available for inspection. Each retail licensee doing business in the city shall keep and maintain the original invoice of each sale to him or purchase by him from a wholesaler of any alcoholic beverages for at least 36 months after the date of such purchase and shall maintain records to show the sales of malt beverages and wine and any other records required by the city. The city or its duly authorized representative shall have the right to inspect the records of each licensee and make a complete audit of the records of each licensee at any time. Failure of a licensee to maintain proper records showing receipt of malt beverages and wine, payment therefore, and payment of the taxes due thereon to the appropriate wholesaler, and records which clearly show the sales, the amount of sales, and the types of sales of each licensee may, at the discretion of the clerk, after a
162
hearing as herein provided, result in the revocation or suspension of such license. (Code 1988, § 3-123; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-338. Revocation or suspension of license.
The violation of any term, condition or provision of this article in any particular, or as to any detail whatsoever, shall be conclusive cause for the immediate revocation or suspension of any license described in this article.
(Code 1988, § 3-124; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-339. Production of records.
In conjunction with any application for license, or in conjunction with any license which has been issued under the terms hereof, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected hereunder, the clerk shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices, of any licensee for the purpose of auditing the records of such licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this article proving or disproving violation of any part of this article by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder.
(Code 1988, § 3-125; Ord. of 5-28-1994)
Sec. 6-340. Penalties and enforcement.
The provisions of this division shall be enforced by the city manager, the city clerk, or their designee and by the county police department. The county police department is authorized to conduct random inspections of licensed establishments to assure compliance with the provisions of this article. Any person violating the provision of this division shall be issued a citation to the municipal court of the city, and upon conviction shall be punished by fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. All ordinances or part of ordinances in conflict with this division are hereby repealed. Except as specifically amended herein all other provisions of this ordinance shall continue to remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 3-126)
Secs. 3-341--3-360. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
SALE OF SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR FOR ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION*
* State Law References: Sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
163
Sec. 6-361. Purpose of article.
This article has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control for the licensing and sales of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises; to protect and preserve schools and churches; to give effect to existing land use; and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining the stability of neighborhoods and property values; and to protect against the evils of concentration of the businesses serving spirituous liquor in one family and/or in one corporation and to prevent undesirable persons in engaging in or having any interest in the sale of alcoholic beverages.
(Code 1988, § 3-200; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-362. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Adequate parking means one parking space for each 200 square feet of customer service area within the premises of applicant, but not less than five parking spaces. Such off-street parking shall have vehicular access to streets and shall be constructed of an all-weather surface.
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, spirituous liquors as defined herein, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine.
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, larger beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
Business area means any area which is correspondingly zoned in accordance with the city's zoning ordinance.
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship.
Clerk means the person holding the official title of Clerk for the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
164
College means only such state, county, city, church, or other colleges as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of the state and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught.
Distance means from the wall of the structure where alcohol is sold to the closest property line of the nearest church, school, daycare facility or college. (Should said business that sells alcohol be part of a larger building, the measurement shall be from the wall of the business where alcohol is sold, as if it were the only business in the building). Distance shall be measured in a straight line along the most direct and shortest possible route regardless any obstacles that may be present.
Event facility means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where special events including, but not limited to, weddings, wedding receptions, private parties and similar events are held and which provides meals or food services in connection with such events. Any such facility shall be equipped with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining facilities and shall have a seating capacity of at least fifty (50) people. The event facility shall be capable of preparing, cooking and serving meals and other food products associated with its special events on site. Any such establishment shall derive at least seventy-five (75) percent of its total annual gross sales from rental for special events and the service of meal and food products in connection with such special events. The revenues received from alcohol sales shall never exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total annual gross sales for any such facility. Any such facility open to the public for the service of at least one (1) meal per day for three (3) or more days per week shall be considered a restaurant and not an event facility.
Amend. April, 2011.
Family means and includes any person related to the holder of a license issued under the provisions of this article within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to the law of the state.
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Fortified wine includes, but is not limited to, brandy.
Hotel means a building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge restaurant in their privileges, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel thereunder.
License means the authorization by the appropriate government officials of the city to engage in the sale of spirituous liquor.
Licensee shall mean a person or persons, real or artificial, holding any class of license
165
issued under the terms of this article.
Liter means metric measurement currently used by the United States.
Lounge shall mean a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in hotels as defined herein with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a capacity of at least 50 persons.
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. Manufacturer also means:
(1) In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits.
(2) In the case of malt beverage, any brewer. Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container.
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public.
Premises means the definite closed or apportioned- in locality whether a room, shop or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold.
Private residence means a house or dwelling where not less than one or more than three families customarily reside and shall not include an apartment house having facilities for housing four or more families and any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of any application hereunder.
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity of at least 50 people, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incident thereto. The business shall derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared food or meals.
Retail sales means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public.
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry,
166
vocational occupations and other subjects are taught.
Spirituous liquors or distilled liquors means any alcoholic beverages containing alcoholic obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, cordials, or other spirituous liquors by whatever name called to include fortified wines, as defined by the Federal Alcoholic Administration.
Wholesaler means any person, firm or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale, any alcoholic beverages as defined herein.
Wine shall mean any alcoholic beverages containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. (Code 1988, § 3-202; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-363. Sale within the incorporated areas of the city; license a privilege.
(a) Spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises may be sold within the incorporated areas of the city under a license granted by the appropriate government officials as governed by the terms and conditions hereafter provided.
(b) All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the ordinances of the city and state law.
(c) All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words:
"THIS LICENSE IS A MERE PRIVILEGE SUBJECT TO BEING REVOKED AND ANNULLED, AND IS SUBJECT TO ANY FUTURE ORDINANCES WHICH MAY BE ENACTED" (Code 1988, § 3-201; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-364. Compliance with article required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within the city without having first complied with the provisions of this article. (Code 1988, § 3-204; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-365. Sale at public golf course.
The city or any other entity designated by the city to provide food service at the City of Sugar Hill Public Golf Course shall be authorized to obtain a license under the provisions of this article for the sale of spirituous liquor by the drink, either in association with the provision of food service or in connection with private parties which may be conducted in or around the
167
clubhouse facilities.
(Code 1988, § 3-246; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Secs. 6-366--6-385. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LICENSE
Sec. 6-386. Separate application and separate license for each location of sale.
Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses must be issued except as hereinafter set forth.
(Code 1988, § 3-205; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-387. Authorities of city to prescribe appropriate form.
All persons, firms or corporations desiring to sell spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises within the city shall make application on the forms prescribed by the appropriate authorities of the city and must follow the procedures applicable to that particular license, hereinafter set forth.
(Code 1988, § 3-206; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-388. Application for license permitting the sale of alcoholic spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises.
(a) No spirituous liquor shall be sold for consumption on the premises except under a license granted by the clerk, as provided herein.
(b) Only the following shall be authorized or licensed under this article: spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises.
(Code 1988, § 3-207; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-389. Application.
(a) Required; form. All persons desiring to engage in the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises shall make written application to the clerk for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and provided by the clerk. Such application shall state and/or contain the name and address of the applicant; a plat of the place where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of all partners, whether general or limited; if a corporation, the name of the top three officers and all stockholders holding more than ten percent of the common stock; the names of all individuals other than stockholders and partners who will have an economic interest in the license if issued; and such other appropriate information as may be required by this article or by the clerk, and shall be sworn to by the applicant before filing.
(b) Contents.
168
(1) Plans of building. No license hereunder shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. Each applicant for a license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the proposed applicant is a franchise, such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with the ordinances of the city; regulations of the state revenue commissioner; the laws of the state; and all other pertinent laws. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when finished by the building inspector. Each building in which the business is to be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. All premises for which a license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein.
(2) Survey. Each applicant shall, upon request by the clerk, submit a survey by a registered land surveyor showing compliance with all distance requirements contained herein.
(3) State application with required attachments. In addition to the completion and submission of the application form as required by this article, such applicant shall attach thereto a completed application form with all attachments and requirements for a state license.
(c) Processing fee. Upon filing of the application with the clerk, the applicant shall deposit in cash or by certified check a processing fee of $250.00 to cover the expense of investigation and processing the application which fee shall not be refundable.
(d) License fee. Upon approval, in accordance with the terms of this article of an application for license, the license fee shall be paid by certified check to the clerk prior to the issuance of a license within ten days after approval. The amount of the license fee is listed in section 6-403.
(e) Refund upon denial. In the event the applicant is denied a license by the state, the license fee shall be refunded.
(Code 1988, § 3-208; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-390. Filing of bonds by applicants for license.
(a) All applicants for licenses permitting the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises shall file with the clerk, along with each application, a bond:
(1) Conditioned to pay all sums which may become due by the applicant to the
169
city as taxes, license fees or other changes imposed by this article for the sale of spirituous liquor; and
(2) Conditioned to pay all penalties which may be imposed upon the applicant for failure to comply with the laws, ordinances and rules and regulations pertaining to alcoholic beverages.
(b) The surety for the bond shall be a surety company licensed to do business in this state and the bond shall be in such form as is acceptable to the clerk.
(c) The bond shall be in the amount of $5,000.00. (Code 1988, § 3-209; Ord. of 12-1-1995)
Sec. 6-391. Investigation of applicant; report.
All applications in which a license permitting the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises shall be investigated by the county police department and a report of said investigation presented to the clerk for consideration with the application.
(Code 1988, § 3-210; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-392. Payment of taxes and other debts to the city.
The clerk shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent or any other monies owing to the city. No license shall be issued nor shall a license be renewed until all such debts are paid in full.
(Code 1988, § 3-211; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-393. Issuance of license to persons with prior conviction prohibited; exception.
No license hereunder permitting the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any person who shall have been convicted or shall have entered a plea of guilty or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application for any felony, misdemeanor of any state or of the United States, or any municipal ordinances except simple traffic
violations. The term conviction shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime.
(Code 1988, § 3-212; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-394. General qualifications.
No application for a license permitting the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the
be granted when the application or investigation by the clerk shows any of the following to exist:
170
(1) That the applicant is of bad moral character or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made or who has been dishonorably discharged from the armed services of the United States, or fails to demonstrate financial ability;
(2) That the applicant has had any license issued by the city or by any other city in the state, or by any other licensing authority in the state relating to the manufacture, distribution or sale of alcoholic or malt beverages or wine previously revoked within the past ten years;
(3) That the applicant is related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computer according to the laws of the state;
(4) That applicant does not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs or that the applicant appears to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever;
(5) That the applicant is the city clerk or a member of the city’s alcoholic beverage review board or a spouse or minor child of one of the aforesaid persons;
(6) That the applicant is not of legal age and/or not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully permitted for permanent residence;
(7) That operators, managers or clerks or other employees of applicant are of bad moral character;
(a) Premises shall:
(1) That corporate or firm applicants are of bad business reputation;
(2) The clerk, is his discretion may consider any extenuating circumstances that may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If, in his judgment, circumstances are such that granting the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application;
(3) The clerk may decline to issue a license when any person having any interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as herein set forth for the business.
(b) All decisions of the clerk either approving or denying license application shall be stated in writing and a copy of such statement shall be provided to the applicant either
171
personally or by certified mail.
(c) Whenever the clerk shall deny an application for a license, the applicant shall be notified of the right to a hearing under this article upon timely application.
(Code 1988, § 3-213; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-395. Change in relationships and/or ownership interest.
Any change in any of the relationships and/or ownership interest contained on the application must be filed with the clerk within 30 days after such change is made and the failure to do so shall be grounds for immediate cancellation and revocation by the clerk of a license or for the immediate dismissal of any application for a license.
(Code 1988, § 3-214; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-396. City clerk, members of alcoholic beverage review board prohibited from interest in license.
It shall be unlawful for the city clerk or any member of the city's alcoholic beverage review board or a spouse or minor child of said person to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license hereunder. (Code 1988, § 3-215; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-397. Annual renewal.
All licensees holding licenses permitting the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises will be required to renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the clerk.
(Code 1988, § 3-216; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-398. Suspension or revocation; notice hearing; refund.
(a) Any license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any licensee may be suspended or revoked for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing held for the purpose of considering any such suspension or revocation.
(b) The mayor of the city is hereby authorized to suspend any license issued hereunder for any emergency situation such as civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation that the mayor deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city, and such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the mayor determines that the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of the mayor and council or a meeting called prior to the next regular meeting.
(c) Where a license, identified in section 6-398(a), is suspended or revoked, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee to the holder of such suspended or revoked license.
(Code 1988, § 3-231; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
172
Sec. 6-399. Suspension of license; causes.
(a) Any license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any licensee may be revoked for due cause as hereinafter defined after a hearing held for the purpose of considering such revocation. Any license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any licensee may be suspended for due cause as hereinafter defined beginning 30 days after notification without a hearing unless the licensee appeals such suspension as provided for in this article within 15 days after such notification.
(b) The violation of any term, condition or provision of this article in any particular, or as to any detail whatsoever by the licensee, shall be cause for the suspension or revocation of any license as provided for in this article.
(c) Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell, at wholesale or retail, any alcoholic beverages, or suspend or revoke a state retail consumption dealer's license, said action shall automatically serve to suspend the applicable city license issued under the terms of this article pending a revocation hearing as provided for in this article. Whenever the judicial system for the state or the city shall convict or accept a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for the sale of alcoholic beverages to an underage person, the license issued by the city to the offending licensee shall thereupon be automatically suspended pending a revocation hearing as provided for in this article.
(d) Any material omission from or untrue or misleading information which is contained in an original, renewal or transfer application for a license permitting the consumption of alcohol on the premises hereunder shall be cause for the denial or refusal of a license, and if any license has previously been granted under such circumstances, the same shall constitute due cause for revocation of such license. Any failure to notify of the change in any relationship as specified in section 6-395 within 30 days within such change is made shall likewise constitute due cause for cancellation, revocation or suspension of a license issued hereunder. Further, failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this article shall constitute due cause for cancellation, revocation or suspension of a license issued hereunder.
(e) Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of sections 6-428 or 6-429 of this article shall be subject to immediate license suspension pending a revocation hearing as provided for in this article, in addition to all other penalties provided for in this article.
(f) The clerk shall call a hearing as provided for in this article to revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period.
(g) The clerk shall call a hearing as provided for in this article to revoke the license for
173
any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension.
(h) The clerk may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this article any time such knowledge becomes known to him or her as provided for in this article.
(i) An act or omission of a licensee, holding a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, who is owner of more than a ten-percent interest in the licensed establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or any provision of this article will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of its license in accordance with the provisions of this article when the clerk determines to his own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues. In the case of an employee, the clerk must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee, were condoned by the licensee, or the licensee had not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring.
(Code 1988, § 3-232; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-400. Application; data; information.
The city clerk shall have authority to prescribe forms for new or renewal applications which are required under this article. All applicants shall furnish all data requested of them by the clerk and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. The applicants, by filing an application for a license permitted under this article, agree to produce, for oral interrogation, any person or persons requested by the clerk or the county police department, considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such application and/or license to be issued under this article. The failure to produce such person or persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of any application pending under this article. (Code 1988, § 3-244; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-401. Issuance of licenses limited to designated area.
No license permitting the retail sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises shall be granted to any applicant hereunder unless the proposed premises for the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises is a restaurant, event facility, hotel, or lounge, and is located in the appropriate zoning district permitting such use as provided by the zoning ordinances of the city as now or hereafter amended. Such sales shall be permitted in the following zoning districts: BG, HSB.
(Code 1988, § 3-245; Ord. of 12-11-1995); Amend. April, 2011.
Sec. 6-402. Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent.
174
(a) No license permitting the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. Where the applicant is a corporation or other business entity other than an individual, the stock holders or joint venturers or principals behind such business must meet the requirements of this section and, in the event any license provided for hereunder shall be issued, such license shall be issued in the name of the corporation and the principal stockholder or principal behind such business entity. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements of this section shall apply to all partners.
(b) All establishments licensed to sell spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises must have and continuously maintain in the city or the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law under this article to be served upon the licensee or owner, may be served. This person must be a resident of the city or the county. The licensee shall file the name of each such agent along with the written consent of such agent with the clerk at the time of application.
(Code 1988, § 3-247; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-403. Annual fees for sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises.
The licenses listed below are the only licenses authorized to be issued by this chapter and each such license is a separate and distinct license and shall require the payment of separate license fees as provided for in this chapter. The types of licenses, the restrictions on the issuance of each, and the fees for such licenses are as follows:
(1) Each licensee holding a license for the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises shall pay an annual fee of $2,500.00. This fee may be amended annually.
(2) All annual license fees herein shall be paid in advance, on or before January 1 of each year and any new license granted hereunder during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without pro-ration; provided, however, that if a license is granted after July 1, the license fee shall be one - half of the annual license for such calendar year.
(3) Any person licensed hereunder shall be required to renew his license on or before January 1 of each year. In addition to any other penalties that may be authorized otherwise, a penalty of ten percent of the license fee shall be imposed for failure to renew the license on or before January 1 of each year.
(Code 1988, § 3-257; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Secs. 6-404--6-425. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
175
OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS
Sec. 6-426. Gambling on premises prohibited.
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch-boards, slot machines or the operation of any scheme for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any place of business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or in any room adjoining the same, owned, leased or controlled by a licensee. No licensee holding a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall allow or permit any video game to be placed on the bar in such establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold or delivered to customers. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of a license. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the conducting of lottery activities on the premises provided such activities have been properly approved by the state.
(Code 1988, § 3-217; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-427. Solicitation prohibited.
No retail consumption dealer licensed to sell alcoholic beverages hereunder shall require, permit, suffer, encourage or indulge any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic, or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay any commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agents or manager to solicit for himself or for others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic. (Code 1988, § 3-218; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-428. Types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city at which spirituous liquor is offered for sale for consumption on the premises:
(1) To suffer or permit any female person 21 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola thereof.
(2) To suffer or permit any female person 21 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of human female breasts as described in section 6-428(a)(1).
(3) To suffer or permit any person 21 years of age or older, while in the premises of said commercial establishment, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, anus or anal cleft.
(4) To suffer or permit any person 21 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or
176
covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, public area, anus, or anal cleft.
(5) To suffer or permit any person 21 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to:
a. Act or perform acts which simulate sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation;
b. Touch, caress, or fondle the breasts, anus or genitals; or
c. Display pubic hair, the anus or vulva.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any female person 21 years of age or older, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which spirituous liquor is served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view that area of the human female breasts at or below the top of the areola thereof, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance or simulate such areas of the female breasts as described herein.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person 21 years of age or older, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which spirituous liquor is offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view his genitals, pubic area, anus, or anal cleft, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, anus or anal cleft.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which spirituous liquor is offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to hold, promote or allow any contest, promotion, special night or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the above prohibited conduct.
(e) Nothing in this article adopted by the mayor and council of the city, shall be construed to apply to the presentation, showing, or performance of any play, drama, ballet, or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution or higher education, or other similar establishment as a form of an expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. This article specifically applies to establishments licensed by the city, to sell or offer for sale spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises and is intended solely to regulate the conduct of individuals physically present in such establishments.
(Code 1988, § 3-219; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
177
Sec. 6-429. "Happy hour" promotions and sales.
(a) No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall:
(1) Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons;
(2) Deliver more than one alcoholic beverage to one person at one time;
(3) Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverages at a price less than the price regularly charged for such beverage during the same calendar week, except at private functions not opened to the public;
(4) Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not opened to the public;
(5) Sell, offer to sell or deliver beverages to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not opened to the public;
(6) Sell, offer to sell, or deliver any alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time;
(7) Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week;
(8) Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize.
(b) Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in a room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner so as to be in view of the paying public and said schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week.
(c) No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under section 6-429(a).
(Code 1988, § 3-220; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
178
Sec. 6-430. Bring your own bottle ("brown bagging") prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to bring his own alcoholic beverage (brown bag) into any establishment which is licensed under any of the business license or occupation tax provisions of the city, whether or not such establishment is licensed or unlicensed to serve alcoholic beverages.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any corporation, partnership, individual or other entity who maintains a business which is lawfully licensed by the city, to permit, allow or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages within any premises licensed for business under the laws and ordinances of the city. This subsection shall not apply to nor shall it affect the lawful sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by licensees operating under a valid license issued under the terms of this article or other ordinances providing for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
(Code 1988, § 3-221; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-431. Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverages by the package on the premises or beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. (Code 1988, § 3-222; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-432. Purchase restricted; requirements of wholesalers generally; minimum legal container; sales off-premises prohibited.
(a) No licensed retail consumption dealer shall buy or arrange to buy or in any way affect the transfer of any alcoholic beverages except from a wholesaler licensed by the state revenue department and the city. All wholesale dealers or distributors shall comply with all laws and regulations of the state revenue department before they sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages in the city. Deliveries and sales shall be made only to retailers licensed under the provisions of this article and all deliveries shall be made in conveyances owned and operated by such wholesale dealers or distributors.
(b) No retail consumption dealer may purchase spirituous liquors in containers smaller than 750 milliliters. The sale of alcoholic beverages by the licensee hereunder in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises is expressly prohibited.
(Code 1988, § 3-223; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-433. Regulations governing retail storage.
No retail consumption dealer licensed hereunder shall keep any alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. No retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to enter any type of arrangement whereby alcoholic beverages ordered by licensee are stored by licensed wholesaler. The business premises of a licensed retail consumption dealer hereunder shall be open
179
to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials representing the governing authority authorized to inspect such premises. Any alcoholic beverage found in any retailer's stock that is sold or distributed by a wholesaler who is not licensed in accordance with the laws of the state to make sales and deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. (Code 1988, § 3-224; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-434. Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful for licensees holding a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any manner misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand names of any alcoholic beverage.
(Code 1988, § 3-225; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-435. Display of licenses.
The licenses provided for herein shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view of the public at the place of business of the licensee.
(Code 1988, § 3-226; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-436. Licensees to maintain a copy of this article; employees to be familiar with its terms; responsibility of licensee for violations.
Each retail consumption dealer hereunder shall keep a copy of this article in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working therein with respect to the terms hereof and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be responsible for any acts of agents or employees which are in violation of this article or of the laws of the state or of the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner, except as hereinafter provided.
(Code 1988, § 3-227; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-437. Exterior advertisement prohibited.
No outdoor advertising or signs with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages, or the prices of such beverages, shall be permitted on the exterior of any retail outlet, or on the windows or elsewhere in the outlet that may be viewed from the outside.
(Code 1988, § 3-229; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-438. Sales restricted to premises only.
No retail consumption dealer shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any person except in said licensee's place of business.
(Code 1988, § 3-230; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-439. Acceptance and consideration of application after rejection or revocation.
When any license or permit authorizing the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the
180
premises is revoked, it shall be unlawful for the appropriate governing officials to accept and/or consider any application from the same applicant for license within 12 months from the time of such revocation.
(Code 1988, § 3-236; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-440. Time limit for commencement of business in licensee's establishment; forfeiture for nonuse.
(a) All holders of licenses for the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises must, within 12 months after the issuance of said license, open for business, the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within 12 months after the issuance of such license shall serve as cause for the forfeiture of such license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder.
(b) Failure to operate the business authorized by the license referred to in subsection (a) of this section for a period of six consecutive months after the licensee has begun operation under a license shall serve as cause for the forfeiture of such license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder.
(Code 1988, § 3-237; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-441. Completion of proposed licensed premises.
Where a building in which an applicant proposes to operate under a license permitting the sale of spirituous liquor for the consumption on the premises is at the time of the application for such license not in existence, or not yet completed, a license may be issued for such location providing the plans and specifications for the proposed building are filed with the clerk and show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this article and applicable ordinances of the city. No sales shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with said plans and specifications and is in conformity with all other provisions of this article and applicable ordinances of the city and an occupancy permit has been issued. (Code 1988, § 3-238; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-442. Removal of signs.
When any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages is revoked, all signs indicating that such beverages may be sold or purchased, shall be immediately removed from the place of business.
(Code 1988, § 3-239; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-443. Restriction upon transfers.
(a) Licenses for the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises shall not be transferrable except as otherwise provided in this section.
(b) In case of the death of any person owning a license issued under this article, or any interest therein, the same may, with the approval of the clerk and subject to
181
the terms of this article, be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or to the heirs at law of the deceased person, if such heirs meet all of the other qualifications contained herein. The license of such deceased person shall be held by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete execution of his estate and dispose of the license or his interest therein, but in no event to exceed six months.
(c) Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership and to assign his interest in such partnership to one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such withdrawal shall not, however, serve as to bring any new ownership into the partnership, unless all provisions of this article are fully complied with by the new partner.
(d) Should a transfer of the location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee and the new location shall meet all requirements of a new license to be issued hereunder, except payment of license and investigation fees.
(e) A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee himself will directly receive none of the additional capital investment. Under this section an additional partner or new stockholder must be approved in accordance with this article. This section only applies to corporations when the new stockholder obtains ten percent or more of the common stock.
(Code 1988, § 3-240; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-444. Application for new license in existing license location.
An application filed under this section shall meet and qualify under all requirements of this article for granting of a new license.
(Code 1988, § 3-241; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-445. Employees of licensees to be fingerprinted; procedure.
(a) All persons employed to work on the premises in connection with the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises must be fingerprinted by the county police department and issued a letter of clearance by the county police department indicating the person employed is eligible for employment.
(b) All persons subject to the provisions of this section shall, within three days after the date of their first work in an establishment holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages, report to the county police department for purposes of being fingerprinted.
182
(c) The county police department shall make a complete and exhaustive search relative to the record of any person so fingerprinted. In the event there is a record of a violation, as defined in section 6-447, the city marshal or city clerk shall issue a letter to the person fingerprinted stating that the person is not eligible for employment. The city marshal or city clerk shall likewise notify the employer that such person is not eligible for continued employment.
(d) Any letter of eligibility for employment issued hereunder shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless earlier canceled. The city may prescribe regulations for certifying the eligibility for continued employment without the necessity of an employee being again fingerprinted. The county police department may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility for employees which fee shall be paid by the employer or the employee at the time request for eligibility certification is made.
(e) It shall be the duty of all the persons holding a license under the terms of this article to file with the city clerk the names of all employees working on the premises and connected with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages with their Social Security number, date of birth, home addresses and home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees, with the names of new employees, must be filed with the city clerk within three days from the date of any such change.
(f) The licensee is responsible for the conduct and action of his employees while in his employment. (Code 1988, § 3-242; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-446. Regulations as to employees of licensees.
The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a license for the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises:
(1) No person shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, mix alcoholic beverages, or in any managerial position by an establishment holding a license for the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises until such person as been fingerprinted and a background check on said person has been performed by the county police department and the county police department has provided the city clerk with a letter indicating that the person is eligible to hold a pouring permit.
(2) This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy, cook, or dishwasher, if those employees are never allowed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, mix alcoholic beverages or in any way be associated with the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages.
(3) No pouring permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the city clerk and/or county police department and the appropriate fee which as established by the city and/or the county police department has been paid. A search of the criminal record of the person completing the application shall
183
be conducted by the county police department. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the person, through the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall not give rise any presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, that portion of these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection unless required by state law or court order.
(4) The county police department or its designee shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person submitting the application for a pouring permit. In the event that the person is eligible for a pouring permit under this section, the county police department shall issue a letter to the city clerk that the permit has been issued to the person, and stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for the pouring permit, the county police department shall notify the city clerk that the person is not eligible, and the reasons why the person is not eligible, and the city clerk shall notify the person in writing that they are not eligible for the permit, the cause for the denial of the permit, and the person's right to appeal the denial.
(5) No person shall be granted a pouring permit unless it appears to the satisfaction of the county police department and the city clerk that such person has not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, illegal possession or sale of controlled substances, illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any other sexually related crime within a period of five years of the date of the application. No person shall be granted a pouring permit who has been convicted, plead guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any federal, state or local law which constitutes a felony within five years of the date the application. For purposes of this section, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the defendant was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act as amended, however, any such offense shall not be ignored if the defendant violated any terms of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentence in court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender.
(6) A pouring permit shall be issued for a period of one year from the date of the original application. The pouring permit must be in the possession of the employee while the employee is working at the licensed establishment, and must be made available for inspection by members of the county police department or the city manager, city clerk or their designee.
(7) No person shall be issued a pouring permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed, or covered up any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making
184
application for the permit. If a permit is denied or revoked under the provisions of this section, no application from the same person shall be accepted for a period of at least six months.
(8) All pouring permits issued through administrative error are considered void and may be terminated and seized by the city manager, city clerk, county police department or their designee.
(9) All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon demand by any county police officer or the city manager or the city clerk or their designee. A new employee shall receive a receipt issued by the city clerk or county police department upon filing an application for a pouring permit. This receipt may be used as a pouring permit for a maximum of 30 days from the date of its issue. Replacement permits will be issued within 30 days of the original date of issuance upon payment of one-half of the normal fee for a pouring permit. After 30 days from the original issuance date, a new application and fee must be submitted in order to obtain a replacement permit.
(10) It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license under the terms of this section to file with the city clerk the names of all employees working on the premises and connected with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages along with the employee’s social security number, date of birth, home address and home phone number and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees must be filed with the city clerk upon the hiring of a new employee. Copies of these filings shall be provided to the county police department for use in random inspections.
(11) It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license under this section to inspect and verify that each employee has obtained a valid pouring permit and that the permit is in their possession at all times while working at the licensed establishment. Allowing an employee to work in the licensed establishment without possession of a valid pouring permit shall constitute a violation of this section, and both the employee and the licensee shall be subject to penalty for such violation.
(Ord. of 5-14-2001(2))
Sec. 6-447. Employment of persons with prior convictions prohibited.
No licensee shall employee in any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages any person in any capacity whatsoever, who has been convicted of, in this state or any other state, or in the United States, or in any other country, within ten years immediately prior to the application for employment: soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting of premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly house, illegal dealing in narcotics, sex offenses or other charges related to the manufacturer or sale of alcohol or any crime involving moral turpitude.
(Code 1988, § 3-243; Ord. of 12-11-1995, Amd. of 10-18-06)
Sec. 6-448. Distance from churches, schools, day care facilities, colleges.
(a) No license permitting the sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises shall be issued under this article if the premises of the applicant is located within a distance of 75 feet of the property line of any church, school, licensed day
185
care facility or college, except as otherwise provided in this section. The distances in this section shall be measured in accordance with the definition and method set forth in Section 6-362 of this Chapter. If an applicant or licensee otherwise qualifies hereunder, he shall be entitled to a license to continue to operate any business described herein in the event that subsequent to the date of granting a license hereunder a church, school, licensed care facility or college is located closer than the distance set forth herein.
(b) Because of the unique nature of the Town Center Overlay District (as set forth on the City’s Official Zoning Map) and the desire to encourage economic redevelopment and economic health and stability of that area, all distance limitations set forth in this section shall be reduced to zero feet for businesses located or proposed to be located in the Town Center Overlay (TCO). (Amended 2-10-14)
(Code 1988, § 3-248; Ord. of 12-11-1995; Amd. of 6-2000, Amd. of 10-18-06)
State Law References: Location restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 1.
Sec. 6-449. Hours of sale.
(a) No one holding a license under this article shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises at any time except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. until 1:30 a.m. Monday through Saturday; and in eating establishments which derive at least fifty percent (50%) of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, between 12;30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday.
(Amd. of 2-11-04, Amd. of 10-18-06 )
(b) No license holder shall serve alcoholic beverages at any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the Mayor and Council.
(Code 1988, § 3-249; Ord. of 12-11-1995; Ord. of 7-15-1996, Amd. of 10-18-06)
State Law References: Days and hours of sale, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-7, 3-3-20.
Sec. 6-450. Other licenses.
The licenses and taxes provided for in this article are not levied in lieu of any other license fees or taxes that may be levied upon licensed premises, but are in addition thereto.
(Code 1988, § 3-250; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-451. Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions.
No licensee shall employ any person under 21 years of age, in or about the premises where alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale, to sell, take orders for delivery, or to aid or assist in the sale or delivery,
directly or indirectly, of alcoholic beverages unless the person under 21 years of age shall be under direct supervision of a person who shall be both employed by said establishment and who shall be over the age of 21 years of age.
(Code 1988, § 3-251; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
186
Sec. 6-452. Sales to underage persons, incompetents, drunkards prohibited.
No licensee hereunder shall sell alcoholic beverages to any person under the age of 21 years of age, or to any person in an intoxicated condition or to any person known to such licensee or his employees to be a habitual drunkard, or to any such person known to such licensee or his employees to be of unsound mind. (Code 1988, § 3-252; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-453. Furnishing of alcoholic beverages to underage persons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase for or to furnish any alcoholic beverages to any person who has not attained the age of 21 years.
(Code 1988, § 3-253; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-454. Purchase, consumption or possession by or for underage persons.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages within the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a place where any person under 21 years of age is allowed or permitted to come and purchase, drink, or possess an alcoholic beverage.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any parent or other person to buy alcoholic beverages and furnish the same on the premises to persons under 21 years of age for consumption.
(d) It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to examine the identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age. A Georgia driver's license, which is apparently valid upon its face, may be accepted by the licensee or his employee as evidence of age.
(Code 1988, § 3-254; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-455. Misrepresentation of age by persons under 21 years of age.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to falsely misrepresent his age in any manner whatsoever.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages as defined herein.
(Code 1988, § 3-255; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-456. Alcoholic beverages in public places.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage while in or upon public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots, or other public ways except as otherwise provided or allowed by this Code.
187
(b) No person shall be in possession of any glass, can or open container containing alcoholic beverages on any thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or any other public way.
(c) No person, firm or corporation licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall permit any person to remove from such premises, any alcoholic beverage.
(d) No person shall have in his possession an open container containing alcoholic beverages while within or on a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, while parked or standing on a public street or public parking lot in the city, or while such vehicle is in motion.
(Code 1988, § 3-256; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-457. Special provisions applicable to wholesale purchase.
(a) Any person desiring to sell at wholesale any alcoholic beverages in the city shall make application to the clerk of the city for a license to do so, which application shall be in writing on the prescribed forms and pay any application and license fees as set by this article.
(b) No person who has any direct financial interest in any license for the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages in the city shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale alcoholic beverage license issued by the city.
(c) No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to any person other than a retailer licensed under this article. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business.
(d) No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle.
(Code 1988, § 3-258; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-458. Annual fees for wholesalers.
Each licensee for wholesale sales shall pay an annual fee of $100.00. This fee may be amended annually.
(Code 1988, § 3-259; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-459. Requirements of wholesalers.
All wholesale dealers or distributors shall be licensed by the state revenue department and shall comply with all laws and regulations of the state revenue department before they sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages in the city. Deliveries and sales shall be made only to retailers licensed
188
under the provisions of this article and all deliveries shall be made in conveyances owned and operated by such wholesale dealers or distributors. (Code 1988, § 3-262; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-460. Retailers to purchase from licensed wholesalers only.
Retail dealers in alcoholic beverages licensed under the provisions of this article shall not buy nor accept deliveries of spirituous liquor from wholesalers, dealers or distributors, except who are licensed by the state revenue department.
(Code 1988, § 3-263; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-461. Invoices.
(a) Wholesaler to keep copy. Upon each and every delivery by a licensed wholesaler to a licensed retailer, an invoice in triplicate shall be prepared showing the quantities and brands of spirituous liquor delivered, together with the price thereof and the excise tax due and collected thereon. The original of such invoice shall be delivered by the wholesaler to the retailer simultaneously with such delivery. The wholesaler shall retain the second copy of such invoice and shall keep it for a period of 36 months after the date of delivery and during such 36 month period, such invoices shall be made available for inspection by the clerk of Sugar Hill, or their duly authorized representatives. Upon request of the city, a copy of such invoice shall be attached to any reports requested or required by the city.
(b) Retailer to keep original. Each retail licensee doing business in the city shall keep and maintain the original invoice of each sale to him or purchase by him from a wholesaler of any alcoholic beverages for at least 36 months after the date of such purchase and shall maintain records to show the sales of spirituous liquor and any other records required by the city. The city, or its duly authorized representative shall have the right to inspect the records of each licensee and make a complete audit of the records of each licensee at any time. Failure of a licensee to maintain proper records showing receipt of spirituous liquor, payment therefor, and payment of the taxes due thereon to the appropriate wholesaler, and records which clearly show the sales, the amount of sales, and the types of sales of each licensee may, at the discretion of the clerk, after a hearing as herein provided, result in the revocation or suspension of such license.
(Code 1988, § 3-264; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-462. Production of records.
In conjunction with any application for license, or in conjunction with any license which has been issued under the terms hereof, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected hereunder, the clerk shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of any licensee for the purpose of auditing the records of such licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this article proving or disproving violation of any part of this article by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder.
(Code 1988, § 3-266; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
189
Sec. 6-463. Penalty for violation of article; enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the city manager, the city clerk, or their designee and by the county police department. The county police department is authorized to conduct random inspections of licensed establishments to assure compliance with the provisions of this article. Any person violating the provision of this article shall be issued a citation to the Municipal Court of the city, and upon conviction shall be punished by fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. of 5-14-2001(2))
Secs. 6-464--6-485. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE REVIEW BOARD Sec. 6-486. Established; duties.
There is hereby established an alcoholic beverage review board which shall have the duty of hearing appeals from decisions of the clerk denying the issuance or renewal of any license provided for by this article and to hear appeals from the decision of the clerk revoking or suspending any such license provided for by this article.
(Code 1988, § 3-233; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-487. Composition.
The alcoholic beverage review board shall be composed of five citizens of the city appointed by the mayor and council to serve two-year terms.
(Code 1988, § 3-233; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-488. Hearings.
(a) No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing except as hereinafter provided.
(b) The clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of his order to deny, suspend, or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the clerk may have a review thereof by appeal to the alcoholic review board. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the clerk.
190
(c) A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the clerk, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses.
(d) The findings of the alcoholic review board shall be forwarded to the clerk after the conclusion of the hearing and it shall be the duty of the clerk to notify the appellant of the action of the alcoholic review board.
(e) The findings of the city clerk shall not be set aside unless the alcohol beverage review board finds them to be:
(1) Contrary to law or ordinances;
(2) Unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole; or
(3) Unreasonable.
(f) The findings of the alcoholic review board shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said findings by certiorari to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
(Code 1988, § 3-234; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Sec. 6-489. Notice.
For the purpose of sections 6-486- -6-488, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by registered mail and/or certified mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail.
(Code 1988, § 3-235; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
Secs. 6-490--6-510. Reserved.
EXCISE TAX
Sec. 6-511. Excise tax: levied, amount, payment, duties of dealers and wholesalers.
(a) Scope of section. In addition to all other taxes or license fees heretofore or hereafter imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the city in the business of selling alcoholic beverages, there is imposed and levied upon all hereinafter described dealers within the city an excise tax to be computed and collected as hereinafter set forth. The taxes imposed by this article shall not be levied with respect to the following:
(1) Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental service only; and
191
(2) Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state or under the Constitution of the United States.
(b) Basis for computation of tax. The tax levied hereunder shall be computed on the basis of twenty- two cents ($0.22) per liter for spirituous liquors sold or delivered as hereinafter set forth. The twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter shall be pro-rated down on fractional parts of liters, so that each bottle or each individual size container shall be taxed on the basis of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any such licensee to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any liquor on which such tax has not been paid.
(c) Computations, payment, duties of wholesale dealer and distributor. The tax imposed shall be computed and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping, or delivering alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer in the city shall, as a condition to the privilege of conducting said business in the city:
(1) Keep and maintain true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of alcoholic beverages to each retail dealer in the city such records to be preserved for a period of not less than one year and to be made available on request for the inspection of any duly authorized representative of the city.
(2) Collect from each retail dealer in the city at time of delivery of alcoholic beverages the amount of tax due under the terms of this section and hold the same in trust for the city until such tax is remitted to the city as herein provided.
(3) On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, each wholesaler shall make a verified and comprehensive report to the city which shall correctly show and reflect all sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages to or for retail dealers in the city for the calendar month immediately preceding the date of said report. Said report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount of excise tax collected under the terms of this section, and such other reasonable information as may be requested by the city. Said report shall be accompanied by remittance payable to the city for all taxes collected or due, as shown on said report.
(4) The excise tax levied in this section is hereby levied upon the retailer licensed to do business in the city and it is the intent of this article to so levy this tax but to require the payment of the tax at the time of delivery to the retailer by the wholesaler, who shall have the responsibility of remitting the tax to the city on behalf of the retailer on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, as hereinbefore required. In the event the tax due hereunder is not paid on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, a ten percent penalty on the gross tax will be levied by the city against each defaulting retailing licensee for whom the tax is not paid on or before the tenth day of the month.
192
(5) To insure payment of the excise tax levied hereby and prior to the issuance of any retail alcoholic beverage license in the city, an applicant must post and file with the governing authority of the city, along with his application, a performance bond conditioned upon the faithful observance and performance by the applicant of the rules and regulations contained in this article, and upon the payment of any taxes due to the city. Upon the violation of this article, or any part thereof, such bond will be forfeited as determined by the clerk at a hearing held for that purpose upon three days' written notice given to the licensee concerned. Bond shall be payable to the clerk of the city and shall be in the amount of $1,000.00 and shall be in a form acceptable to the clerk of the city.
(d) Noncompliance by wholesale dealer; distributor. If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports required herein, the city shall notify such dealer or distributor in writing and if the reports are not made and the taxes are not remitted within five days from the date of such notice, such wholesale dealer or distributor shall be prohibited from making any further deliveries in the city and the retail licensees served by such wholesale dealer or distributor for whom the taxes have not been paid shall be subject to having their license suspended or revoked as herein provided.
(e) Unlawful retail sales. It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation to sell at retail within the city alcoholic beverages on which the taxes herein provided for have not been paid.
(f) Unlawful deliveries. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesale dealer or distributor, person firm or corporation to deliver any alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer in the city without at the time of such delivery collecting the excise taxes herein provided for.
(g) Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article or who shall assist any retail dealer in alcoholic beverages in the city to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes herein provided for shall be guilty of a violation of this section and on conviction thereof in the municipal court shall be fined or sentenced as provided by this article and any such person so convicted shall also be subject to having his license suspended or revoked, if he shall be a licensed dealer in alcoholic beverage at wholesale.
(Code 1988, § 3-260; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
State Law References: Local excise tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80.
Sec. 6-512. Excise tax on sale of spirituous liquor by the drink.
(a) Amount. In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the sale of spirituous liquor by the drink, there is imposed an excise tax upon the sale of said drinks in the amount of three percent (3%) of the total cost of such drink which is charged to the public. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee under this chapter and any such licensee shall remit the same to the clerk of the city on or before the tenth (10th) day of the succeeding month along with a summary of the licensee’s gross sales derived from the sale of spirituous liquor
193
by the drink. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales and shall be reported and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the clerk to the same extent as required of cash sales. It shall be the duty of every such licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levy hereunder to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable under this section, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due. It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three (3) years.
(b) Verification. In the event the clerk deems it necessary to verify the excise tax submitted to the city pursuant to this section, for any month, he shall notify the licensee of such need for verification and the licensee shall submit a verified comprehensive report to the clerk, prepared by an auditor, reflecting all sales under this section by the licensee and the taxes submitted to the city. The licensee shall have 30 days to submit such a report to the clerk following such a request.
(Code 1988, § 3-261; Ord. of 12-11-1995)
State Law References: Local excise tax on sales by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 2-4-130 et seq.
Sec. 6-551. Eligibility for issuance of a special event license.
(a) A special event license permitting the sale of malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises may be obtained for events sponsored or co-sponsored by the City. A special event license shall be subject to the following terms and conditions:
(1) An application must be submitted to the City Clerk at least 30 days prior to the date of the event and shall be accompanied by a non- refundable fee in the amount of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00).
(2) The application must be reviewed by the City Clerk in a timely manner and may be approved only if all terms and conditions are met and all information requested by the City Clerk is provided.
(3) The entity obtaining the special events license must have a valid alcohol beverage license from the State of Georgia and said license must be in good standing at the time of application and continuing through the time of the event.
(4) A special event license shall permit sales only at the Town Green, City Hall/Town Lawn/Amphitheater, E.E. Robinson Park, Sugar Hill Community Center and Gary Pirkle Park.
(5) All entrances and exits to the area where alcoholic beverages are permitted shall be through controlled access points which allow for easy monitoring of patrons entering and leaving the event.
194
(6) When safety and/or traffic circulation issues may exist, the City Clerk may require the submission of a crowd control and traffic plan to be approved by the necessary City Departments.
(7) A special event license shall not be valid for a period longer than three (3) days.
(8) A special event license shall be limited to sales of malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises.
(9) A special event licensee shall not sell, serve, or deliver more than two alcoholic beverages to one person at one time.
(10) No container in which alcoholic beverages are dispensed shall exceed sixteen fluid ounces in size.
(11) Possession of any open glass container for the consumption of any beverage is prohibited.
(12) Hours of sale for a special event license shall be restricted to between the hours of 9 a.m. until 11:59 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
(13) The City Clerk or her designee may immediately revoke any special event license if it is determined that continued alcohol sales may endanger the health, welfare or safety of the public.
(14) No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at a special event shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued by the City of Sugar Hill that was revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application for such event.
(15) The City Clerk shall notify the Gwinnett County Police Department of the date and location of all events for which a special event license is issued.
(16) Mayor and Council may waive the requirements for pouring permits where it is impractical to require each person pouring alcohol to obtain a permit, provided the following conditions are met:
(i) The licensed alcohol vendor(s) shall designate pouring managers to supervise volunteers pouring without a pouring permit.
(ii) All pouring managers shall be holders of a valid pouring
permit.
195
(iii) All pouring managers and volunteers handling alcohol shall be twenty-one (21) years of age or older.
(iv) A pouring manager shall be present in all areas where
alcohol is being served at all times alcohol is being served.
(v) A pouring manager may supervise a maximum of ten (10)
volunteers at a time.
(vi) Prior to allowing a volunteer to pour alcohol at an event without a handling permit, vendors shall provide basic instruction to volunteers regarding the applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances and event restrictions.
(vii) Pouring managers and volunteers serving alcohol shall
comply with all of the other requirements of state and local law and ordinances.
(viii) Pouring managers and the licensed alcohol vendor(s) for the event may be held accountable for violations of local or state
law and ordinances by the volunteers.
Secs. 6-552 – 6-570. Reserved.
Chapters 7--9 RESERVED
Chapter 10 ANIMALS *
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; animals generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq.
Article I. In General Sec. 10-1. City designated as bird sanctuary.
Sec. 10-2. Damage caused by animals.
Secs. 10-3--10-26. Reserved.
Article II. Animal Control
Sec. 10-27. Definitions.
Sec. 10-28. Restraint.
Sec. 10-29. Abandoned animals.
Sec. 10-30. Transient dogs and cats. Sec. 10-31. Cruelty to animals.
Sec. 10-32. Public nuisance animal. Sec. 10-33. Adoption.
Sec. 10-34. Disposition of impounded animals.
Sec. 10-35. Humane disposition.
Sec. 10-36. Vicious animals; dogs and cats.
Sec. 10-37. Biting dogs and cats. Sec. 10-38. Wildlife.
Sec. 10-39. Removal of dead animals.
Sec. 10-40. Collar and rabies vaccination tag.
Sec. 10-41. Vaccination of dogs and cats.
Sec. 10-42. Vaccines used and time of vaccination.
Sec. 10-43. Certificate of vaccination. Sec. 10-44. Summons.
Sec. 10-45. Liability of the county, city, animal control u nit, officers and employees.
196
Sec. 10-46. Interference with animal control officers.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. City designated as bird sanctuary.
(a) Area embraced. The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.
(b) Trapping, shooting, etc., birds or wild fowl; abatement of nuisance. It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests. Provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the city, then in such event health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, or as many of said clubs as are to be found in the city, after having given clubs at least three days actual notice of the time and place of the meeting to the representatives of such clubs.
(c) Destroying birds deemed nuisance. If, as a result of such meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then the birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed available by the health authorities under supervision of the chief of police of the city.
(d) Penalty for violation. Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days.
(Code 1988, § 4-2; Ord. of 10-4-1975)
Sec. 10-2. Damage caused by animals.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(b) Property of another includes the driveways and lawns of single- family residential homeowners as well as common halls in any apartment house, tenement house, hotel or other multiple dwelling; any entranceway, stairway, or wall immediately abutting a public sidewalk; and any theater, shop, store, office building, and any other building used in common by the public.
(c) Property of the city includes but is not limited to any and all public streets, sidewalks, parks, buildings, and adjacent lawns thereto.
(d) Unlawful whether under restraint or not. It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person having custody of any dog or other animal to permit, either willfully or by failure to exercise due care or
197
control, any dog or animal to enter upon or damage the property of the city, or to damage the property of another, whether said animal is under leash or restraint or not under such leash or restraint.
(e) Leaving fecal matter on property of another. For purposes of this section, the leaving or dropping of fecal matter by any dog or animal upon city property or property of another which is not immediately removed shall be deemed to cause damage thereupon.
(f) Removal of fecal matter by person in control. If a dog or animal damages property as provided herein, the owner or other person having custody or control of such dog or animal shall immediately remove such fecal matter or other droppings and dispose of such matter on his own property or in some other lawful manner that does not create a danger to the public health.
(g) Pro of deemed sufficient for conviction. In the event that any dog or other animal shall cause damage upon any property of another or upon city property, proof of the occurrence and proof of the identity of the owner or other person having custody or control of the dog or animal shall be sufficient to convict the person owning or having custody or control of the animal violating the terms and conditions of this section.
(h) Penalty for violation of section. The penalty for any violation of this section shall be a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00.
(Code 1988, § 4-3; Ord. of 10-14-1996)
Secs. 10-3--10-26. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
ANIMAL CONTROL
Adopted Gwinnett County Animal Control Ordinance as amended 9-14-15. Complete Ordinance on file at the City Clerk’s office.
Sec. 10-27. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandoned animal means any domesticated animal which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property, and is unattended or uncared for.
Animal control officer means an employee of the animal control unit duly deputized under the legal authority of the county or city to enforce the rules and regulations of this article.
Animal control unit means the division of animal control within the department of police services responsible for the enforcement of this article.
Dog running at-large means any dog not under immediate control, not on a leash, not at heel, not beside a competent person, not in a vehicle driven or parked, or not confined within the property limits of his owner.
198
Hunting dogs are under the control of the owner when hunting with the landowner's permission.
Guard or watch dog means any dog trained by a recognized training facility for the purpose of protecting individuals from assault and/or preventing property loss or damage. A recognized training facility shall be deemed to mean any person holding a state kennel license and a business license for either of the purposes described in this definition.
Impoundment means the act of taking physical possession and control of an animal by an animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law and transporting it to the animal control facility.
Livestock means and includes horses, cows, goats, pigs or any other four legged animal, excluding dogs and cats, used for pleasure or profit. Fowl are expressly included within this definition.
Owner means any person who owns, harbors, keeps, feeds, maintains, has lawful possession of, or knowingly causes or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept, or has an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises; provided, however, this shall not include a person hired or acting as custodian of the animal for his owner.
Police officer means any law officer empowered to make arrests or cause to be issued summonses within the city.
Vicious or dangerous animal means any animal that attacks, bites or injures human beings, pets, companion animals or livestock or which, because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite or injure human beings, pets, companion animals or livestock. No dog may be declared dangerous if a threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. The definition shall not be construed to include dogs that are part of a governmental organization or a trained guard dog in performance of its duties.
Sec. 10-28. Restraint.
(a) Leash law. It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any dog to allow such dog to run at- large, whether wearing a collar and tag or not, within the city limits. Any and all such dogs found running at-large, whether wearing a collar and tag or not, shall be immediately impounded by officers of the animal control unit or any police officer. The officers may pursue the dog onto private property to effect capture of such dog.
(b) Duty of all animal owners to be responsible. It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any animal to exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and animals from injuries or damage which might result from their animal's behavior. If the owner or custodian of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure that all provisions of this article are complied with.
(c) Duty to keep dogs under restraint while on owner's property. It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any dog to ensure that the dog is kept under restraint and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the dog from leaving the real property limits of its owner, possessor, or custodian, and ensure that:
199
(1) It is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition; and that such enclosure is securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended.
(2) It is securely and humanely restrained by chain, cable or trolley, invisible containment system, or other tether of sufficient strength to prevent escape.
(3) It is on a leash and under the control of a competent person; or it is off leash and obedient to that person’s command and that person is present with the animal any time it is not restrained as provided for in subsection (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section while on the owner’s property.
(4) The following additional precautions shall be taken by the owners, possessors, or custodians of vicious or dangerous animals:
a. In addition to the requirements in subsection (c)(1) of this section, owners of dangerous or vicious dogs who maintain their dogs out-of-doors shall fence a portion of their property with a second perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter or area fence, the vicious or dangerous animal must be humanely confined inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The sides must either be buried two feet into the ground, sunken into a concrete pad, or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate to the kennel shall be of the inward-opening type and shall be kept locked except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water.
b. Whenever the dog is outside of its enclosure as provided for in this subsection, but on the owner’s property, it must be attended by the owner and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. The leash shall be no longer than ten feet and the animal must be kept at least 15 feet within the perimeter boundaries of the property unless the perimeter boundary is securely fenced.
c. No vicious or dangerous dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate object such as a tree, post or building, outside of its own enclosure as provided for in this subsection.
(d) Guard or watch dogs.
(1) Owners or custodians of any guard or watch dog must confine all
200
such dogs within a perimeter fence and meet the following conditions, unless the dog is otherwise restrained as provided for in subsection (e)(2) of this section:
a. The fence shall be sufficient to prevent the dog's escape, with all points of ingress and egress securely locked at all times.
b. A "beware of dog" sign shall be conspicuously displayed on each exterior side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, minimum of two, as well as a sign on each ingress or egress point to the enclosure. Signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long.
c. The owner or custodian shall, prior to placing dogs on property, obtain from the department of police services a registration number and distinctive identification collar for each dog. There shall be a fee for each dog for the first year or any part thereof and a renewal fee for each dog every year thereafter as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The renewal fee shall be paid by January 30 of each year.
d. The registration number shall be tattooed at the owner's expense on the inside of the right hind leg or inside the upper lip of the dog. The collar provided shall be worn at all times.
e. The owner or custodian shall report to the department of police services within 24 hours of any of the following:
1. Escape of the dog;
2. An attack on a human or animal by the dog;
3. Transfer of ownership of the dog; and/or
4. Death of the dog.
(2) Any enforcement officer of the department of police services shall have the authority to enter onto private or public property for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this subsection (d).
(e) Duty to keep dog under restraint while off property.
(1) It shall be the duty of the owner or custodian of any dog to keep the dog under restraint and control at all times while the dog is off the real property
limits of the owner, possessor or custodian.
(2) For the purpose of this subsection a dog is deemed under control
201
when:
a. It is securely and humanely confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion;
b. It is properly confined within a secure enclosure with the permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located; and/or
c. It is securely restrained by a leash or other device held by a competent person; and/or
d. It is under voice command of a competent person who is in the immediate proximity of the dog.
(3) A guard or watch dog shall be deemed under control only when restrained by the collar provided for in this section and a secure leash not to exceed six feet in length. The leash shall be of sufficient strength to prevent escape.
(4) The following additional precautions shall be taken by owners, possessors, or custodians of vicious or dangerous animals. Except when being transported to a licensed veterinary facility, dangerous and vicious dogs shall not be allowed off the property of the owner. Should such transport to veterinary care be needed, the animal shall be securely and humanely confined within a vehicle. Movement of the animal from the residence of owner to and from the transporting vehicle and to and from the veterinary facility shall be conducted with the animal securely leashed by a leash no longer than six feet in length and muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting.
(f) Failure to keep animal under restraint. Failure to keep any animal under
restraint or control as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall
be punishable as provided in this article.
Sec. 10-29. Abandoned animals.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon any domesticated animal within the city. Each person who does abandon, or knowingly and willingly permits such abandonment, or aids in the abandonment of any domesticated animal shall be in violation of this Code and may be punished as provided in this chapter.
Sec. 10-30. Transient dogs and cats.
Any dog or cat shipped or transported through the county or entering the county only for the purpose of a temporary stay, when such stay shall not exceed 15 days, shall be exempt from license fees and collar and tag sections of this article. However, all other provisions of this article are applicable to such transient animals.
202
Sec. 10-31. Cruelty to animals.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
(1) Cruelty means and includes every act whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering or death is caused, permitted or allowed to continue where there is reasonable remedy or relief.
(b) Acts of cruelty. Acts of cruelty shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Whoever willfully or maliciously kills, abuses, maims, or disfigures
any animal or willfully or maliciously administers poison to any
animal or exposes any poisonous substance with intent that the poisonous substance shall be taken and swallowed by such
animal shall be in violation of this article;
(2) Whoever overloads, overdrives, tortures, torments, or deprives an animal of its necessary sustenance or shelter; beats, mutilates, or kills any animal or causes the same to be done; or carries in or upon vehicles or otherwise any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner shall be deemed in violation of this article.
(3) Whoever confines any animal and fails to supply it with sufficient quantities
of wholesome food and water; who keeps any animals in any enclosure without
wholesome exercise and change of air; or abandons any animal to die shall be
deemed in violation of this article.
(c) Animal fighting. No person shall:
(1) Own, possess, keep or train any animal with the intent that such animal shall be
engaged in an exhibition of fighting;
(2) Build, make, maintain, or keep a pit on premises owned by him or occupied by him
or allow a pit to be built, made, maintained or kept on such premises for the purposes
of an exhibition of animal fighting;
(3) In any manner encourage, instigate, promote or assist in an exhibition of animal
fighting or intentional combat; and
(4) Charge admission, be an assistant, umpire or participant or be present as a spectator
to any exhibition of animal fighting or combat.
(d) Impoundment. Any animal control officer, or other officer empowered to act by law, may impound any animal found to be cruelly treated.
(e) Duty of owner to keep animal enclosure clean. It shall be the duty of the owner to maintain in a clean and sanitary condition and free from extreme and unreasonable objectionable odor all structures, pens, yards, and areas adjacent thereto wherein any animal is kept.
203
State Law References: Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4.
Sec. 10-32. Public nuisance animal.
(a) Defined. A public nuisance animal shall mean and include any animal or animals that:
(1) Is repeatedly found at-large;
(2) Damages the property of anyone other than the owner;
(3) Is vicious;
(4) Attacks without provocation;
(5) Excessively makes disturbing noises including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept;
(6) Creates unsanitary conditions or offensive and objectionable odors in enclosures or surroundings and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance
or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises
where the animal is kept; and/or
(7) An animal which is not being kept in conformity with city zoning ordinances or resolutions.
(b) Impoundment. Any such public nuisance animal may be impounded and the owner or possessor charged for a violation of this article.
State Law References: Dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.
Sec. 10-33. Adoption.
(a) Rules for adoption.
(1) Voluntarily surrendered animals. The animal control unit or its designee may offer for adoption any animal unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after seven days or, if the animal is voluntarily surrendered to the animal control unit by the owner of the animal, the animal may be offered for adoption immediately.
(2) Age for person adopting; humane care. All persons adopting animals shall be over 18 years of age and shall provide proper and humane care, feeding, shelter and protection from the weather and veterinary treatment as required.
204
(3) Spaying and neutering required. All persons adopting a fertile dog or cat shall cause to have a female spayed or a male neutered within 30 days of the date of adoption or by the maximum age of six months for a female and nine months for a male, whichever is longer.
(4) Use of adopted animal for breeding or research. Any person adopting an animal shall not use the animal for breeding, exhibition or profit and shall not engage in any research involving the use of the animal or supply the animal to any individual or institution which may use the animal in research.
(5) Frequency of adoption. The frequency with which animals may be adopted and placed in any household may be restricted.
(b) Fees. Adoption fees in an amount stated in this schedule of fees and charges may include all or part of the costs of an examination and rabies inoculation and all or part of the costs associated with neutering or spaying dogs and cats.
Sec. 10-34. Disposition of impounded animals.
(a) Owner notification; redemption. Any animal, dog or cat, seized or impounded by an animal control officer, or any officer empowered to act by law, for running at- large shall be detained at the animal control shelter. The officers of the unit shall notify by mail the owner of such animal, if known or can be reasonably ascertained, that the animal has been impounded. The owner of any animal impounded may, within seven days after the mailing of the notice, reclaim the animal by the payment of an impoundment fee plus a boarding fee for each day the animal was impounded; the annual license fee if such has not been paid; and the cost of rabies vaccination if the animal has not been vaccinated within the prescribed time period. These fees, as applicable, shall also apply to biting animals held for rabies observation at the animal control shelter.
(b) Sick animals. If any animal seized or impounded by the animal control division evidences advanced symptoms of contagious, infectious or fatal diseases, is seriously ill or severely injured, the animal control unit shall seek the services of a licensed veterinarian who will determine whether to treat or euthanize the animal; or in the absence of an available veterinarian, the animal control officer may concur with a superior on duty, in addition to writing a complete report on the reason for euthanization. This action may be taken to control the spread of disease or to eliminate any further pain and suffering of an animal. Every reasonable attempt will be made to stabilize an owned animal to afford the owner the opportunity to pick up the animal.
Sec. 10-35. Humane disposition.
(a) Animals not claimed by owner. If a dog or cat is not claimed by the owner within seven days of notice to the owner, or a dog or cat of unknown ownership is not adopted within seven days of impoundment, then it shall be the duty of the animal control department to euthanize the animal by an injection of sodium phenobarbital in as humane and painless a manner as possible. An animal deemed to be highly desirable for adoption may be kept beyond the seven-day limitation, provided that the animal does not evidence any apparent signs of illness, injury, contagious or infectious diseases and that space is available to house the animal, at the discretion of the director of the division of animal control. Animals may be released by the local humane society to
205
approved foster homes authorized to accept animals if not claimed or adopted as provided. Animals shall not be provided to any public or private institution, animal dealer or other individual who may use or supply the animal for research purposes.
(b) Dangerous animals. Any animal which is suffering excessively or any animal which represents a real danger to persons or other animals, without regard to the period of confinement as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be destroyed by officers of the animal control unit in as humane a manner as possible.
(c) Treatment of sick animals. When, in the opinion of a supervisor of the animal control unit, a diseased or injured animal, taken into custody, is in need of immediate treatment, so as to lessen the animal's suffering or to prevent the spread of a communicable disease to other animals, he shall immediately obtain the services of or place the animal with a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of administering necessary treatment.
Sec. 10-36. Vicious animals; dogs and cats.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, accompany or be responsible for the presence of any vicious dog or cat on the streets or public places of the city or allow the animal to run on the premises of another at any time, unless and in addition to the other requirements of this article such dog or cat shall be securely muzzled to effectively prevent it from biting any person or other animal. Upon impounding a vicious animal for any reason, the animal control unit may for reasons of public safety, retain the animal at the impoundment facility until disposition by the appropriate court.
State Law References: Dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.
Sec. 10-37. Biting dogs and cats.
(a) Confinement for observation. In accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health and any ordinances or regulations promulgated by the city, all dogs and cats known to have bitten a person shall be confined to the animal control shelter or veterinarian's hospital for a period of ten days. All expenses incurred for boarding of the animal for this period of time shall be paid by the owner or possessor of the biting animals.
(b) Animals which cannot be confined. In accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of public health, all pets or wild animals, other than a dog or cat, known to have bitten a person, or any animal which cannot be held for a rabies observation period, shall be euthanized and a lab specimen of brain tissue sent to the state department of epidemiology for testing and control of rabies.
Sec. 10-38. Wildlife.
All complaints and matters concerning wild animals not of a domestic nature and complaints involving game animals or protected species and/or hunting, shall be forwarded to the state department of natural resources, game and fish division or the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Law Enforcement Division for proper disposition, i.e. compliance, apprehension, controlling and/or enforcement as may be necessary as provided by state and federal rules and regulations.
Sec. 10-39. Removal of dead animals.
206
Officers of the animal control unit are authorized to remove dead animals from public property including, but not limited to, public schools, parks and roadways. Carcasses on private property must be disposed of by the animal owner or property owner/possessor in accordance with provision of state law. Any dog, cat or small animal carcass to be picked up for disposal by the animal control center from a private residence must first be contained in a plastic bag and delivered to the right-of-way of the road or street for disposal. All dead livestock, including horses, cattle and any other large animal must be disposed of by the animal owner or property owner/possessor in accordance with state and local regulations.
Sec. 10-40. Collar and rabies vaccination tag.
(a) It shall be the duty of each dog and cat owner or possessor to provide a collar and tag for each dog and cat, and the tag or collar shall be on the animal at all times when the animal is not under immediate control of the owner or possessor of the animal.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination or owner's license tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove such tags from any animal without the consent of its owner or possessor.
Sec. 10-41. Vaccination of dogs and cats.
No person shall vaccinate dogs and cats against rabies who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state.
Sec. 10-42. Vaccines used and time of vaccination.
(a) All dogs and cats being owned, possessed, harbored or residing within the city limits shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, and using only those vaccines prescribed and/or approved by the state department of human resources.
(b) All dogs and cats are to be vaccinated against rabies before and no later than six months of age. All dogs and cats are to be revaccinated within the specified time, 12, 24, or 36 months depending on the type of vaccine used. Any dog or cat found not vaccinated by six months of age must have consent of a licensed veterinarian stating the reasons.
(c) Any person keeping, owning, harboring or having any other type of animal in possession, excluding dogs and cats, is not required to have the animal vaccinated against rabies but does so at his own risk and assumes all liabilities for adverse actions of the animal.
Sec. 10-43. Certificate of vaccination.
(a) Upon administering anti-rabies vaccines, a certificate of vaccination must be issued and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine, to prove evidence of vaccination.
(b) Any veterinarian is authorized and required in connection with his practice to is sue certificates of vaccination, provided he furnishes one copy to the animal owner, one copy to the animal control unit, and one copy is retained by the veterinarian. In addition, a fourth copy may be given to the
207
animal owner and delivered to the animal control unit for the license.
(c) The certificate of vaccination furnished to the department of animal control shall be maintained in an orderly indexed file for a period of not less than three years.
Sec. 10-44. Summons.
(a) The animal control officer or police officer at his discretion may not impound a dog or other animal found in violation of any section of this chapter, but return the animal to its owner or possessor and issue or cause to be issued a summons directing the owner or possessor of the dog to appear before the city court on a certain day to stand trial for the violation of this chapter.
(b) If a violation of this chapter has not been personally witnessed by the animal control supervisor or his authorized representative or other employee of the city, a subpoena may be issued to the person complaining to be and appear on the day and time set for trial, then and there, to testify on behalf of the city.
Sec. 10-45. Liability of the county, city, animal control unit, officers and employees.
The county, the city, the animal control unit and its officers and employees shall not be held responsible or liable for any accidents, diseases, injuries, or deaths to any animal while being impounded or boarded at the animal control shelter.
Sec. 10-46. Interference with animal control officers.
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the county or city vehicle used to transport the animal, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control shelter or impounding area.
Sec. 10-47. Enforcement of article.
In addition to enforcement by animal control officers and police officers, the provisions of this article shall be enforced by the City Manager or his designee, including but not limited to code enforcement officers of the City’s Department of Planning and Development.
Chapters 11—13
RESERVED.
Chapter 14
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Article I. In General
Secs. 14-1--14-20. Reserved.
Article II. Technical Codes
Sec. 14-21. Regulations.
Sec. 14-22. Amendments.
208
Secs. 14-23--14-45. Reserved.
Article III. Swimming Pools
Division 1.
Generally
Secs. 14-46--14-70. Reserved.
Division 2.
Private Residential Pools
Sec. 14-71. Definitions.
Sec. 14-72. Compliance with division required.
Sec. 14-73. Construction permit.
Sec. 14-74. Construction and design criteria.
Sec. 14-75. Safety precautions.
Sec. 14-76. Setback requirements.
Sec. 14-75. Safety precautions.
Sec. 14-76. Setback requirements.
Sec. 14-77. Inspections.
Secs. 14-78--14-100. Reserved.
Division 3. Minimum Standards for Swimming Pools, Public Spa Pools and Bathhouses
Subdivision I. In General
Sec. 14-101. Title and purpose.
Sec. 14-102. Definitions.
Sec. 14-103. Applicability of division.
Sec. 14-104. Plans and specifications.
Sec. 14-105. Water supply.
Sec. 14-106. Structure design and materials.
Sec. 14-107. Steps, ladders and handrails.
Sec. 14-108. Fences, barriers and gates.
Sec. 14-109. Electrical.
Sec. 14-110. Recirculation and filtration system.
Sec. 14-111. Pumping equipment.
Sec. 14-112. Piping.
Sec. 14-113. User load computation.
Sec. 14-114. Administration and enforcement; variance.
Sec. 14-115. Conflict with other codes, laws or regulations.
Sec. 14-116. Enforcement.
Secs. 14-117--14-140. Reserved.
Subdivision II. Public Pools
Sec. 14-141. Shape, slope and depth.
Sec. 14-142. Inlets and outlets.
Sec. 14-143. Overflow facilities.
Sec. 14-144. Hose and connections.
Sec. 14-145. Wading pools.
Sec. 14-146. Spray pools.
Sec. 14-147. Deck areas.
Sec. 14-148. Diving areas and equipment.
Sec. 14-149. Hair and lint strainer.
Sec. 14-150. Suction cleaner.
Sec. 14-151. Disinfectant feeders.
Sec. 14-152. Filtration equipment.
Sec. 14-153. Make-up water facilities.
209
Sec. 14-154. Disinfection and water quality.
Sec. 14-155. Safety precautions.
Secs. 14-156--14-180. Reserved.
Subdivision III. Spas
Sec. 14-181. Definitions.
Sec. 14-182. Shape, slope, and depth.
Sec. 14-183. Steps, ladders, and handrails.
Sec. 14-184. Recirculation and filtration system.
Sec. 14-185. Bathhouse facilities.
Sec. 14-186. Safety precautions.
Secs. 14-187--14-210. Reserved.
Subdivision IV. Bathhouses Sec. 14-211. Regulations.
Sec. 14-212. Facilities.
Secs. 14-213--14-240. Reserved.
Article IV. Ultra-Low-Flow Plumbing Fixtures
Sec. 14-241. Purpose.
Sec. 14-242. Definitions.
Sec. 14-243. Standards.
Sec. 14-244. Product certification.
Sec. 14-245. Exceptions.
Sec. 14-246. Penalties for violation of article.
Sec. 14-247. Compliance and enforcement.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 14-1--14-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
TECHNICAL CODES
Sec. 14-2 1. Regulations.
The city building inspection department shall follow regulations as outlined in the current edition of the following technical code books:
(1) Standard Building Code.
(2) Standard Excavation and Grading Code.
(3) Standard Fire Prevention Code.
(4) Standard Gas Code.
(5) Standard Housing Code.
(6) Standard Mechanical Code.
(7) Standard Plumbing Code.
(8) Standard Swimming Pool Code.
210
(9) Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code.
(10) Standard for Flood Plain Management.
(11) C.A.B.O. Codes for one- and two-family dwellings.
(12) Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings.
(13) Standard Amusement Device Code.
(14) Standard Existing Building Code. (Code 1988, § 5-1; Ord. of 12-10-1990; Ord. of 10-14-1991)
State Law References: Constitutional authority to adopt building code, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); minimum required standards, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I), 8-2-25(a).
Sec. 14-22. Amendments.
1 PURPOSE AND SCOPE
1.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Hereinafter, the State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction shall be referred to as “the construction codes”.
1.2 CODE REMEDIAL
1.2.1 GENERAL. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems.
1.2.2 QUALITY CONTROL. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein.
1.2.3 PERMITTING AND INSPECTION / NO WARRANTY. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The City of Sugar Hill, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. This ordinance and the construction codes shall not create any duty or right of recovery against the City of Sugar Hill or any of its officials or employees.
1.3 SCOPE.
1.3.1 APPLICABILITY:
211
GENERAL. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.
BUILDING. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one and two family dwellings.
ELECTRICAL. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto.
GAS. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer’s gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one and two family dwellings.
MECHANICAL. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one and two family dwellings.
PLUMBING. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system.
FIRE PREVENTION. The provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, or every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.
ENERGY. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction.
ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS. The provisions of the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one or two family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.
EXISTING BUILDINGS. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code, as adopted and amended
212
by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall be enforced within the City and shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators, and occupants; the alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy of existing structures.
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS. The provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall be enforced within the City and shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators, and occupants; the alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy of existing structures. See Section 2.5 below.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall be enforced within the City and shall apply and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. However, if there are any inconsistent or conflicting provisions between the International Property Maintenance Code and the City of Sugar Hill Property Maintenance Ordinance (Article V of Chapter 14 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sugar Hill) the City of Sugar Hill Property Maintenance Ordinance shall govern and shall be the enforceable provision.
1.3.2 FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITY. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any Federal or State agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for he enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law.
1.3.3 APPENDICES. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes.
1.3.4 REFERENCED STANDARDS. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory.
1.3.5 MAINTENANCE. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems.
1.4 DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SHALL BE THE BUILDING DEPARTMENT
There shall be created within and as part of the Department of Planning and Development the Building Department. The City Manager shall appoint Building Official(s) to enforce this ordinance and the construction
213
codes. The Governing Body shall establish the qualifications for the Building Official(s) and other Code Enforcement personnel.
1.4.1 RESTRICTIONS ON EMPLOYEES. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department.
1.4.2 RECORDS. The Building Official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act.
1.4.3 LIABILITY. Any officer or employee, or member of the Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge or his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defined by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings.
1.4.4 REPORTS The Building Official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He/She may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals during said year.
1.5 EXISTING BUILDINGS
1.5.1 GENERAL. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or pluming system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The Building Official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction.
1.5.2 CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY.
If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the Building Official.
1.6 SPECIAL HISTORIC BUILDINGS
The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as Historic Buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the Building Official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding
214
any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts.
2. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL
2.1 GENERAL
The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The Building Official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose.
2.2 RIGHT OF ENTRY
2.2.1 Any owner, applicant or authorized agent, upon submitting a request for a permit or by accepting a permit issued pursuant to the construction codes or this ordinance, shall be deemed to have agreed and consented to allowing the Building Official or his authorized representative to conduct an inspection to enforce any provisions of the construction codes. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Building Official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
2.2.2 When the Building Official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Building Official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes.
2.3 STOP WORK ORDERS
Upon notice from the Building Official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where
an emergency exits, the Building Official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.
2.4 REVOCATION OF PERMITS
2.4.1 MISREPRESENTATION OF APPLICATON. The Building Official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
2.4.2 VIOLATON OF CODE PROVISIONS. The Building Official make revoke a permit upon determination by the Building Official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or
215
replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes.
2.5 UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR SYSTEMS
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code.
2.7 ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND METHODS
The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the Building Official. The Building Official shall approve any such alternate, provided by the Building Official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The Building Official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate.
3. PERMITS
3.1 PERMIT APPLICATION
3.1.1 WHEN REQUIRED Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the Building Official and obtain the required permit for the work.
EXCEPTION: Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work:
1. any portable heating appliance;
2. any portable ventilation equipment;
3. any portable cooling unit;
4. any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the
construction codes;
5. replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe;
6. any portable evaporative cooler;
7. any self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 lb. (4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and
actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less.
3.1.2. WORK AUTHORIZED. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required.
3.1.3 MINOR REPAIRS. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the Building Official
216
without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes.
3.1.4 INFORMATION REQUIRED. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the Building Official on a form furnished for the purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the Building Official.
3.1.5 TIME LIMITATIONS. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 6 months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before than a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the Building Official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated.
3.2 DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS
3.2.1 REQUIREMENTS. When required by the Building Official, three or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term “legal” or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design.
3.2.2 ADDITIONAL DATA. The Building Official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the Building Official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal.
3.2.3 DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following:
1. All Group A, E, and I occupancies.
2. Buildings and structures three stores or more high.
3. Buildings and structures 5000 sq. ft. (465 m2) or more in area.
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered.
EXCEPTION: Single family dwellings, under 5000 square feet, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required.
3.2.4 STRUCTURAL AND FIRE RESISTANCE INTEGRITY. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication
217
conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls.
3.2.5 SITE DRAWINGS. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The Building Official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor.
3.2.6 HAZARDOUS OCCUPANCIES. The Building Official may require the following:
1. GENERAL SITE PLAN. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored.
2. BUILDING FLOOR PLAN. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored.
3.3 EXAMINATION OF DOCUMENTS
3.3.1 PLAN REVIEW. The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances.
3.3.2 AFFIDAVITS. The Building Official may accept a sworn affidavit from a Registered Architect or Engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The Building Official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the Building Official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the Building Official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances.
3.4 ISSUING PERMITS
3.4.1 ACTION ON PERMITS. The Building Official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the Building Official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant.
3.4.2 REFUSAL TO ISSUE PERMIT. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents
218
describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the Building Official shall not use a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal.
3.4.3 SPECIAL FOUNDATION PERMIT. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the Building Official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes.
3.5 CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITIES
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contractors for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor t have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed.
3.6 CONDITIONS OF THE PERMIT
3.6.1 PERMIT INTENT. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 6 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 6 months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the Building Official.
3.6.2 PERMIT ISSUED ON BASIS OF AN AFFIDAVIT. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the Building Official, are hazardous or complex, the Building Official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the Building Official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the Building Official.
3.6.3 PLANS. When the Building Official issues a permit, he/she shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, all three sets of plans. One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the Building Official, one set shall be returned to the applicant, and one set shall be retained at the site of work. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the Building Official or his/her authorized representative.
3.7 FEES
219
3.7.1 PRESCRIBED FEES. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc. has been paid.
3.7.2 WORK COMMENCING BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100% of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees.
3.7.3 ACCOUNTING. The Building Official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof.
3.7.4 SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body.
3.7.5 BUILDING PERMIT VALUATIONS. If, in the opinion of the Building Official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the Building Official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor.
3.8 INSPECTIONS
3.8.1 EXISTING BUILDING INSPECTIONS. Before issuing a permit the Building Official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which as application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes.
3.8.2 MANUFACTURERS AND FABRICATORS. When deemed necessary by the Building Official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes.
3.8.3 INSPECTION SERVICE. The Building Official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by 3.8.6. He/She may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service.
3.8.4 INSPECTIONS PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR COMPLETION. The Building Official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy or Completion.
3.8.5 POSTING OF PERMIT. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the Building Official or representative to conveniently make the
220
required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the Certificate of Occupancy or Completion is issued by the Building Official.
3.8.6 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS. The Building Official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the Technical Code:
BUILDING
1. Footings and Foundation Inspections: To be made after trenches are excavated and reinforcing steel is in place and forms erected. Building corners and setback lines are to be surveyed and delineated on site by the contractor and approved by the Building Official prior to installation of footing or foundation.
2. Frame Inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, all rough trades, including wiring, water and/or gas pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are completely roughed in. Windows and doors are installed and prior to building insulation installation.
3. Final Inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy.
ELECTRICAL
1. Underground Inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place.
2. Rough-In Inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
3. Final Inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy.
PLUMBING
1. Underground Inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place.
2. Rough-In Inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
3. Final Inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy.
4. Note: See Section 311 of the International Plumbing Code for required tests.
MECHANICAL
1. Underground Inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place.
2. Rough-In Inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all
221
ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
3. Final Inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy.
GAS
1. Rough Piping Inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected.
2. Final Piping Inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test.
3. Final Inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans.
ENERGY
1. Foundation Inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required.
2. Frame Inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage.
3. Final Inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances.
SWIMMING POOL
1. Site Inspection: Required only for private swimming pools.
2. Initial Construction Inspection: To inspect reinforcing steel or basket inspection and erosion control inspection.
3. Final Inspection: All swimming pool installations must be completed with all fences, gates, decks, plumbing equipment, filters, heaters and appliances in place. The pool shall be completely filled with water and in operation before final inspection.
3.8.7 WRITTEN RELEASE. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a
written release form the Building Official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been
made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three
inspections.
3.8.8. REINFORCING STEEL, STRUCTURAL FRAMES, INSULATION, PLUMBING, MECHANICAL, OR
222
ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, mechanical or electrical work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the Building Official.
3.8.9 PLASTER FIRE PROTECTION. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the Building Official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the Building Official has been received.
3.9 CERTIFICATES
3.9.1 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
3.9.1.1. BUILDING OCCUPANCY. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the Building Official has issued a Certificate of Occupancy. Said Certificate shall not be issued until all required building, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances released by the Building Official.
3.9.1.2. ISSUING CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the Building Official shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes.
3.9.1.3 TEMPORARY/PARTIAL OCCUPANCY. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building.
3.9.1.4 EXISTING BUILDING CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A Certificate of Occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the Building Official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Building Official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued.
3.9.2 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a Certificate of Completion may be issued. This Certificate is proof that a structure of system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This Certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
3.9.3 SERVICE UTILITIES
3.9.3.1 Connection of Service Utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the Building Official and a Certificate of Occupancy or Completion is issued.
223
3.9.3.2 Temporary Connection. The Building Official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
3.9.3.3 Authority to Disconnect Service Utilities. The Building Official shall have the power to authorized disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The Building Official shall notify the service utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter.
3.10 POSTING FLOOR LOADS
3.10.1 OCCUPANCY. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The Building Official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded.
3.10.2 STORAGE AND FACTORY-INDUSTRIAL OCCUPANCIES. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the Building Department.
3.10.3 SIGNS REQUIRED. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe flood loads, as reviewed by the Building Official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building.
4. TESTS
The Building Official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his/her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency.
5. CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS
5.1 BOARD ESTABLISHED
There is hereby established and constituted a Board to be called the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The Governing Body (a/k/a Mayor and City Council) shall be and shall serve as the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals (“Board”).
5.2 MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS
5.2.1 QUORUM AND VOTING. A simple majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum. All members of the
224
Governing Body, including the Mayor, shall be voting members of the Board and each member present shall have one vote. In varying any provision of the construction codes, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the Building Official, not less than three affirmative votes shall be required; however, a vote of three to three shall be deemed a denial.
5.2.2 SECRETARY OF BOARD. The City Clerk shall act as Secretary of the Board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote.
5.3 POWERS
The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have the power, as further defined in 5.4, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the Building Official and consider variances of the construction codes.
5.4 APPEALS
5.4.1 DECISION OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the Building Official to the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist:
1. The Building Official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system.
2. The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific cause.
3. That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case.
4. The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted.
5.4.2 VARIANCES. The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this ordinance, the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following:
1. That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others.
2. That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant.
3. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures or service system.
4. That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system.
5. That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare.
225
5.4.2.1 Condition of Variances. In granting the variance, the Board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within
which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the
Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation
of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes.
5.4.3 NOTICE OF APPEAL. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the
Building Official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the Building Official.
5.4.4 UNSAFE OR DANGEROUS BUILDINGS OR SERVICE SYSTEMS. In the case of a building, structure,
or service system, which, in the opinion of the Building Officials, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the
Building Official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period.
5.5 RULES AND REGULATIONS
The Board hereby establishes the following rules and regulations for its own procedure:
1. All matters presented to the Board, whether by appeal of a decision of the Building Official or by request for a variance, shall be heard in an open and public meeting.
2. The hearing shall generally be conducted in the following manner:
(a) The Building Official shall summarize the Notice of Appeal or Variance Request and present any facts or information pertinent to the appeal or variance. The Board may ask questions of the Building Official.
(b) The appellant, person requesting the appeal or variance or his/her representative (“Applicant”) shall be provided the opportunity to be heard. The Applicant may present any evidence, information, materials or witnesses that the Applicant desires for the Board to consider at arriving at its determination. The Board shall be allowed to limit the time for presentation by the Applicant. The time allowed shall not be less than that allowed for the Building Official and in no case shall the Board allow less than fifteen minutes for presentation time by the Applicant. The Board, in its discretion may extend the time for presentation by the Applicant.
(c) Public comments are not necessary for the consideration of the Board. However, in its discretion, the Board may call for comments from the public and shall be allowed to limit the presentation time of the public collectively to no more than fifteen minutes.
3. In considering a variance request, the Board shall consider and weigh the factors provided in Sections 5.4.2 and 5.4.2.1 above. The burden for proving the necessity of a variance shall be that of the Applicant. The Board shall use its discretion in weighing the factors found in Sections 5.4.2 and 5.4.2.1.
4. In considering an appeal from a decision of the Building Official, the Board shall consider all evidence, materials and testimony presented. In making its determination, the Board shall consider whether the Building Official abused his/her discretion in making the decision being appealed. If the Board determines the Building Official abused his/her discretion, the Board shall be authorized to change or vary the decision of the Building Official and shall be permitted to place reasonable conditions on its decision.
The Board shall meet within 45 calendar days after Notice of Appeal has been received or a request for a variance
226
has been filed.
5.5.1 DECISIONS. The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the Board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the Board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the Building Official or varies the application of any provision of the Construction codes, the Building Official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the City Clerk and a copy shall be maintained by the Building Official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant. Every decision of the Board shall be final, subject however to an appeal by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
6. SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the construction codes is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the construction codes.
7. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of violating this ordinance and the construction codes. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. Any fine assessed by a court of competent jurisdiction for a violation of this ordinance shall not be less than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Secs. 14-23--14-45. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
SWIMMING POOLS
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY Secs. 14-46--14-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL POOLS
Sec. 14-71. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation or association.
227
Private residential swimming pool means any swimming pool constructed and maintained for a single-family residence under the control of any individual homeowner or lessee, the use of which is limited to swimming by members of his family or their invited guests.
Public swimming pool means any swimming pool, including all facilities incident thereto, other than a private residential swimming pool, constructed and maintained for collective use by numbers of persons for swimming and operated by any person as defined herein, whether such person be owner, operator, lessee, licensee, or concessionaire, and regardless of whether a fee is charged.
Swimming pool means any structure containing an artificial body of water, together with piping, chemical feeders, pumps, filters and other mechanical equipment to control the quality, clarity and flow of the water and used or intended to be used as a place for swimming, diving, bathing or similar recreational activities. (Code 1988, § 5-30)
Sec. 14-72. Compliance with division required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any private residential swimming pool in the city except in compliance with the provisions of this division.
(Code 1988, § 5-31)
Sec. 14-73. Construction permit.
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to proceed with the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and appurtenances thereto located in the city without first obtaining a construction permit from the city manager in the manner herein below set forth.
(b) Application. All applications for a construction permit required hereunder shall be prepared on forms provided by the city clerk and shall be accompanied by plans and drawings drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth of an inch to the foot, on paper or cloth, in ink, or by some process that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot line, and including information pertaining to the pool, walk and fence location and construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems, and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool.
(c) Fee. Each application for a construction permit required by this division shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of $25.00 for each permit application.
(Code 1988, § 5-32)
Sec. 14-74. Construction and design criteria.
The following construction and design criteria shall apply to all private residential swimming pools for which a permit is required by this division:
(1) Recirculation required. All pools shall be of the recirculation type in which the circulation of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps, the water drawn from the pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool.
(2) Materials. All pools shall be constructed by use of impervious materials, nontoxic to man, which
228
will provide a smooth and easily cleanable surface with not cracks or open joints and which shall be finished in a light color.
(3) Slope and depth. All pools shall be constructed so as to conform to the following slope and depth criteria:
a. For water depth less than five feet, the slope of the pool bottom shall be uniform and shall not exceed one foot of slope per 12 feet. For depths greater than five feet, the slope shall not exceed one foot per three feet.
b. The maximum depth at the shallow end of the pool shall not exceed three feet, six inches.
c. The minimum depth of water in the pool shall be three feet.
d. The depth of the water at the deepest point in the shallow end and at slope break in the pool bottom the shallow and deep portions of the pool shall be permanently and conspicuously marked above water on the pool sides.
e. Walls of a pool shall be either:
1. Vertical water depths at least six feet; or
2. Vertical for a distance of two feet, six inches below the water level, below which the wall may be curbed to the bottom with a radius equal to the difference between the depth and two feet, six inches.
(4) Structural stress. Pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within, and if below ground level, to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure of 2,200 pounds per square foot.
(5) Walk areas. Unobstructed walk areas not less than 30 inches wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool. The walk area shall be constructed of impervious material, and the surface shall be smooth, easily cleaned, and of nonslip construction. The slope of the walks shall have a pitch of at least one -fourth inch to the foot, designed so as to prevent back drainage from entering the pool.
(6) Fences. All swimming pools for which a construction permit is herein required shall be completely enclosed by a fence. All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area shall be equipped with gates. The fence and gates shall be at least four feet, six inches in height above the grade level. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate. Fence posts shall be decay- or corrosion-resistant.
(7) Steps, ladders and handrails. Steps or ladders shall be provided at the shallow end of pools where the vertical distance from pool bottom to deck level is over two feet. Ladders or recessed steps shall be provided at the deep portion of the pool. Steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material with a minimum tread of 12 inches by three inches and a maximum rise of ten inches. Ladders within the swimming pool shall be corrosion- resistant and shall be equipped with a handrail at the top of both sides extending not less than 30 inches above the coping or edge of the deck.
229
(8) Skimmers. In every swimming pool at least one skimming device shall be provided. Skimmers shall be designed and located so as to effectively remove floating oils, wastes and other materials from the water surface of the entire pool. Skimming devices shall be built into the pool wall and shall meet the following general specifications:
a. Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow-through rate of at least thirty (30) gallons per minute or 3.75 gallons per minute per linear inch of weir, and the total capacity of all skimmers in any pool shall be at least 80 percent of the required filter flow of the recirculation system.
b. Skimmers shall be automatically adjustable to variations in water level over a range of at least four inches.
c. An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through which all overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap large solids.
d. The skimmer shall be provided with a device to prevent air lock in the suction line.
e. An equalizer line shall be provided with a valve that will remain tightly closed under normal operating conditions, but which will automatically open at a differential of not more than four inches between the pool level and the level of the overflow tank.
f. The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a rate of flow of at least 20 gallons per minute per linear foot of weir lip.
(9) Inlets and outlets. Swimming pool water recirculation inlets and outlets shall be located so as to produce as far as possible uniform circulation of water throughout the pool without the existence of dead spots. The area of all outlet openings shall be covered with gratings or other coverings which are not readily removable by bathers and which will not injure bathers' fingers. Outlets shall not connect directly to sewers, but shall be installed in such manner that any sewage backing up from the sewer will overflow to waste receivers and not reach the pool.
(10) Recirculation and filtration system and appurtenances. The entire recirculation and filtration system shall be designed for continuous operation and shall have sufficient capacity to clarify the entire pool volume in eight hours or less, thus providing at least three turnovers daily. Such system shall consist of pumping equipment, hair and lint catcher, filters, together with the necessary pipe connections at the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe connections necessary for backwashing filters, and facilities and equipment for disinfecting the pool water, as provided below:
a. The recirculation system pump shall have sufficient capacity to discharge the volume required for an eight-hour turnover of the pool.
b. The pump used for backwashing filters shall have sufficient capacity to provide a filter backwash rate of at least 12 gallons per minute per square foot of filter area.
c. A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall be installed on the suction side of the
230
circulation pump to prevent hair, lint and other extraneous matter from reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be so designed that they can be easily dismantled for cleaning and inspection, and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning.
d. Re-circulating systems shall contain rapid pressure filters. Sufficient filter area shall be provided to filter the entire contents of the pool in eight hours at the rate of not more than three gallons per square foot of filter area per minute. The filter backwashing facilities shall be sufficient to backwash at a rate of 12 gallons per minute per square foot of filter area. Pressure filters shall be equipped with readily accessible air relief valves, loss of head or pressure gauges on the inlet and outlet pipes, and an access head or hole large enough to permit inspection, maintenance and repair work. Sight glasses that can be easily removed for cleaning shall be provided in the effluent line from the filter units.
e. Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water. Any disinfection method using materials other than chlorine compounds shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. Disinfection equipment installed for the use of chlorine compounds shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a minimum free chlorine residual of five-tenths parts per million. The disinfectant shall be introduced into the recirculation system ahead of the filters.
(11) Electrical requirements. All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction with private residential swimming pools shall be in conformance with city ordinances regulating electrical installations.
a. All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as a result of contract with broken over- head conductors or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded.
b. Switches, starters, panel boards, and similar electrical equipment shall be located in areas not readily accessible to swimmers.
c. Each underwater light shall be individually grounded.
d. No overheard or underground electrical wiring shall pass within 15 feet of the swimming pool enclosure.
(Code 1988, § 5-33)
Sec. 14-75. Safety precautions.
Every private residential swimming pool shall be equipped with adequate safety devices which may include one or more throwing ring buoys with line attached, and one or more light but strong poles with blunted ends, for making reach assists or rescues.
(Code 1988, § 5-34)
Sec. 14-76. Setback requirements.
No portion of a private residential swimming pool located outside of a building shall be located at a
231
distance less than ten feet from any side or rear property line or building line, and all pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment shall be located at a distance not less than ten feet from any side property line. (Code 1988, § 5-35)
Sec. 14-77. Inspections.
The city manager periodically may inspect all private residential swimming pools to determine whether or not the provisions of this division and other ordinances and laws of the city regarding health, sanitation and safety are being complied with.
(Code 1988, § 5-36)
Secs. 14-78--14-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SWIMMING POOLS, PUBLIC SPA POOLS AND BATHHOUSES Subdivision I.
In General
Sec. 14-101. Title and purpose.
(a) A regulation establishing minimum standards governing the use and maintenance of swimming pools, and structures; establishing minimum standards governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things, and conditions essential to make swimming pools and surrounding premises safe, sanitary and fit for human use; establishing minimum standards governing the conditions and maintenance of swimming pools and structures; fixing certain responsibilities and duties of owners, operators and attendants of swimming pools; authorizing the inspection of swimming pools and structures and providing for the condemnation of all swimming pools and structures deemed unfit for human use.
(b) This division, upon adoption by the mayor and council of the city shall be known and may be cited as "The Sugar Hill Swimming Pool Ordinance."
(Code 1988, § 5-51; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 1)
Sec. 14-102. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Design professional means an architect or engineer registered to practice in the state.
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, and association and may extend and be applied to bodies, politic and corporate.
Prime design professional means the design professional responsible for the entire project.
232
Private residential swimming pool means any swimming pool for a single residence under the control of an individual homeowner, the use of which is limited to swimming or bathing by family members or their invited guests. Facilities serving two to five private residences may, upon application, be considered as private under this regulation.
Public swimming pool means any swimming pool, other than a private residential swimming pool, for collective use by numbers of persons for swimming or bathing operated by any person as defined herein, whether he be owner, operator, lessee, licensee, or concessionaire regardless of whether a fee is charged, and all facilities incident thereto.
Swimming pool means any structure of inert and enduring material such as concrete, masonry, metal, or other impervious material containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving, or recreational bathing.
Turnover means the ratio of the volume of water circulated to the capacity of the pool. (Code 1988, § 5-52)
Sec. 14-103. Applicability of division.
The provisions of this division are applicable to all swimming pools, both public, and residential as hereinafter designed, located in the city, provided, however, that both public and private residential swimming pools in existence on the effective date of these regulations, which have permits and are in compliance with the existing regulations, except in cases of major improvements and/or remodeling shall be approved under this division; and provided further that swimming pools which serve a restricted clientele only, such as hotels, motels, apartments, and condominiums, shall not be required to meet the requirements hereof relating to telephone, showers, toilets, lavatory facilities and dressing rooms where such facilities are readily available in near or close by structures to all persons who may use the swimming pool.
(1) Permits (public). It shall be a violation of this division for any person to operate a public swimming pool in the city who does not possess an unrevoked operating permit from the director of the county board of health. Only persons who comply with all the requirements of this division shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. Such a permit may be temporarily suspended by the director of the county board of health upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this division; or revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by the director of the county board of health upon serious or repeated violations.
(2) Inspection of swimming pools (public). Periodically, the director of the county board of health, or his duly appointed representative shall inspect every operating swimming pool located within the city. In the event the director or his representative discovers the violation of any item relative to sanitation and safety, he shall make a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems necessary for the defect to be remedied and the second inspection shall be used to determine
compliance with the requirements of this division. Any violation of the same item of the regulation on the second inspection shall be grounds for the immediate suspension of the permit to operate for that particular pool.
(Code 1988, § 5-53; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3)
Sec. 14-104. Plans and specifications.
233
The plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be accompanied by complete specifications so as to permit a comprehensive review of the plans including the piping and hydraulic details and shall include:
(1) A plan and sectional view with all the necessary dimensions of both the pool and surrounding areas.
(2) Complete site drainage details including diversion ditches for surface run-off.
(3) A piping diagram showing all appurtenances, including treatment facilities in sufficient detail, as well as pertinent elevation data, to permit a hydraulic analysis of the system.
(4) Specifications shall contain details of all treatment equipment, including performance characteristics of pumps, chlorinators, chemical feeders, filters, strainers, interceptors and related equipment.
(Code 1988, § 5-54; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 4)
Sec. 14-105. Water supply.
(a) The water supply for all pools, showers, lavatories, drinking fountains, and any other uses in conjunction with the pool shall be adequate and shall comply with all requirements of the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977 and the rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Natural Resources.
(b) The water distribution system serving the swimming pool shall be protected against backflow by means of an air gap, not less than two service pipe diameters in width, between the service pipe and the flood rim of the receiving vessel, or backflow prevention device approved by county planning and development department and the director of the county board of health or his designated representative.
(Code 1988, § 5-55; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 5)
Sec. 14-106. Structure design and materials.
(a) Swimming pools shall be designed and constructed to withstand all structural stresses including external hydrostatic pressures and flotation.
(b) Public swimming pools shall be constructed of inert and enduring materials, nontoxic to man, which will provide a smooth and easily cleanable surface with no cracks or open joints, and shall be finished in a light color. Interior corners shall be covered with a minimum radius of six inches.
(Code 1988, § 5-56; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 6)
Sec. 14-107. Steps, ladders and handrails.
Steps or ladders shall be provided at the shallow end of pools where the vertical distance from pool bottom to deck level is over two feet. Recessed steps or ladders shall be provided at the deep portion of the pool and if the pool is over 30 feet wide, such steps or ladders shall be installed on each side. A means of egress shall be provided for each 75 feet of pool perimeter.
234
(1) Steps shall be of non-slip design with minimum tread of 12 inches and maximum rise of 12 inches. Abrupt drops, or submerged projections into the pool shall be guarded by handrails.
(2) Ladders shall be corrosion-resistant and shall be equipped with non-slip treads. They shall be designed to provide a hand hold and shall be rigidly installed with clearance between the ladder and the pool wall not less than three inches nor more than six inches.
(3) Steps inserted in the pool wall shall be of easily cleanable construction, designed to drain into the pool, and shall be at least 14 inches wide and five inches deep and a maximum of 12 inches vertical spacing.
(4) Ladders within the swimming pool shall be equipped with a handrail at the top of both sides thereof extending not less than 30 inches above the coping or edge of the deck.
(Code 1988, § 5-61; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 11)
Sec. 14-108. Fences, barriers and gates.
An effective fence or barrier, not less than four feet high, shall be provided on the outer side of the walk area to prevent spectators in street attire from traversing the pool walk and prohibit access of unattended children and animals to the pool. There shall be no more than four inches of clearance between the bottom of the fence barrier and ground surface or pool deck. Any gates shall be located at the shallow end of the pool and shall be self-closing and have a lockable self-latching device. Where pools serve special purposes, such as a therapeutic pool, wavier of this requirement may be acceptable.
(Code 1988, § 5-64(3); Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 14)
Sec. 14-109. Electrical.
All electrical materials and workmanship shall be in compliance with the Standard Building Code and current adopted edition of the National Electrical Code.
(1) In all installations to be used at night, pools, deck areas, dressing rooms, toilets, equipment rooms, chemical rooms, and concessions shall be lighted in accordance with the following minimum standards:
a. Underwater lighting.
1. Indoor, 100 lamp lumens/square foot of pool surface.
2. Outdoor, 60 lamp lumens/square foot of pool surface.
b. Deck lighting, footcandles maintained in service.
(Public Only)
Outdoor
Indoor
Exhibition
20 F.C.
50 F.C.
Recreation
10 F.C
30 F.C.
Min. mounting ht.
30 feet
20 feet
c. Dressing rooms, toilets and accessory areas. Lighting in dressing rooms, toilets, equipment rooms, chemical rooms, concessions, and related areas shall be in compliance with the above -referenced codes.
235
(2) Switches, starters, panelboards and similar electrical equipment shall be located in areas not readily accessible to bathers.
(3) Each underwater light shall be individually grounded.
(4) No overhead electrical wiring shall pass within 20 feet of the swimming pool enclosure. (Code 1988, § 5-66; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 16)
Sec. 14-110. Recirculation and filtration system.
The entire recirculation and filtration system shall be designed for continuous operation and shall have sufficient capacity to clarify the entire pool volume in eight hours or less thus providing at least three turnovers daily. Where separate wading pools are provided for children recirculation capacity shall provide for complete turnover of the wading pool content every two hours or less. The pool turnover rate of eight hours will provide satisfactory water quality under "normal" conditions. Turnover rates of less than eight hours should be considered when the maximum patron load can be expected for extended periods and/or the environmental conditions (temperature, sunshine, debris, wind, etc.) are expected to be extreme.
(1) A rate-of-flow indicator, reading in gallons per minute, and a flow regulating valve shall be installed and located so that the rate of recirculation and backwash rate will be indicated and can be controlled.
(2) All recirculation and filtration equipment that requires adjustment and maintenance, and sight- glasses, dials or meters that must be recorded, shall be readily accessible and have unobstructed clearance from walls, ceilings, and other equipment, and shall be well lighted.
(3) Swimming pool heaters when used shall be certified by a nationally recognized organization and shall be in compliance with the National Gas and Electrical Codes.
(Code 1988, § 5-67)
Sec. 14-111. Pumping equipment.
Pumps and motors shall have sufficient capacity to provide the required number of turnovers specified in section 14-110 above and for providing adequate flow and head to backwash filters at rates set forth below:
(1) Recirculation pumps shall be located below the pool water level to provide positive pressure on the suction side or positive priming method shall be provided. A check valve shall be installed on the pump discharge line.
(2) Requirements for filtration shall be based upon the maximum head loss developed immediately prior to backwashing the filters.
(3) Additional head of five percent to ten percent should be added for pump ware, piping changes etc. (safety factor).
(Code 1988, § 5-68)
Sec. 14-112. Piping.
Pool piping shall be detailed on the plans as to size and material. Buried flexible plastic pipe shall not be
236
used. Piping shall be of nontoxic material, resistant to corrosion, and be able to withstand operating pressures. Plastic pipe, when used shall be NSF approved. Piping shall be in compliance with the state plumbing code.
(1) Piping shall be designed to carry the required quantity of water at a maximum velocity not to exceed six feet per second on piping to the suction side of the recirculation pump and not to exceed ten feet per second in discharge lines.
(2) Piping shall be positively supported to prevent settlement which may cause air pockets or sediment traps or rupture of lines. Piping shall be provided with uniform slope and with positive means of draining water to prevent damage from freezing.
(3) Valves shall be provided to cut off flow during cleaning or inspection of strainers and pumps. (Code 1988, § 5-71; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 21)
Sec. 14-113. User load computation.
In computing user loading, those portions of the swimming pool five feet or less in depth shall be designated as "non-swimming" areas and those portions over five feet in depth shall be designated as "swimmer areas." To compute the in pool swimmer and bather capacity, swimming pool areas shall be determined as follows:
(1) Ten square feet of pool water surface area shall be provided for each non-swimmer expected at time of maximum load.
(2) Twenty-four square feet shall be provided for each swimmer expected at time of maximum load.
(3) Three hundred square feet of pool water surface area shall be reserved around each diving board or diving platform and this area shall not be included in computing the area of the swimming section. During the preliminary design phase of a swimming pool facility, the owner (operator), prime design professional, and the governing authority should agree on pool and deck capacities, depending on the establishment or area served. In general, the experience and knowledge of the area by the governing authority should be the prime factors in capacity determinations.
(Code 1988, § 5-77; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 27)
Sec. 14-114. Administration and enforcement; variance.
This chapter shall be administered by the director of the county board of health, who shall have the authority to grant a variance from the requirements of this chapter as follows:
(1) Where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that strict compliance with the standards would result in practical difficulty to or induce hardship upon the property owner due to special conditions or cause;
(2) Where the public or private interest in granting of the variance is found by the director to clearly outweigh the interest of the application of uniform rules; and
(3) Where such alternative measures are provided which in the opinion of the director will provide adequate public health and safety protection.
237
In granting a variance, the director may attach thereto any condition which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, public health, safety and welfare secured. Such variance shall not waive any requirement of other federal, state, or county codes which may also be applicable to the design, construction or operation of any items covered by these health regulations.
(Code 1988, § 5-85; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 35)
Sec. 14-1 15. Conflict with other codes, laws or regulations.
Nothing in this division is intended to, nor will it serve to supersede any other federal, state, or county code, regulation, or ordinance. Where a conflict may be deemed to exist, the stricter shall apply. (Code 1988, § 5-87; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 37)
Sec. 14-116. Enforcement.
(a) This article, upon adoption by the city, shall be enforced by the county board of health, as a duly adopted ordinance of the city. Any person violating any provision in this division shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city, and upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by confinement in the county jail for a total term not to exceed 60 days.
(b) The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this division on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law.
(Code 1988, § 5-88; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 38)
Secs. 14-117--14-140. Reserved.
Subdivision I.
Public Pools
Secs. 14-141. Shape, slope and depth.
The pool shall be designed and constructed so that efficient and safe control of the pool and bathers can be accomplished.
(1) For water depth less than five feet the slope of the pool bottom shall be uniform and shall not exceed one foot of slope in 12 feet. For depths greater than five feet the slope shall not exceed one foot in three feet.
(2) The maximum depth at the shallow end of the pool shall not exceed three feet, six inches, except for competitive or special purpose pools.
(3) The minimum depth of water in pools shall be three feet except for special instructional pools or for restricted or recessed areas in general pools which are set aside primarily for the use of
238
children. Such areas when included as part of the pool shall be separated from the pool by proper means of a safety line supported by buoys and attached to the side walls.
(4) The depth of the water at the deepest point, at the shallow end, and at slope break in the pool bottom between the shallow and deep portions of the pool shall be permanently and conspicuously marked above water at pool sides and deck. Markers shall be visible at night under artificial illumination where night swimming is permitted.
(5) Walls of a pool shall be either vertical for water depths of at lease six feet, or vertical for a distance of two feet, six inches below the water level, below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius equal to the difference between the depth and two feet, six inches.
Sec. 14-142. Inlets and outlets.
Inlets and outlets to pools shall be arranged so as to get effective and uniform circulation of the incoming water throughout the pool.
(1) A sufficient number of inlets shall be provided to obtain adequate circulation and prevent dead spots. A maximum spacing of 20 feet shall be provided between inlets.
(2) Maximum flow rates (in gpm) through various fixed inlet branches shall be not more than as listed below:
Size (inches)
GPM
1
10
1
1/4
20
1
1/2
30
2
50
(3) All inlets shall be designed as adjustable orifices, or shall be individually valved, and shall be submerged not less than 24 inches below overflow level to reduce the escape of disinfecting agents. Inlets shall be flush with the pool wall. Proprietary inlet systems that are part of a gutter or skimmer system and do not meet all of the above inlet requirements may be considered to meet the requirements of this division if the inlet system meets the intent of the above requirements, has been proven to operate satisfactorily, and or acceptable to the director of the county board of health or his representative.
(4) Two or more outlets shall be provided at the deepest point of the pool to permit the pool to be completely drained. Each low point in the pool shall be adequately served by an outlet.
(5) Outlets shall be spaced not more than 30 feet apart and not more than 15 feet from the side walls.
(6) The area of all outlet openings shall be covered with gratings or other coverings which are not readily removable by bathers.
(7) Net openings in each floor outlet covering or grating shall be at least four times the area of the discharge pipe or shall provide sufficient area so that the maximum velocity of the water passing the grate will not exceed 1 1/2 feet per second. The width of the opening on the grating shall be not
239
less than one-half inch and not more than one inch.
(8) Outlets shall not connect directly to sewers but shall be installed in such a manner that any sewage backing up from the sewer will overflow to waste and cannot reach the pool. Pool drainage, valves and pumps shall be sized to prevent surcharge of the sanitary sewer.
(Code 1988, § 5-58; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 8)
Sec. 14-143. Overflow facilities.
Positive means shall be provided for continuous removal of scum, sputum and floating debris from the pool surface. Drainage from overflow facilities shall be discharged to waste or to a make-up or surge tank.
(1) Standards for overflow gutters. Overflow gutters where used shall meet the following standards:
a. Overflow gutters shall extend completely around the swimming pool except at steps or
recessed ladders. The lip of the gutter shall be level and shall be designed to serve as a handhold for bathers.
b. Overflow gutters shall be smooth finished and of open, roll-over or semi-recessed type, except overflow gutters for water-level deck type public swimming pools may be countersunk in a deck sloped to drain from the gutter and such gutters shall be covered by a flush mounted grating.
c. Overflow gutters shall be designed to permit ready and effective cleaning and to prevent accidental entrapment of bather's arms or legs.
d. Overflow gutter and outlet design shall provide for continuous removal of not less than 50 percent of the re-circulated water for return to the filter or to waste.
e. Overflow gutters shall be provided with drainage outlets of two inches minimum diameter at intervals of not more than 15 feet. Outlets shall be covered by removable gratings.
(2) Standards for skimmers. Skimmers, where used shall comply in all respects with appropriate standards of the National Sanitation Foundation regarding design, operation and safety and shall meet the following standards:
a. Skimmers may be used in lieu of overflow gutters provided the circulation system is designed to produce substantial circulatory movement to pool water for promotion of skimming and of uniform disinfectant distribution and provided a handhold equivalent to bullnose coping with outer two inches not over 2 1/2 inches thick is extended around the pool perimeter not more than nine inches above the normal water level.
b. Skimmers shall be designed for a flow through rate of at least 30 gallons per minute and the total capacity of all skimmers in any pool shall be at least 80 percent of the required filter flow of the recirculation system. Each skimmer shall be provided with a valve for equalization of flow.
c. Skimmers shall be built into the pool wall and the weir shall be automatically adjustable to
240
water level variations over a range of at least four inches. At least one skimmer shall be located to oppose the prevailing wind.
d. Skimmers shall be designed and located to effectively remove floating materials from the water surface of the entire pool area. At least one skimmer shall be provided for each 500 square feet of water surface area or fraction thereof.
e. Skimmers shall be provided with an easily removable and cleanable screen or basket to trap large solids.
f. Skimmers shall be designed or equipped to prevent air lock in the suction line, if used, shall be sized to meet capacity requirements of the filter and pump and in no case shall be less than two inches in diameter. Equalizer lines shall be installed at least one foot below the lowest weir level and equipped with valves or devices to remain closed at normal operating conditions but automatically open when water level drops two inches below the lowest weir level.
Sec. 14-144. Hose and connections.
Sufficient hose connections, at least three-quarters inch in diameter, shall be provided for cleaning the pool, decks, walks, toilets, dressing rooms and other flooded areas used in connection with pools and bathhouses. Hose connections shall be fitted with an approved vacuum breaker.
(Code 1988, § 5-60; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 10)
Sec. 14-145. Wading pools.
Wading pools for non-swimming children may be independent auxiliary pools or may be restricted areas of a general swimming pool. All applicable sections of this standard shall apply to wading pools.
(1) Restricted areas of swimming pools set aside for use as wading pools shall be separated from the main body of the pool by means of a safety line attached to the side walls and supported by buoys. This restricted area of the swimming pool shall have a turnover rate of once every two hours or less with inlets and outlets and overflow facilities sized accordingly.
(2) Independent wading pools shall have maximum depth of not more than 18 inches; the bottom shall be nonabrasive, shall have a non-slip finish and shall be sloped toward a drain at not more than three inches in ten feet nor less than one inch in ten feet. Such wading pools shall be served by a swimming pool recirculation system with turnover rates of once every two hours or less.
(Code 1988, § 5-62; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 12)
Sec. 14-146. Spray pools.
(a) Spray pools are small independent artificial pools for non-swimming children into which water is sprayed but is not allowed to pond. Spray pools may be supplied by the swimming pool recirculation system or by water meeting the same quality requirements from other sources with all drainage to waste. All applicable sections of this standard shall apply to spray pools.
241
(b) Spray pool bottoms shall be nonabrasive, shall have a non-slip finish, and shall be sloped toward a drain at not more than three inches in ten feet nor less than one inch in ten feet.
(Code 1988, § 5-63)
Sec. 14-147. Deck areas.
A clear and unobstructed paved deck or walkway shall extend completely around the pool; deck width shall be at least five feet measured from the pool side edge, except at the deep end where there is a diving board and width shall be at least ten feet.
(1) Deck drainage shall be conducted away from the pool area and shall be pitched to drains designed to conduct drainage from the pool to points of disposal in a manner that will not create unsanitary, hazardous or objectionable conditions. Decks shall be sloped no less that one-quarter inch per foot.
(2) Decks shall have a non-slip surface and shall be of a material and finish that can be cleaned by hosing.
(3) An effective fence or barrier, not less than four (4) feet high, shall be provided on the outer side of the walk area to prevent spectators in street attire from traversing the pool walk and prohibit access of unattended children and animals to the pool. There shall be no more than four (4) inches of clearance between the bottom of the fence barrier and the ground surface or pool deck.
Any gate(s) shall be located at the shallow end of the pool and shall be self-closing and have a lockable self-latching device. Where pools serve special purposes, as therapeutic pool, waiver of this requirement may be acceptable.
(Code 1988, § 5-64(1), (2); Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 14)
Sec. 14-148. Diving areas and equipment.
(a) At least 15 feet of free and unobstructed head room shall be provided above diving boards.
(b) Diving boards steps and ladders shall be of corrosion-resistant material, easily cleanable and non-slip design, and kept in good repair. Handrails shall be provided at all steps and ladders leading to diving boards with elevations one meter or more high shall be protected with guard railings.
GRAPHIC UNAVAILABLE: Click here/.
Board Height Over
Water
Minimum Dimensions
D1
D2
L1
L2
L3
26"
(2/3 m.)
7' - 0"
8' - 6"
2'
- 6"
8' - 0"
10'
- 6"
242
30"
(2/3 m.)
7' - 6"
9' - 0"
3'
- 0"
9' - 0"
12'
- 0"
1 Meter
8' - 6"
10' - 0"
4'
- 0"
10' - 0"
15'
- 0"
3 Meter
11' - 0"
12' - 0"
6'
- 0"
10' - 6"
21'
- 0"
Note: Placement of boards shall observe the following minimum dimensions. With multiple board installations minimum pool widths must be increased accordingly.
(1) One meter or dock level board to pool side: nine feet (2.74m).
(2) Three meter board to pool side: 11 feet (3.35m).
(3) One meter or dock level board to three meter board: ten feet (3 .05m).
(4) One meter or dock level to another one meter or dock level board: eight feet (2.44m).
(5) Three meter to another three- meter board: ten feet (3 .05m).
(Code 1988, § 5-65; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 15)
Sec. 14-149. Hair and lint strainer.
A strainer shall be provided on the suction side of the pump to prevent hair, lint and other matter from reaching the pump and filters. Strainers shall be corrosion resistant with openings not over one-eighth inch in width and with a size providing a free flow area at least four times the area of the pump suction line and shall be readily accessible for frequent cleaning.
(Code 1988, § 5-69; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 19)
Sec. 14-150. Suction cleaner.
A suction cleaner, either built in or portable type, shall be provided for removing sediment from the pool floor and shall be capable of reaching all parts of the pool floor. Built- in cleaners shall provide sufficient connections in the pool walls at least eight inches below the water line. Portable or jet-type units shall be provided with backflow protection for the water systems.
(Code 1988, § 5-70; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 20)
Sec. 14-151. Disinfectant feeders.
Equipment and piping used to apply disinfectant chemicals to the water shall be of such size, design and material that they may be cleaned. Feeders shall not be cross-connected with potable water systems. Material used for such equipment and piping shall be resistant to the action of chemicals to be used therein.
(1) A means of disinfecting the pool water which provides a residual agent in the pool water shall be used. The disinfecting agent shall be subject to simple field tests for determination of concentration. Chlorination or other disinfectant feeders shall be capable of supplying at least the equivalent of one pound of available chlorine per eight hours per 10,000 gallons of pool capacity; rate of feed shall be adjustable and shall be indicated on the feeder.
243
(2) Chlorinators or other disinfectant feeders shall be of sturdy construction and materials which will withstand wear, corrosion or attack by disinfectant solutions or vapors and which are not adversely affected by repeated adjustments or other conditions anticipated in the use of the device. The feeder shall be easily disassembled for cleaning and maintenance and shall be designed and constructed to minimize stoppage from chemicals used. Feeder design shall include fail-safe features to prevent the disinfectant feeding directly to the pool or its components under any type of failures of equipment or maintenance.
(3) Disinfectant feeders shall have a graduated and clearly marked dosage adjustment to provide flows from full capacity to ten percent of such capacity. The device shall be capable of continuous delivery within ten percent of the dosage at any setting.
(4) When the disinfectant is introduced at the suction side of the pump, a device shall be provided to prevent air lock of the pump or recirculation system.
(5) When chlorine gas is used the following additional features shall be provided:
a. The chlorine and chlorinating equipment including scales and one extra chlorine cylinder, shall be in a separate well- ventilated room. Floors of such rooms shall not be below ground level. The rooms shall be provided with an exhaust fan located at floor level and vented to the out-of-doors. Exhaust fan shall produce a complete exchange of air in two minutes. Louvers shall be provided at the top of the room on the wall opposite the exhaust fan for admitting fresh air. The room shall be sealed (air tight) from adjacent rooms to prevent chlorine gas circulation.
b. The door of the chlorine and chlorinated equipment room shall not open to the swimming pool or filter room and shall open to the out-of-doors. A viewing window and exterior-controlled artificial illumination and exhaust fan shall be provided so that essential performance of the equipment may be observed without/before entering the room.
c. Facilities shall be provided for anchoring chlorine cylinders to a wall or other support to prevent their falling over.
d. The chlorinator shall be a solution feed type, capable of delivering chlorine at its maximum rate without releasing chlorine gas to the atmosphere.
e. The chlorinator shall be designed to prevent the backflow of water into the chlorine solution container. All piping containing chlorine gas either under pressure or under vacuum shall be located in chlorine equipment room.
f. A closed gas mask cabinet, accessible without a key, shall be located outside of the chlorinator room. The cabinet shall be equipped with a gas mask designed for use in a chlorine atmosphere and of a type approved by the U.S. Bureau of Mines.
g. Installation of chlorinator equipment, and initial operation thereof, shall be under the supervision of personnel experienced with the installation and operation of such equipment.
(6) When a hypochlorite solution is to be fed through hypochlorinator equipment, such equipment
244
shall also provide the following additional features:
a. Feed shall be positive under all conditions of pressure in the circulation system.
b. A method shall be provided for reducing to a minimum the entry into a swimming pool of free calcium released from calcium hypochlorite.
c. A method shall be provided to prevent siphoning of hypochlorite solution when the recirculation pump and hypochlorinator are both turned off.
(Code 1988, § 5-72; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 22)
Sec. 14-152. Filtration equipment.
Filter shall be capable of maintaining water in the pool which meets physical standards set forth in this section. Sufficient filtering area shall be provided to meet the design pump capacity as required by this section. Filters shall comply in all respects with appropriate standards of the National Sanitation Foundation regarding material, design, operation and safety.
(1) A sight glass shall be installed on the waste discharge line of pressure filters to observe the progress of filters washing. The filter system shall be provided with influent and effluent pressure, vacuum or compound gauges as are required to indicate the condition of the filter and gauges shall be provided with shut-off cocks. Air-relief valves shall be provided at the high point of the filter. In vacuum filter installation where the circulating pump is two horse-power or higher an adjustable high vacuum shut-off shall be provided to prevent damage to the pump by cavitation.
(2) Rapid sand filters shall be designed for a filter rate to the swimming pool of not more than three gallons per minute per square foot of bed area at a time of maximum head loss with sufficient area to meet the design rate of flow required by the prescribed turnover.
a. For standard underdrain systems not less than 20 inches of screened sharp filter sand with effective size between 0.4 and 0.55 mm., and a uniformity coefficient not exceeding 1.75 supported by at least ten inches of graded filter gravel shall be provided. A reduction in this depth or elimination of gravel may be permitted where equivalent performance and service are demonstrated.
b. At least 12 inches of freeboard shall be provided between the upper sand surface and the backwash overflow invert.
c. Each pressure filter unit shall be provided with an access opening of not less than a standard 11 inches by 15 inches manhole and cover.
d. Facilities shall be provided for adding chemicals for coagulation and pH control.
e. Filter piping shall be designed and valved to permit individual backwashing of filters to waste at not less than 15 gallons per minute per square foot of filter area, to permit isolation of individual filters for repairs while keeping others in service to permit complete drainage, and to permit maintenance, operation and inspection in a convenient manner.
f. Sampling cocks shall be provided to enable sample collection of pool water as it leaves the pool and as it leaves the filters.
245
(3) Diatomaceous earth filters shall be designed for a filter rate to the swimming pool of not more than two gallons per minute per square foot of effective filtering surface without continuous body feed and not greater than 2.5 gallons per minute per square foot with continuous body feed.
a. Appurtenances shall be provided for pre-coating with diatomaceous earth slurry. Provisions for re-circulating during the pre-coating operation shall be made where filters permit passage of earth through elements during pre-coating operations. Sight glass will be required for pressure filters.
b. Where body feed is provided, the device shall be accurate +/- 10 percent and shall be capable of continually feeding within a calibrated range, adjustable from two to six ppm, at the design capacity of the re-circulating pump.
c. Filtering area, where fabric is used, shall be determined on the basis of effective filtering surfaces as created by the septum supports with no allowances for area of impaired filtration, such as broad supports folds or portions which may bridge.
d. Filters shall be equipped for cleaning by one or more of the following methods: back-washing, air-bump-assist backwashing, spray wash (mechanical or manual), or agitation.
e. Provisions shall be made for completely and rapidly draining the filter.
(4) High rate sand filters shall be designed for a filter rate to the swimming pool of not more than 20 gallons per minute per square foot of filtering surface shall meet the standards set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section.
(5) Cartridge filters shall be designed for filter rate to the swimming pool of not more than 0.33 gallons per minute per square foot of effective filter area.
a. Filters shall be equipped with at least influent and effluent pressure gauges with gauge cocks and air-relief valve.
b. Two sets of filter cartridges shall be provided to facilitate cleaning and drying of one set while the other is in operation. Disposable cartridges shall be replaced when initial filtration rate is impaired by clogging.
(Code 1988, § 5-73; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 23)
Sec. 14-153. Make-up water facilities.
All pools shall be equipped with provisions for adding make-up water to compensate for water loss through evaporation and to waste so that a constant water level is maintained while the pool is in operation to
enable continuous into skimmers or overflow gutters. (Code 1988, § 5-74; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 24)
Sec. 14-154. Disinfection and water quality.
The chemical, physical, and bacteriological quality of pool water shall be such that it is sanitary, clear, and safe for swimming.
(1) Swimming pools when open or in use shall be continuously disinfected by a chemical which
246
imparts and easily measures free available residual effect. When chlorine is used without stabilizing chemical such as cyanuric acid and the source of residual chlorine is from elemental chlorine or a hypochlorite solution, a free chlorine residual of at least 0.5 ppm at pool pH shall be maintained throughout the pool. If other halogens are used, residuals of equivalent disinfecting strength shall be maintained. A testing kit for measuring the concentration of the disinfectant, accurate within 0.1 ppm shall be provided at each swimming pool. Where cyanuric acid is used as a stabilizing agent of residual chlorine or if the source of residual chlorine is from a chlorinated cyanurate, a chlorine residual of at least 1.0 ppm shall be maintained with cyanuric acid residual of 25 ppm and at least 1.5 ppm chlorine shall be maintained with cyanuric acid residuals of 50 ppm. The cyanurate level shall not be greater than 100 ppm. A testing kit for measuring the concentration of cyanuric acid, accurate within 5.0 ppm shall be provided at each swimming pool using cyanuric acid or chlorinated cyanurates.
(2) Other disinfecting materials or methods shall be acceptable after they have been adequately demonstrated to provide a satisfactory residual effect which is easily measured and to otherwise be equally as effective under conditions of use as the chlorine concentration required herein, and not be dangerous to public health, create objectionable physiological effect, or impart toxic properties to the water.
(3) The swimming pool water shall be maintained in an alkaline condition as indicated by a pH of not less than 7.2 and not over 8.0. A pH testing kit accurate within 0.2 pH shall be provided at each swimming pool. A total alkalinity of the water shall be at least 80 ppm.
(4) The water shall have sufficient clarity at all times so that a black disc, three inches in diameter, is readily visible when placed on a white field at the deepest point of the swimming pool.
(5) Not more than 15 percent of the samples covering any considerable period of time shall either contain more than 200 bacteria per milliliter, as determined by the standard 35-degree Celsius, agar plate count, or show positive test (confirmed test) for coliform organisms in any of the five ten-milliliter portions of a sample or more than 1.0 coliform organism or 50 ml when the membrane filter test is used. All samples shall be collected, dechlorinated, and examined in accordance with the procedures outlined in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater (APHA).
(6) Chemicals used for algae control and in the control of water quality shall be registered by the federal environmental protection agency as applicable and used in accordance with label directions.
(Code 1988, § 5-78; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 28)
Sec. 14-155. Safety precautions.
Life saving and emergency first aid equipment and facilities shall be provided at all swimming pools. A telephone and list of emergency numbers including physicians, ambulance and hospital should be provided.
(1) A life line shall be provided at or near the break of grade between the shallow and deep portions of a public swimming pool with its position marked with colored floats at not greater than five foot spacing. Life line shall be three-fourths- inch minimum diameter and its terminals shall be securely anchored and of corrosion resistant material and of a type which will be recessed or have no projections which will constitute a hazard;
247
(2) Every swimming pool shall be equipped for safety and rescue with one or more light but strong poles (bamboo or other), or shepherds’ crook having, a blunt end and which is not less than 16 feet in length for making reaching assists or rescues;
(3) Every pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing buoys of not more than 18 inches in diameter with a one-fourth-inch line attached at least equal in length to the maximum width of the pool plus ten feet;
(4) Lifesaving equipment described in subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall be mounted in conspicuous places near the pool edge, ready for access, its function plainly marked, kept in good repair and ready condition, and bathers or others shall not be permitted to tamper with it, use it for any purpose other than its intended use, or remove it from its established location;
(5) Every swimming pool shall be equipped with a standard 24-unit first aid kit. The first aid kit shall be kept filled and readily accessible for emergency use. A backboard is advisable for isolated areas and for large pools. The governing authority can require additional first aid materials depending on distance of pool to medical facilities and availability of emergency medical services; and
(6) One lifeguard chair should be provided for each 2,000 square feet of pool surface area or fraction thereof. If a pool is more than 40 feet wide and requires more than one lifeguard stand, these stands should be located on opposite sides of the pool.
(Code 1988, § 5-81; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 31)
Secs. 14-156--14-180. Reserved.
Subdivision I.
Spas
Sec. 14-181. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this subdivision shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Private residential spas means any pool as defined in section 14-102, but for a single-family residence under the control of the individual homeowner, the use of which is limited to members of his family or their invited guests.
Public spas, including hot tubs and recreational whirlpools, means any pool other than a private residential pool primarily designed for individual or small group bathing with circulated water which may employ tempered water, air induced bubbles or combination thereof with the intent of producing a relaxing or therapeutic effect operated by any person as defined herein, whether he is owner, operator, licensee, or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged, and all facilities incident thereto.
(Code 1988, § 5-82(a); Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 32)
Sec. 14-182. Shape, slope, and depth.
Maximum water depth shall be four feet measured from the water line.
248
(Code 1988, § 5-82(b); Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 32)
Sec. 14-183. Steps, ladders, and handrails.
The maximum depth of any seat or sitting bench shall be two feet measured from the water line. Seat or bench may be part of steps.
(Code 1988, § 5-82(c); Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 32)
Sec. 14-184. Recirculation and filtration system.
(a) Recirculation capacity shall provide for complete turnover of the pool content every 30 minutes.
(b) The pool recirculation and filtration system, air induction system, booster pump system when used, heater, and disinfectant system shall be separate equipment from that used by the swimming pool. However, all equipment may be located in the same room.
(c) The maximum temperature of the pool water shall be one hundred five (105) degrees. A thermostatic control for the pool water shall be required and shall not be for patron use.
(d) The air induction system shall prevent water back-up and the air source shall not induce contaminants.
(Code 1988, § 5-82(d); Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 32)
Sec. 14-185. Bathhouse facilities.
(a) Where the pool is adjacent to a swimming pool facility and patron control is through the swimming pool bathhouse, the spa pool patron load shall be included in the swimming pool load.
(b) For separate pool facilities, a shower, lavatory, water closet and dressing room shall be provided for each 36 patrons of each sex. A drinking fountain shall be required.
(Code 1988, § 5-82(e); Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 32)
Sec. 14-186. Safety precautions.
(a) Where the pool is adjacent to a swimming pool facility and patron control is through the swimming pool bathhouse, the requirements of this section are not applicable.
(b) For separate pool facilities, the requirements of this section are not applicable, except for emergency use, a telephone or emergency signs shall be directly connected to an area that is attended at all times the pool is opened to patrons. Emergency procedures and pool use regulations shall be posted.
(Code 1988, § 5-82(f); Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 32)
Secs. 14-187--14-210. Reserved.
Subdivision IV. Bathhouses
249
Sec. 14-211. Regulations.
(a) Compliance with technical codes. Bathhouses shall be in compliance with Standard Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Gas, and Electrical codes.
(b) Bathhouses required for public swimming pools; exception.
(1) Bathhouses containing dressing rooms, showers, toilets, and lavatories shall be required for public swimming pools.
(2) Bathhouses facilities may not be required for swimming pools located on premises of motels, hotels, or other transient residences, and apartment complexes where such facilities are available in adjacent and the swimming pool use is restricted to the employees, occupants, and guest of such establishments. The governing authority shall determine any bathhouse requirements for such establishments.
(c) Other considerations by governing body. Consideration by the governing authority should be given to: distance to adjacent structures, bather load estimates, operator control and health matters when evaluating bathhouse requirements for these potentially exempt establishments.
(d) Optional contents. Bathhouses may also contain public areas, manager's area, first-aid room, and like areas.
(e) Requirements when used by both sexes. Where bathhouses are used by both sexes at the same time, separate and clearly labeled dressing rooms separated by a tight partition shall be provided for each sex; entrance and exits shall be screened to break the line of sight.
(Code 1988, § 5-75; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 25)
Sec. 14-212. Facilities.
(a) Dressing room floors. Dressing room floors shall be easily cleanable, non-slip finish, impervious to moisture and sloped to drain. Walls and partitions shall be of easily cleanable construction and junction of walls and floors shall be coved.
(b) Dressing rooms, toilet rooms, shower rooms. Dressing rooms, toilet rooms, shower rooms, shall be ventilated by natural or artificial means to effectively eliminate odors and condensation.
(c) Shower, toilet and lavatory facilities. Shower, toilet and lavatory facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule and shall be based on pool capacity computations set forth in section 14-113, or on scheduled use periods as at schools.
Males
Females
Water Closets
1/60
1/40
Urinals
1/60
Lavatories
1/60
1/60
Showers (minimum of 3
each side)
1/40
1/40
250
(d) Drinking fountain, minimum of one to be located in swimming pool area. Hose bibb with vacuum breaker required in each toilet room as a minimum.
(e) Toilet and shower room floors. Toilet and shower room floors shall be constructed of impervious material with no open cracks or joints, have an easily cleanable, non-slip finish and shall pitch toward a drain. Juncture of walls and floors shall be coved.
(f) Dressing room location. The location of dressing rooms shall be arranged so that bathers leaving a dressing room must pass the toilets and showers en route to the swimming pool.
(g) Warm water to be supplied to showers and lavatories. Showers and lavatories shall be supplied with warm water at a temperature of 90 degrees to 110 degrees Fahrenheit from a single source. Hot water temperature control devices shall not be available to patrons.
(h) Associated food service facilities. Any food service facilities associated with the bathhouse or swimming pool must meet the requirements of the county board of health rules and regulations for food service.
(Code 1988, § 5-76; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 26)
Secs. 14-213--14-240. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
ULTRA-LOW-FLOW PLUMBING FIXTURES*
State Law References: Water conservation standard for plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.
Sec. 14-241. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to require the use of ultra-low- flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction, or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings, and to require the labeling of plumbing fixtures with information regarding flow rates and serviceability standards; to promote compliance with state laws for the purpose of conserving water to maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies and reduce wastewater flows.
(Code 1988, § 5-101; Ord. of 6-11-1990, § 1; Ord. of 8-12-1991, § 1)
Sec. 14-242. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Commercial building means any type of building other than residential.
Plumbing fixtures means any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators.
Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel.
251
Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water- flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste.
Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. (Code 1988, § 5-102; Ord. of 6-11-1990, § 2; Ord. of 8-12-1991, § 2)
Sec. 14-243. Standards.
(a) No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in subsection (b) of this section or the Georgia State Plumbing Code (or the Standard Plumbing Code with Georgia amendments) whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 5-105. The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be April 1, 1992, and for commercial buildings shall be July 1, 1992.
(b) All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to above should not exceed the following maximum water use rates:
(1) Toilets, gallons per flush: 1.6.
(2) Urinals, gallons per flush: 1.0.
(3) Showerheads, gallons per minute, at 60 psi gauge pressure: 2.5.
(4) Kitchen faucets, gallons per minute: 2.5.
(5) Bathroom and lavatory faucets, gallons per minute: 2.0.
(c) The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and an integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (b) of this section.
(d) Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (b) of this section.
(e) The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.1M-1989 Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in subsection (b) herein.
(f) All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for “low consumption” water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSE/ASME A112.19.6-1990 Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended.
(Code 1988, § 5-103; Ord. of 6-11-1990, § 3; Ord. of 8-12-1991, § 3)
Sec. 14-244. Product certification.
252
The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards listed in section 14-243 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described below and providing upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the city building inspector. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in section 8 of such standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail sale.
(Code 1988, § 5-104; Ord. of 6-11-1990, § 4; Ord. of 8-12-1991, § 4)
Sec. 14-245. Exceptions.
The following fixture uses or applications shall be exempt from the standards established in section 14-
243:
(1) Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc.
(2) Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for use by the physically handicapped.
(3) Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in correctional institutions which may require more water for proper operation.
(4) Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes which cannot be accommodated by existing technology. Permission for the exceptions listed here must be obtained from the city building inspector.
(Code 1988, § 5-105; Ord. of 6-11-1990, § 5; Ord. of 8-12-1991, § 5)
Sec. 14-246. Penalties for violation of article.
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Any building or plumbing contractors, developers, etc., who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to suspension of their business license and/or building permit for a period of up to 90 days. (Code 1988, § 5-106; Ord. of 6-11-1990, § 6; Ord. of 8-12-1991, § 6)
Sec. 14-247. Compliance and enforcement.
In addition to the penalty provided in section 14-246, the city may take other actions as described below to compel compliance and may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article.
(1) Compliance with the requirements for installation and labeling at the time of installation in section 14-243 shall be determined by the city building inspector or his authorized agent in cases of new or replacement plumbing fixture installations and compliance shall be a condition for receipt of any occupancy permit.
253
(2) The city may deny any water and/or sewer connection to an establishment which does not comply with the standards set forth in section 14-243.
(3) Compliance with the requirements in section 14-244, regarding the labeling of plumbing fixtures offered for retail sale, shall be determined by the city building inspector or his authorized agent. The agency shall have access to all establishments which offer for retail sale or sell plumbing fixtures at retail for purposes of determining compliance with section 14-244.
(Code 1988, § 5-107; Ord. of 6-11-1990, § 7; Ord. of 8-12-1991, § 7)
ARTICLE V.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
DIVISION 1. TITLE, PURPOSE, SCOPE, INTERCHANGEABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 14-300. Title.
The title of this article shall be the “City of Sugar Hill Property Maintenance Ordinance” and may be cited hereinafter as “this article.”
Sec. 14-301. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this article is:
(1) To establish minimum requirements and standards for premises and structures in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, order and general welfare of the citizens of the City;
(2) To enhance and promote the maintenance of real property and by so doing, improve the livability, appearance and the social and economic conditions of the community;
(3) To ensure that real properties do not reach such a state of deterioration or disrepair as to cause the depreciation of the value of surrounding property or be materially detrimental to nearby properties and improvements;
(4) This article is not to be used as a vindictive or malicious tool by one person against another. City officials shall use discretion in acting upon repeated and trivial complaints that do not reflect the intent and purpose stated in this section.
Sec. 14-302. Scope.
This article shall apply to all existing structures and premises and shall constitute minimum requirements and standards for existing structures and premises.
Sec. 14-303. Interchangeability.
Words stated in the present tense include the future. Words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. Words stated in the singular number include the plural and the plural the singular.
254
Sec. 14-304. Definitions.
Terms not defined herein shall have their meaning as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, the Development Regulations, or the Code of the City of Sugar Hill, or in the absence of such definition, words shall have their common dictionary definition. Whenever the words “dwelling unit”, “premises,” “building,” “rooming unit” or “story” are stated in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.” The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
Basement. The portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than one-half of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Bathroom. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or material of any kind.
Cellar. The portion of a building having more than one-half of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Director. The Director of Planning and Zoning or his or her designee.
Dwelling. Any structure which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, whether or not such structure is occupied or vacant.
Dwelling unit. One (1) or more rooms designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter with sleeping and bathroom facilities provided within the unit for the exclusive use of a single-family maintaining a household.
Exterior property. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under control of the owners or operators of such premises.
Floor area. The gross heated horizontal areas of the floors of a building, exclusive of open porches and garages, measured from the interior face of the exterior walls of the building.
Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking and serving of food and the storage of produce, tin cans, glass containers and newspapers.
Habitable room. A space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. A cellar, bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable rooms or spaces.
Maintenance. The act of keeping property, structures or vegetation in a proper condition so as to prevent their decline, failure or uncontrolled growth.
Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building.
Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
255
Owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state or county as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
Sewage. Liquids, solid waste or waste matter carried off by sewage disposal systems or drains.
Sewage disposal systems. A system designed and intended to dispose of sanitary and domestic wastes including all liquid and solid wastes from the flush toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower and clothes washing machine.
Tenant. Any person, agent, firm or corporation who holds, possesses, or occupies the land, building, premises of another pursuant to agreement, lease, etc.
Trash. Combustible and noncombustible waste material, except garbage, including paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, cans, metals, bricks, lumber, concrete, mineral matter, glass crockery, and including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible material.
Weeds. All rank vegetative growth including but not limited to kudzu, poison ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, plants of obnoxious odors, or other similar unsightly growths; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers, fruits and vegetables, and gardens.
Workmanlike condition of maintenance and repair. Maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner and in accordance with the requirements of all applicable manufacturer’s specifications, ordinances and law.
Yard trimmings. All leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping or maintenance activities.
Secs. 14-305-14-310. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Sec. 14-311. Automobiles or motor vehicles.
(a) It shall be unlawful to park any passenger car or truck, either operable or inoperable, on the grass, lawn or dirt areas in the yard of any residential structure located within the corporate boundaries of the City of Sugar Hill. Further, parking any passenger car or truck, either operable or inoperable, in the front yard unless on a driveway or a city-approved driveway expansion area shall be unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to retain in the city boundaries any automobile, truck, vehicle, RV, camper or trailer of any kind or type, without a valid license plate attached thereto, on private property or public roads. This Section shall not be the exclusive regulation of placement, parking or standing of vehicles or contrivances, within the city limits of Sugar Hill and shall supplement and be in addition to other ordinances, regulations, statutes and provisions of law of the City, County or State, including but not limited to Sections 613 and 1106 of The 2000
256
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill.
(b) It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle, either operable or inoperable, on the grass, lawn or dirt areas in the yard of any non-residential structure or undeveloped property located within the corporate boundaries of the City of Sugar Hill. Further, parking any motor vehicle, either operable or inoperable, on any surface other than an approved concrete or asphalt parking area shall be unlawful. Lawfully existing gravel parking areas shall not be expanded without written permission from the City, shall be maintained at a uniform depth of at least four (4) inches and shall be kept free of debris, weeds, and uneven holes or depressions. This Section shall not be the exclusive regulation of placement, parking or standing of vehicles or contrivances within the city limits of Sugar Hill and shall supplement and be in addition to other ordinances, regulations, statutes and provisions of law of the City, County or State, including but not limited to Section 613 and 1106 of The 2000 Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill.
Sec. 14-312. Fences and Walls.
Fences and walls shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and in good repair. Fences and walls shall be free from loose or rotting materials to the extent that they have become unsafe and an eyesore and shall have braces and supports attached to or fastened in accordance with common building practices.
Sec. 14-313. Grass, weeds and uncultivated vegetation.
Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation in excess of twelve (12) inches in height by the owner, tenant, occupant, or other designated authority. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, occupant, tenant, or other designated authority to cut and remove grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation as often as may be necessary, provided that the removing and cutting of same at least once every thirty (30) days shall be deemed in compliance with this article and to use every precaution to prevent the same growing on such premises as to become a nuisance. Property shall be maintained to side and rear property lines and to the curb or edge of pavement.
Exceptions:
1. Undeveloped property one (1) acre or greater in size which shall maintain weeds a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all property lines;
2. Property zoned AF (agricultural and forest district) which shall maintain weeds a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all property lines.
Sec. 14-314. Open and outdoor storage.
The open or outdoor storage of any used or damaged lumber, building materials, junk, trash, garbage, debris, scrap metal, concrete, asphalt, cans, bottles, glass, tires, salvage materials, boxes, containers, bins, and abandoned, discarded, inoperative, or unusable furniture, stove, refrigerator, freezer, sink, toilet, cabinet or other household appliances or fixtures, yard waste or equipment (excluding residential lawn maintenance equipment), shall not be permitted for more than twenty-four (24) hours. Refer to the city health and sanitation ordinance for additional requirements on the storage of garbage, rubbish, refuse and other litter being stored on private property.
Exceptions:
1. Property where outdoor storage is authorized by the zoning ordinance;
2. Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three (3) feet and is for the
personal use of the owner or occupant.
257
Sec. 14-315. Sanitation.
All exterior property areas and the interior of every dwelling shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of trash, rubbish or garbage. The storage and disposal of refuse shall be in accordance with the Solid Waste Chapter of this Code, as amended.
Sec. 14-316. Swimming Pools.
Stagnant water in swimming pools conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises. A finding by a health official of the county environmental health department shall constitute prima-facie evidence that stagnant water in a swimming pool is conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects.
Sec. 14-317. Trees.
(a) Hazardous trees. There shall be no dead, dying, damaged, diseased or hazardous trees, shrubs, ground cover or weeds likely to harbor vermin or insects, restrict or impede access to or public use of adjacent sidewalks and streets, obstruct traffic-control signs and devices and fire hydrants, or pose a risk of physical injury to the public. A finding by a registered forester or certified arborist shall constitute prima-facie evidence that a tree is in danger of falling upon adjacent lots or public streets due to the death or impending death of the tree, or due to damage by weather conditions or due to disease infestation.
(b) Tree stumps. Tree stumps visible from a public street greater than twelve (12) inches in height above ground level shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises for more than thirty (30) days after the tree has been cut.
Exceptions:
1. Property covered by a valid land disturbing permit;
2. Property one (1) acre or greater in size;
3. Property zoned AF (agricultural and forest district).
(c) Tree debris. Felled trees, slash, removed tree limbs, or other portions of any tree shall not be permitted or maintained on the ground on any premises for more than thirty (30) days.
Exceptions:
1. Property covered by a valid land disturbing permit;
2. Property one (1) acre or greater in size;
3. Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three (3) feet;
4. Property zoned AF (agricultural and forest district).
Sec. 14-318. Rodents, insects, and pests.
All property shall be maintained so as not to allow, create, or be conducive to the infestation, harboring, breeding of rats, flies, mosquitoes, roaches, silverfish, or other similar rodents or pests. Further, it shall be unlawful for any property owner to fail to remove a nest or colony of stinging insects, such as yellow jackets, hornets, bees, wasps, or other similar pests that are or would create a public safety hazard or public nuisance. A public safety hazard shall include a threat of stinging to any person on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot, or to any person on adjacent private property. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the keeping of bees on private
258
property so long as it does not create a public safety hazard or public nuisance and the owner complies with any federal, state, or local regulations regarding the keeping of bees.
Amend. September, 2011.
Secs. 14-319-14-325. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. BUILDING MAINTENANCE
Sec. 14-326. Building Interiors.
(a) Freedom from dampness. Every building shall be maintained free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay, mold, electrical hazards or deterioration of the structure.
(b) Structural members. The supporting structural members of every building shall be structurally sound, showing no evidence of deterioration or damage that would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads.
(c) Interior wall, ceilings, floors, stairways and handrails. All interior walls, ceilings, floors, stairways and handrails shall be structurally sound, in good repair, free from defects and painted, decorated or properly covered.
Sec. 14-327. Decorative features.
Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in a good repair with proper anchorage in a safe condition.
Sec. 14-328. Dwelling space.
(a) Required space in dwellings. Each dwelling shall contain at least six hundred fifty (650) square feet of floor area for the first occupant thereof and at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor area per additional occupant.
(b) Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling of two (2) or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof.
(c) Sleeping area requirements. Kitchens and non-habitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
(d) Conditions on inhabiting basement. No cellar shall be used as a habitable room. No basement shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
(1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are adequately protected against dampness; and
(2) All sleeping rooms shall have an emergency escape window or door leading directly to the exterior.
259
Sec. 14-329. Exterior doors and frames.
Exterior doors of buildings shall be maintained so that they fit reasonably well within their frames so as to substantially prevent rain and wind from entering a building. Exterior door-jams, stops, headers and moldings shall be securely attached to the structure and maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration. Additionally, exterior doors shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in proper working condition.
Sec. 14-330. Exterior stairways, decks, porches and balconies.
Exterior stairways, decks, porches and balconies, and all appurtenances attached thereto, of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
Sec. 14-331. Exterior surface treatment.
All exterior surfaces, included but not limited to doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, and trim shall be maintained in good repair. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight.
All graffiti, vulgar language, gang related symbols or other painting on the outside of a building that is not related to a sign permitted by the city shall be covered with paint, washed off or other means of removing the vandalism.
Sec. 14-332. Foundation and exterior walls.
Every foundation, exterior wall, chimney and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; shall be maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated as needed to prevent deterioration. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all points.
Sec. 14-333. Kitchen Sink.
Every dwelling shall contain a kitchen sink apart and separate from the room with a water closet and related lavatory.
Sec. 14-334. Maximum occupancy.
(a) Maximum occupancy limitations. In a dwelling containing one thousand (1,000) square feet or less, the maximum occupancy shall be four (4) individuals. In a dwelling containing between one thousand one (1,001) square feet and one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet, the maximum occupancy shall be six (6) individuals. In a dwelling containing one thousand eight hundred and one (1,801) square feet or greater, the maximum occupancy shall be eight (8) individuals. A variance from these maximum occupancy limitations may be obtained from and granted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Sugar Hill in their sole discretion in accordance with the procedures and considerations set forth in subsection (b) below.
(b) Variance powers, procedures and considerations. The Mayor and Council of the City shall have
260
the power to grant variances from the maximum occupancy limitations set forth in subsection (a) above. Said variance shall not be contrary to the public interest. Variances may be granted in such individual cases to avoid unnecessary hardship after consideration of the following criteria by the Council:
(1) The effect of the number of people on the sanitary sewer and/or septic system present on or serving the property;
(2) The effect of the variance on the health and safety of those individuals living in the dwelling and the effects on the surrounding property owners;
(3) The size and square footage of the dwelling;
(4) The number of bedrooms in the dwelling.
(5) The number of bathrooms in the dwelling; and
(6) The age, height and weight of the individuals in the dwelling.
(c) Public hearing and notice. The Mayor and Council shall hold a public hearing and take public comment or any application for a variance submitted under this section. The notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be published at least 15 days prior to the hearing in the official organ of the City. Additionally, the City shall post a sign on the property listing the time, place and subject matter of the variance request at least 15 days prior to the hearing. The failure to erect and maintain a sign on the property shall not invalidate the subsequent determination made by the Mayor and Council.
(d) Reapplication. If an application for a variance under this section is denied by the Mayor and Council, a reapplication for such a variance shall not be made earlier than six (6) months from the date of the original application.
(e) Appeals. Appeals of the decision of the Mayor and Council shall be presented to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County by Writ of Certiorari as set forth in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Such appeal shall be made within in thirty (30) days from the date of the decision of the Mayor and Council. Upon failure to appeal within thirty (30) days, the decision of the Mayor and Council shall be final.
(f) Limitation of variance procedures. The variance procedures outlined in this Section may only be used to vary the maximum occupancy limits set forth in this Section. The variance procedures shall not be applicable to any other Section in this Article or to any other Section contained in the Code of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
Sec. 14-335. Roofs.
Roofs of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound and in a safe condition and have no defects, which might admit, rain or cause dampness in the interior portions of a building. All portions, additions or sections of a roof including, but not limited to, the fascia, ease, soffit, sheathing, rafter tail, barge rafter, vent screening, gutter, downspout, roof jack, lead or metal flashing, shall be complete with all trim strips, moldings, brackets, braces and supports attached or fastened in accordance with common building practices.
261
Sec. 14-336. Sanitary toilet requirement.
All dwellings and living quarters located in the city limits shall have sanitary toilets using septic tanks, drain field or sanitary sewer and running water. No person shall maintain any unsanitary outside toilet after being given thirty (30) days notice by the City Council to remedy the situation.
Sec. 14-337. Water closet, bathtub or shower requirements.
Every dwelling shall contain within its walls at least one (1) room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy and is equipped with a toilet and a lavatory. Every dwelling shall contain at least one (1) room which affords privacy to a person and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower. There must be at least one toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower (a full bathroom) for each five persons living and sleeping in a dwelling.
Sec. 14-338. Windows.
Windows of buildings shall be fully supplied and maintained with glass windowpanes or with a substitute approved by the building official, which are without open cracks, broken glass or holes. Screens, if provided, shall be securely fastened to the window.
Sec. 14-339-14-345. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. ENFORCEMENT, UNLAWFUL ACTS AND NOTICE OF VIOLATION
Sec. 14-346. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the City Code Enforcement Officer, the Director of Planning and Development or the director’s duly authorized representative, or any other agency or individual designated by the City Council to enforce this article.
Sec. 14-347. Subpoena Power.
Any duly authorized enforcement personnel shall have the power to issue subpoenas requiring occupants, residents, owners, etc. of buildings under inspection or investigation to appear in Sugar Hill Municipal Court. The duly authorized enforcement personnel shall also have the power to issue subpoenas to occupants, residents, owners, etc. to produce written records related to the property under inspection or investigation.
Sec. 14-348. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with, or in violation of, this article.
Sec. 14-349. Notice of violation.
Enforcement shall begin with a written notice of violation provided to the owner, occupant, or party in interest. The notice shall be served by either personal service or certified mail. The notice shall contain a deadline of, not less than ten (10) and not more than thirty (30) days for compliance, which may be extended by the City Code Enforcement Officer. If the violation continues past the deadline, the Code Enforcement Officer
262
may issue a citation or take such other legal action authorized under this article.
If any person fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of sections 14-313 and 14-317 of this article within the specified deadline of the Code Enforcement Officer, the City, through its agents and employees, may go upon such property and do or cause to be done the work necessary to obtain compliance with this article. The expense incurred in correcting this condition of such property, and any administrative costs involved, shall be paid by the City and charged to the owner of such property. A bill for such services shall be promptly sent to the owner of the property on which such services where performed by the Department of Planning and Zoning. Should said amount go unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days following the mailing of said bill, the City may institute a law suit or place a lien on said property to seek recovery of the amounts expended by the City including applicable interest and attorney’s fees. This provision is not exclusive of any other rights and remedies available to the City under its charter and laws of the state.
Sec. 14-350. Non-compliance.
If any person fails to comply within the time specified in the notice of violation, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall file a complaint in the Sugar Hill Municipal Court specifically alleging
the nature of the violation of this article. The Court shall have the authority to issue penalties as
established in Section 14-356, to order the City to complete any necessary work and receive a lien
against the property to recover its costs, or to issue any other remedy it deems necessary and appropriate.
Amend. September, 2011.
Sec. 14-351-14-355. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. PENALTIES
Sec. 14-356. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in the Sugar Hill Municipal Court, be punished whether by a fine of no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per offense, or by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. Each and every day that the premises shall remain in a condition in violation of the terms of this article shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall be in addition to and cumulative of the provisions of the abatement of said nuisance and the charge of the cost of the same against the owner of the premises by the city. The Court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this Article on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence.(Ordinance Updated 08-09-05).
Chapters 15—17
Chapter 18
BUSINESSES*
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.
Article I. In General
Sec. 18-1—18-20. Reserved.
263
Article II. Game Machines, Vending Machines and Other Recreational Machines
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 18-2 1. Item of machinery or equipment defined.
Sec. 18-22. Penalty for violation of article.
Secs. 18-23--18-45. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 18-46. Required; fees; additional fees for pool tables.
Sec. 18-47. Filing of application.
Sec. 18-48. Listing of items of machinery or equipment on application; notification of acquisition of new machinery.
Sec. 18-49. Procedure for issuance.
Sec. 18-50. Factors for council consideration.
Sec. 18-51. Restrictions on issuance.
Sec. 18-52. Termination, renewal, revocation, etc.
Sec. 18-53—18.75. Reserved.
Article III. Yard Sales
Sec. 18-76. Yard sale defined.
Sec. 18-77. Permit--Required.
Sec. 18-78. Same --Term; fee.
Sec. 18-79. Person conducting sale to be responsible for parking violations.
Sec. 18-80. Penalty for violation of article.
Secs. 18-81--18-105. Reserved.
Article IV. Pawnbrokers and Pawnshops
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 18-106. Definitions.
Sec. 18-107. Pawnbroker and employee regulations.
Sec. 18-108. Pawnbrokers and employees, restrictions as to character; hearing.
Sec. 18-109. Records and information to be maintained; display of pawnshop transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage; presentation upon request.
Sec. 18-110. False entries or statements.
Sec. 18-111. Hours of operation.
Sec. 18-112. Property not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition; location of property; police holds.
Sec. 18-113. Dealing with minors.
Sec. 18-114. Penalties for violation of article; suspension or revocation of license.
Sec. 18-115. Enforcement responsibility.
Secs. 18-116--18-140. Reserved.
Division 2. Annual Permit
Sec. 18-141. Required.
Sec. 18-142. Background investigation; fee.
Sec. 18-143. Renewal. Sec.
Sec. 18-144. Application.
Sec. 18-145. Prerequisite to issuance of business license.
Sec. 18-146. Daily report to police.
Secs. 18-147--18-170. Reserved
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 18-171. Definitions.
Sec. 18-172—18-195. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 18-196. Posted license required.
Sec. 18-197. Compliance required for issuance or renewal.
Secs. 18-198--18-220. Reserved.
Article VI. Food Vending Vehicles
264
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12-221. Definitions.
Sec. 18-222. Reinspection of facilities and premises; unsatisfactory condition grounds for license revocation.
Sec. 18-223. Report of changes.
Sec. 18-224. Standards.
Sec. 18-225. Periods of operation.
Secs. 18-226--18-250. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 18-251. Required.
Sec. 18-252. Application.
Sec. 18-253. Fees and term.
Sec. 18-254. Investigation of facilities and vehicles prerequisite for issuance.
Sec. 18-255. Exemptions.
Sec. 18-256. Revocation of license; appeal.
Sec. 18-257. Penalty for violation of article.
Secs. 18-258--18-280. Reserved.
Article VII. Massage or Spa Establishments
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 18-281. Definitions.
Sec. 18-282. Scope of regulations.
Sec. 18-283. General operating provisions.
Secs. 18-284--18-305. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 18-306. Required; application.
Sec. 18-307. Regulatory fee; expiration and renewal.
Sec. 18-308. Work permits required.
Sec. 18-309. Issuance of license.
Sec. 18-310. Grounds for revocation and suspension of license.
Sec. 18-311. Hearings.
Secs. 18-312--18-335. Reserved.
Article VIII. Adult Entertainment Establishments
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 18-336. Findings and Purpose.
Sec. 18-337. Definitions.
Sec. 18-338. Applicability of article.
Sec. 18-339. Erotic dance establishment regulations.
Sec. 18-340. Certain activities prohibited.
Sec. 18-341. Sale of alcohol prohibited.
Sec. 18-342. Admission of and sales to minors unlawful.
Sec. 18-343. Location.
Sec. 18-344. Adult entertainment establishment employees.
Sec. 18-345. Violations of article; penalty.
Sec. 18-346. Unlawful operation declared nuisance.
Sec. 18-347. Cleaning of licensed premises.
Sec. 18-348. Self-inspection of licensed premises.
Sec. 18-349. Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions.
Sec. 18-350. Abatement as sanitary nuisance.
Sec. 18-351. Prohibition of enclosed viewing rooms.
Secs. 18-352--18-375. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Subdivision I. In General
265
Sec. 18-376. License does not condone illegal activity.
Sec. 18-377. Required.
Sec. 18-378. Renewal; fee.
Sec. 18-379. Transferability.
Sec. 18-380. Suspension or revocation.
Sec. 18-381. Persons prohibited as licensees.
Secs. 18-382--18-405. Reserved.
Subdivision II. Application
Sec. 18-406. Submittal to city clerk; application fee.
Sec. 18-407. Application not authority to conduct business.
Sec. 18-408. Bond to be filed with application.
Sec. 18-409. Investigation of application.
Sec. 18-410. Application contents.
Sec. 18-411. Applicant to provide proof of payment of application fee.
Sec. 18-412. Ivestigation of application and applicant; grant or denial.
Secs. 18-413--18-435. Reserved.
Division 3. Appeals Sec. 18-436. Time limit for filing.
Sec. 18-437. Procedure.
Sec. 18-438. Council action.
Sec. 18-439. City council to receive testimony and evidence.
Sec. 18-440. Hearing officer.
Sec. 18-441. Rules of evidence.
Sec. 18-442. Hearing officer report and final decision.
Sec. 18-443. Appeal of council decision to superior court.
ARTICLE I.
In General Secs. 18-1--18-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
GAME MACHINES, VENDING MACHINES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL MACHINES
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY Sec. 18-21. Item of machinery or equipment defined.
As used herein, an item of machinery or equipment hereunder regulated shall mean an electronic, mechanical, electrical or other type of machinery or equipment, the primary purpose of which is the entertainment, amusement or pleasure of the operator, user or spectator. Such items shall include, but not be limited to, machines sometimes known as pinball machines, electronic game machines, pool tables and all other such items where a fee is paid in connection with the use, operation or observation of same. Not included in the definition of items of machinery or equipment regulated hereunder are vending machines for the sale of goods or services such as soft drinks, snack foods, cigarettes, shoe polishing machines, gum and other such machines where there is received an item of goods or services other than a service which is the entertainment, amusement or pleasure of the operator, user or spectator, which is proportionate in value to the fee paid for same. (Code 1988, § 18-51)
266
Sec. 18-22. Penalty for violation of article.
No person may use or operate within the city any item of machinery or equipment as described in this article without having first obtained a valid license and for each additional separate location within the city wherein three or more of such items of machinery or equipment are to be used or operated, an additional separate license, and unless all such licenses remain valid and in effect at all times during which such persons shall be conducting such business. Any person who shall violate this or any other provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, any and all of such penalties to be imposed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city or such other judicial officer as shall have jurisdiction to try such case. (Code 1988, § 18-60)
Secs. 18-23--18-45. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LICENSE
Sec. 18-46. Required; fees; additional fees for pool tables.
Each owner, user or operator of items of machinery or equipment as described herein located within the city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk as set forth above, and shall pay a minimum annual license fee of $100.00 for this privilege. Payment of such license fee shall entitle the licensee to use, own or operate within the city at least one item of such machinery or equipment. For each additional item of machinery or equipment the license fee shall be increased by $25.00. After issuance of a license, if the licensee seeks to operate additional items of machinery or equipment within the city which were not included in the original or renewal application for license, applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee of $25.00 for each additional item of machinery or equipment. If the licensee is exchanging an existing item of machinery or equipment for a new or different item of machinery or equipment so as not to increase the total number of such items to be operated by the licensee, there shall be no fee charged for such exchange. Should the licensee, in addition to the operating of herein described game machines and equipment, elect to operate or offer for operation to the general public, pool tables, the fee, in addition to the business license, shall be $50.00 for each such pool table. (Code 1988, § 18-52)
Sec. 18-47. Filing of application.
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this article shall submit an application for such license to the city clerk, which application shall conform to the requirements of article II of chapter 70 and shall contain the name and home address of each shareholder owning a beneficial interest of more than 40 percent of the issued and outstanding shares, if the applicant is a corporation, together with the address of the principal officer and registered agent of the corporation within the state.
(Code 1988, § 18-53)
Sec. 18-48. Listing of items of machinery or equipment on application; notification of acquisition of new machinery.
(a) At the time of filing the application for the license or licenses under this article, the licensee shall include on the application the number, type and description of each separate item of machinery or equipment to be owned, used or operated by the licensee, and the location within the city at which such items of equipment or machinery are to be operated.
267
(b) If at any time during a calendar year when a license is in effect, the licensee acquires a new or different item of machinery or equipment, the licensee, prior to placing any such machinery or equipment into use or operation, shall notify the city clerk of each such additional item of machinery or equipment, upon advising the city clerk of the information relating to the description and location of the item or items as is appropriate and paying the appropriate fee for same.
(Code 1988, § 18-54)
Sec. 18-49. Procedure for issuance.
(a) City manager's recommendation. The city clerk shall forward a copy of any application for a license received under this article to the city manager within 48 hours of the time of receipt of the application. The city manager shall make a recommendation to the city clerk within 14 days after receiving a copy of the application, and thereafter the application shall be processed as provided in this article.
(b) City council action. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the city manager, the city clerk shall forward such recommendation and the application to the city council for consideration and action at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(Code 1988, § 18-55)
Sec. 18-50. Factors for council consideration.
The council, in passing upon an initial application for a license hereunder, shall be guided by the following factors as to whether to grant or deny such application:
(1) Proximity of similar establishments. The proximity of other establishments wherein items of the machinery or equipment covered hereunder are located in relation to the proposed location;
(2) Character of adjacent neighborhoods. The character of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location;
(3) Proximity of churches, etc. The proximity of churches, schools and playgrounds to the proposed location;
(4) Parking. Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons;
(5) Affect on traffic. Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom;
(6) Citizen reactions. The feelings and attitudes of the citizens residing in the area adjacent to the proposed location;
(7) Information on application. The information set forth in the application;
268
(8) Revocation of previous applications. Whether any application under this article previously issued for such location was ever revoked for cause by the council; and
(9) Illegal use of machinery or equipment in the past. Whether the applicant has ever used or operated any items of machinery or equipment described herein illegally in the city. (Code 1988, § 18-56)
Sec. 18-51. Restrictions on issuance.
No license shall be issued in accordance with this article unless the following conditions are met:
(1) Premises from which an item of machinery or equipment hereunder is to be owned, operated or used shall be kept in full compliance, at all times, in a safe and sanitary condition, and in accordance with all laws and ordinances regulating the type of premises wherein same is located.
(2) The premises for which a license is initially issued hereunder must be no closer than 500 feet from any then-existing established church, school, hospital or an existing business wherein there is being used or operated an item of machinery or equipment described herein, such measure being taken from front door to front door of each such establishment.
(3) No more than two such items of machinery or equipment may be owned, used or operated from premises where the use, operation or ownership of such items is done only as an incidental part of another existing ongoing business.
(4) If three or more of such items of machinery or equipment are to be operated from the same premises, the premises, or portion thereof in which such operation is located, must be separately enclosed, that is, not operated as a part of any other business; the location must be separately licensed hereunder; there must be in attendance at all times when such place of business is open for the use or operation of such items of machinery or equipment a responsible adult, 18 years of age or older, who shall have no duties or responsibilities other than to manage, supervise or direct the use and operation of such items of machinery or equipment located within such premises; such premises may not open for business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday and may not operate during the hours of 11:00 p.m. Saturday to 8:00 a.m. Monday; the licensee shall not permit nor shall the licensee allow others to permit any person under the age of 16 years to use or operate any item of equipment or machinery during the normally accepted school operating hours which are from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; the licensee shall not permit nor shall the licensee allow others to permit any person under the age of 14 years to use or operate any item of machinery or equipment unless accompanied by such child's parent or legal guardian; no licensee shall allow or permit others to allow any alcoholic or malt beverages to be consumed or brought upon or about the premises; and a licensee shall otherwise fully comply with this Code, all ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state and the United States Government as they affect the premises and activities therein.
(Code 1988, § 18-57)
Sec. 18-52. Termination, renewal, revocation, etc.
(a) Termination. All licenses issued in accordance with this article shall terminate as subject to and governed by article II of chapter 70, except as expressly changed in this article.
(b) Change of location. In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any business
269
licensed hereunder may not be changed without the prior approval of the city council, and any such change shall not, under any circumstances, be made if to do so would place the licensee in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance or law then in effect in the city; provided, however, that this provision shall not prohibit a licensee who has obtained licenses for more than one operation in the city, from moving individual items of equipment or machinery in the city, from moving individual items of equipment or machinery covered by this article from one licensed location to another licensed location, without the prior approval of the council, provided that by doing so the licensee is not placed in violation of the provisions of this article or of any other ordinance of law then in effect in the city.
(c) Limits on number of machines. For the purpose of this article, each branch establishment or location wherein there are located three or more items of equipment or machinery of the licensee shall be deemed a separate place of business for which a separate license shall be required hereunder. A licensee may own, use or operate no more than two items of machinery or equipment at locations within the city other than at the principal location under and pursuant to the license issued hereunder for the principal place of business of the licensee. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the number of items of such machinery or equipment which the licensee may own, use or operate at the principal place of business of such licensee.
(Code 1988, § 18-58)
Secs. 18-53--18-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
YARD SALES
Sec. 18-76. Yard sale defined.
A yard sale is hereby defined as the selling or displaying of goods outside of an enclosed permanent structure including, but not limited to, the selling or displaying of goods in the area commonly know as the carport or garage of a residence or the area commonly known as the yard of a residence.
(Code 1988, § 18-71; Ord. of 9-11-1989)
Sec. 18-77. Permit--Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to conduct a yard sale from property zoned or used for residential purposes unless the person or entity conducting the yard sale shall have received a yard sale permit from the city authorizing sale.
Sec. 18-78. Term.
Any yard sale permit issued by the City shall be good only for a period not to exceed three days (72 hours), and shall state thereon the time and date the sale is to begin and the time and date the sale is to end, which beginning and ending time shall not cover a span greater than 72 hours. No more than four (4) permits shall be issued for the conduct of a yard sale at any one location within a twelve (12) month period.
(Repealed August 10, 1998)
(Code 1988, § 18-72; Ord. of 9-11-1989; Ord. of 12-10-07)
270
Sec. 18-79. Person conducting sale to be responsible for parking violations.
Any person conducting such a sale, after obtaining such a permit, shall do so in such a manner that any prospective purchaser attending the sale shall not illegally park vehicles on or off the city streets, roads and highways located in the city, and shall not allow parking to be done on adjacent property, without the express written approval of the adjacent property owners. The person obtaining the permit and conducting the sale shall be in violation of this article if any parking violations as defined by this or other ordinances are committed by persons attending such a sale. If the person obtaining the permit and/or conducting the sale is unable to obtain the cooperation of a visitor to the sale to avoid violating the parking restrictions contained herein, or any other parking ordinances or laws, he shall immediately cease the sale, discontinuing all activities in connection therewith, upon doing so such person shall not have violated the article and shall have no further responsibility under this article for any illegally parked vehicles.
(Code 1988, § 18-73; Ord. of 9-11-1989)
Sec. 18-80. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person convicted of violating this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200.00. (Code 1988, § 18-74; Ord. of 9-11-1989)
Secs. 18-81--18-105. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
PAWNBROKERS AND PAWNSHOPS*
* State Law References: Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-121-130 et seq.; municipal regulation of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-121-136.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 18-106. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Automated reporting system means: a computer based system specified by the chief of police designed to record and transmit data and information electronically.
Chief or Chief of Police means: the chief of police of the Gwinnett County Police Department or his/her designee.
Employee means:
(1) Any owner or pawnbroker who, in the performance of his or her duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into contact with members of the public; or
(2) Any person working for an owner or pawnbroker; or
(3) Any person who is employed on a part-time or full-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop.
271
Pawn or pledge means: a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the power of sale on default.
Pawnbroker means: any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this Article.
Pawnshop means: any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon.
Pawnshop transaction means: to take or receive any article of property or, from any customer, by pawning, pledging, trading, exchanging, purchasing, or other means.
Person means: any individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust association, or other legal entity however organized.
Police Department means: the Gwinnett County Police Department.
Third party administrator means: any individual, business or corporation designated by the chief of police to administer the reporting requirements of this ordinance.
Sec. 18-107. Annual permit required.
All persons before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or similar place persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property shall first file an application with the Police Department for an annual permit to conduct such business. The issuance of such permit will be based on a criminal history background investigation of the applicant. The cost of the permit/criminal history background investigation shall be $100.00, or a fee established by the chief of police. This fee is imposed to cover investigative expenses and/or administrative costs associated with issuing an initial permit for all owners. In the event an owner has more than one pawnshop, then each location will be assessed the above fee. This fee is nonrefundable in the event an applicant, for any reason, is not issued a permit and/or an occupational tax certificate. Owners are required to renew the permit upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee established by the chief of police.
Sec. 18-108. Permit prerequisite to issuance of occupation tax certificate.
No occupation tax certificate required by this Article shall be granted to any person until a permit required by section 18-107 of this Article has been issued or approved by the Police Department. Proof of issuance of the annual permit shall be submitted to the City Clerk as part of the application for or renewal of an occupation tax certificate.
Sec. 18-109. Application for permit.
The application for the annual permit required by this Section shall contain and state the street number and address at which the business is proposed to be operated. The application shall contain the full name, address,
272
phone number, date of birth, photograph, and social security number of all persons, including pawnbrokers and employees, having any interest in the proposed business, plus any additional information, including fingerprints, deemed necessary by the City Clerk and/or the Police Department.
Sec. 18-110. Regulation as to employees and managers.
(a) No person shall be employed by a pawnshop in any capacity until such person is found to be in compliance with the qualifications as described in this Section and has paid a fee which shall be established by the chief of police. Upon complying with the requirements of this Article, a permit card authorizing such person to be a pawnshop employee will be issued. Each employee and/or manager will be required to renew the permit card annually. The permit card and occupation tax certificate will expire annually, on the date established generally for expiration of the occupation tax certificate. All persons having any interest in the proposed business including each owner, employee, manager, and pawnbroker shall while on the pawnshop premises, have in their possession and available for inspection such permit card. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to insure compliance with the provisions of this Section.
(b) The following qualifications shall apply to all employees and managers:
(1) No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the Police Department or chief of police and a search of the criminal record of the person completed. Such application shall include the applicant's name, fingerprints, social security number, date of birth, and prior arrest record; though an applicant's arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall not give rise to a presumption or inference of guilt. Applicant must also provide positive identification (only official government issued pictured identification accepted, e.g. U.S. driver's license, passport, military card, or U. S. state identification card).
(2) The chief of police shall conduct a complete and exhaustive search relative to any police record of the applicant.
(3) In the event the applicant is qualified for employment in a pawnshop under this Section and there is no record of a violation of this Article, the chief of police shall issue a permit to the applicant, by mail, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not qualified for a permit and therefore ineligible for employment in a pawnshop, the chief of police shall notify the person in writing that they are not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and their right to appeal.
(4) No person who has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within five years immediately preceding the date of application shall be issued a permit. For purposes of this Article, a conviction or plea of guilt or nolo contendere entered under the Georgia First Offender Act, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., shall be ignored. Provided, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender status or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender.
(5) No person shall be issued a permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed, or misrepresented any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application to the Police Department for a pawnshop permit under this Section.
(6) All permits issued through administrative error can be terminated and seized by the chief of police or the City Clerk or her designee.
273
(7) Replacement permits will be issued within thirty (30) days of original date, upon paying one-half of the fee charged for pawnshop permits. After thirty (30) days of original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted.
(8) All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the Police Department, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer or designee of the Police Department or employee of the City.
(9) No pawnshop owner shall allow any employee or manager to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in their possession a current valid county permit. For new employees, a receipt issued by the Police Department may be used for a maximum of thirty (30) days from the date of issue. Pawnshop owners are required by this Article to inspect and verify that each employee or manager has in their possession a valid current pawnshop permit. Issuance of this fee receipt shall allow the applicant to work in the position applied for only until such time as the required criminal history background investigation is completed. The temporary privilege conferred by issuance of this fee receipt shall expire immediately upon completion of such background investigation. If the background investigation indicates that the applicant does not meet the requirements for issuance of a pawnshop permit, the applicant may appeal the denial of the permit as provided in this Article. However, issuance of this fee receipt and the temporary privilege granted thereby shall not be construed as conferring any right or privilege to the applicant to continue working in the position for which the permit sought during the pendency of the appeal from the denial of a permit under this.
(10) It shall be the duty of all persons holding a pawnshop occupation tax certificate to file with the chief of police, the name of the establishment, the occupation tax certificate number and a list of all employees, including their date of birth, social security number, home address and home telephone numbers twice annually; during the month of June and again during the month of December.
(11) If it is determined that any person issued a pawnshop permit has falsified, concealed, or misrepresented any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme in the application for the pawnshop permit such permit shall be revoked or canceled.
(12) City employees who are directly involved in the issuance of pawnshop permits or in the regulation of pawnshops shall not be eligible for a permit.
Sec. 18-111. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
A permit may be denied, suspended or revoked by the chief of police where the pawnbroker or employee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a permit or fails to meet all qualifications set forth under the provisions of this Article.
Sec. 18-112. Hearings for denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
No permit shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided:
(1) The chief of police shall provide written notice to the applicant of his or her order to deny, suspend or revoke the permit. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this Article. Any applicant who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the chief of police may have a review thereof by appeal to the City Council established pursuant to the City’s alcoholic beverage ordinance. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days after the final order or action of the Police
274
Department/chief of police and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $100.00. The City Clerk at her discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it is determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing such appeal. The City Council may, at the request of the appellant, refund all or a portion of the filing fee by a majority vote.
(2) A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of filing with the City Clerk unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the City Clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. Before hearing an appeal, each member of the City Council shall sign an affidavit to be part of the record that he or she is not related to or personal friends with any owner of the establishment in question in the appeal being considered and that he or she has no financial interest in the outcome of the appeal. Should any member be unable to sign such an affidavit, that member shall not serve on that appeal and the case shall be heard by the remaining members of the City Council.
(3) The findings of the City Council shall be forwarded to the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to notify the appellant of the action of the City Council.
(4) The findings of the City Council shall not be set aside unless found to be:
a. Contrary to law or ordinances, or
b. Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole, or
c. Unreasonable.
(5) The findings of the City Council shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of such finding by a writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
Sec. 82-113. Occupation tax certificate applications, renewals and qualifications.
(a) All persons, firms, or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or occupation of a pawnshop shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, make application for an occupation tax certificate (“certificate”) in the form and manner prescribed by the City Clerk. Proof of issuance of the annual permit as required in Section 18-107, above, shall be submitted to the City Clerk as part of the application for or renewal of an occupation tax certificate.
(b) The application shall include but shall not be limited to the information required on all occupation tax returns, along with the following additional information:
(1) Full name, date of birth, address and social security number of applicant.
(2) Full name(s) dates of birth and social security numbers of any other persons having an ownership interest in the business. In the case of a corporation, this list shall include owners of ten percent (10%) or more of the common or preferred stock.
(3) Full names, dates of birth and social security numbers and titles of corporate officers where appropriate.
(4) Full names, addresses, telephone numbers, dates of birth, title and social security numbers of individuals to be employed.
275
(5) A copy of the alcohol, tobacco and firearms license where applicable.
(c) All occupation tax certificates granted under the provisions of this Article shall expire annually, on the date established generally for expiration of the occupation tax certificates.
(d) Certificate holders who desire to renew their certificates shall file the application and all applicable fees with the City Clerk on the form prescribed for renewal of the certificate for the following year. Applications for renewal must be filed on or before the annual deadline provided for all businesses for filing of renewal applications, with payment of tax being due on the date(s) set for occupation taxes generally.
(e) All occupation tax certificates granted hereunder shall be for the full calendar year and are not subject to proration.
(f) It shall be the duty of the renewal applicant to obtain renewal permits as required by this Article.
(g) The following occupation tax certificate qualifications shall also apply:
(1) No occupation tax certificate required by this Article shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or registered resident alien. Where the owner-applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders.
(2) Where the applicant is a corporation, a certificate will be issued jointly to the corporation, president or chief executive officer and to the majority stockholder. Where the applicant is a partnership, the certificate may be issued to a partner or general partner.
(3) An occupation tax certificate for the practices listed herein may not be issued where the applicant has been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere, and has been released from parole or probation, to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or has been convicted of any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any pawnshop occupation tax certificate, the applicant shall, by duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither the applicant, nor any of the other owners of the establishment, have been convicted or have plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or have been convicted of any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices. Should any applicant, partner, or officer engaged in operating a pawnshop, after a certificate has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or enter a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or any felony, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices, the certificate and/or permit shall be immediately revoked or canceled.
Sec. 18-114. Suspension or revocation of occupation tax certificate.
(a) A certificate may be suspended or revoked by the City Clerk where the certificate holder furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a certificate and failing to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this Article.
(b) The City Clerk shall revoke the certificate for any premises where goods are pawned during a period of suspension.
(c) The City Clerk may suspend or revoke the certificate of any establishment which does not meet the
276
qualifications set forth in this Article any time such knowledge becomes known to her.
(d) An act or omission of a certificate holder, owner of more than twenty (20) percent interest in the establishment, or employee of the certificate holder or establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this Article will subject the certificate holder to suspension or revocation of its certificate in accordance with the provisions of this Article, when the City Clerk determines to her own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues. Provided, however, in the case of an employee, the City Clerk or her designee must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the certificate holder, were condoned by the certificate holder, or where the certificate holder has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring.
(e) The City Clerk may suspend or revoke the certificate of any establishment whenever it can be shown that a certificate holder hereunder no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the certificate was conditioned or whenever the certificate holder has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city.
(f) Wherever this Article permits the City Clerk to suspend any certificate issued hereunder but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised within the guidelines of this subsection.
(1) No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such certificate.
(2) The following factors shall be considered on any revocation or suspension as set out above:
a. Consistency of penalties mandated by this Article and those set by the City Clerk.
b. Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing.
c. Impact of the offense on the community.
d. Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by certificate holder.
e. Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the certificate holder to take remedial or corrective steps.
Sec. 18-115. Hearings for the denial, suspension or revocation of certificate.
No certificate shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided:
(1) The City Clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant or certificate holder of her order to deny, suspend or revoke the certificate. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or certificate holder of the right to appeal under the provisions of this Article. Any applicant or certificate holder who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the City Clerk may have a review thereof by appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days after the final order or action of the City Clerk and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $100.00. The City Clerk at her discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it’s determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing such appeal. The City Council may, at the request of the appellant, refund all or a portion of the filing fee by a majority vote.
(2) A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of filing with the City Clerk unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the City Clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal
277
proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. Before hearing an appeal, each member of the City Council shall sign an affidavit to be part of the record that he or she is not related to or personal friends with the appellant or any owner of the establishment in question in the appeal being considered and that he or she has no financial interest in the outcome of the appeal. Should any member be unable to sign such an affidavit, that member shall not serve on that appeal and the case shall be heard by the remaining members of the City Council.
(3) The findings of the City Council shall be forwarded to the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to notify the appellant and the chief of police of the action of the City Council.
(4) The findings of the City Council shall not be set aside unless found to be:
a. Contrary to law or ordinances;
b. Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole; or
c. Unreasonable.
(5) The findings of the City Council shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of such finding by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
Sec. 18-116. Records and information to be maintained; display of pawnshop transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage.
Engaging in the business of pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling used or previously owned merchandise, furniture, machinery, appliances, utensils, firearms, gold, silver, coins, precious metals, jewelry, and precious stones within the municipal boundaries of the City is hereby declared to be affected with the public interest due to the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. In the public interest and as set forth herein, all pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting all pawnshop transactions:
(1) All pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting accurate descriptions of all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold to the pawnbroker. Such description shall include, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and all other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The pawnbroker shall assign a pawnshop transaction number documenting each transaction, and ensure each item received is tagged with the pawnshop transaction number.
(2) The tag bearing the pawnshop transaction number must remain attached to the item until the property is disposed of by sale, trade, or other lawful means. This paragraph does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however the pawnbroker shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this paragraph.
(3) The pawnbroker shall require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a pawnshop transaction. Proper identification is defined as a government issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport.
(4) The pawnbroker shall also document the name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, drivers license number, date of birth, and social security number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction.
278
(5) The pawnbroker shall photograph, with a digital camera or web camera, the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property. The photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnbroker's ticket transaction number and a photograph of the item being pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review.
(6) The pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any property, the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging, or selling the property. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one pawn transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature should be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property.
(7) Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging cannot be accepted by the pawnbroker unless the customer can supply a copy of the original sales receipt, or other proof of purchase from the place of purchase, to the pawnbroker who shall retain the receipt or proof of purchase on file.
(8) The pawnbroker shall store the above records, digital images, and fingerprints for a period of four years and make them available to law enforcement personnel upon request.
(9) Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the county police department.
Sec. 18-117. Daily report to police; required format.
Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report, in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police, of all pawnshop transactions that occurred during 24 hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report.
(1) Daily reports shall list all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold, the pawn transaction number for each transaction, and a description of the property including, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and any other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The daily report shall also list the name, address, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and social security number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property along with the date and time of the transaction.
(2) Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the police department.
(3) In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, pawnshops and pawnbrokers will be notified as soon as possible by the Police Department. In this event, the pawnbrokers will be required to make records of transactions in paper form as prescribed by the Police Department. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in Section 18-116. Pawnbrokers shall be responsible for maintaining an adequate inventory of these forms.
279
(4) The chief of police shall select and designate the required automated reporting system and required equipment needed. There will be a fee assessed to the pawnshop for each reported transaction. Said fee may be assessed against the persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property. The accessed fee shall not exceed 50% of the actual cost charged by the police department or the third party administrator. This fee will be invoiced to the pawnbroker and collected by the chief of police, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system.
Sec. 18-118. Property not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition; location of property; police holds.
(a) All property received through any pawnshop transaction shall be held for at least thirty (30) days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise, except when property is redeemed as per a pawn transaction contract.
(b) All property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or purchased shall be held and maintained by the pawnbroker on the premises of the pawnshop or, if impracticable, at such other location as may have been previously approved in writing by the chief of police. The chief of police shall not approve any off-premises storage facilities located outside Gwinnett County.
(c) The Police Department has the authority to place property that is the subject of police investigation on "police hold." In that event, the Police Department shall notify the pawnbroker of the need for a police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from police hold status or the property is confiscated as evidence.
Sec. 18-119. Dealing with minors.
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his or her agents or employees, to receive through any pawnshop any property from minors. A minor, for the purpose of this section, is an individual 17 years of age or under.
Sec. 18-120. Hours of operation.
The hours during which pawnbrokers and pawnshops may conduct business shall be no earlier than 7:00 a.m. to no later than 9:00 p.m. and shall only be allowed to conduct business Monday through Saturday.
Sec. 18-121. Responsibility for enforcement.
The Police Department and the City Clerk shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this Article. Sworn officers of the county police department and civilian employees designated by the chief of police or the City Clerk shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other county or city officer or employee to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the code, ordinances or charter of the city.
Sec. 18-122. Penalty for violation.
Any person, firm, company, corporation or other entity who violates any provision of this may be subject to arrest or summoned to appear in the Municipal Court of the City of Sugar Hill and upon conviction or other finding of guilt, be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment, or both.
280
Sec. 18-123. Severability.
If any portion of this ordinance is declared by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, such declaration shall not be deemed to affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
Secs. 18-124. – 18-170. Reserved.
Amend. February, 2010.
ARTICLE V.
FOOD SALES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 18-171. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Food sales establishment means retail and wholesale grocery stores; retail seafood stores and places of business; food processing plants, seafood processing plants, except those processing plants which are currently required to obtain a license from the commissioner of agriculture under any other provision of law; bakeries; confectionaries; fruit, nut, and vegetables stores or roadside stands; wholesale sandwich and salad manufacturers; including vending machines and operations connected therewith; and places of business and similar establishments, mobile or permanent, engaged in the sale of food primarily for consumption off premises.
(Amd. of 2-2003)
Secs. 18-172--18-195. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LICENSE
Sec. 18-196. Posted license required.
Each food sales establishment as defined herein licensed pursuant to this Code shall post such license on the premises in an open or conspicuous manner so as to be visible to the public.
(Amd. of 2-2003)
Sec. 18-197. Compliance required for issuance or renewal.
281
Pursuant to state law the city clerk shall not issue or renew any occupation tax for any food sales establishment as defined herein until such establishment complies with the requirements of the Codes of Georgia and of the city.
(Amd. of 2-2003)
Secs. 18-198--18-220. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
FOOD VENDING VEHICLES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 18-221. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
City means the City of Sugar Hill.
Vehicle or cart means any cart or vehicle used for the sale of food as described in this article.
Vehicular food vendor means any person engaged in the business of selling food products from a vehicle or cart, self-powered or otherwise, on the public and private streets and other areas of the city, provided that the words "vehicular vendor" shall not include salesmen who use vehicles to go from place to place for the purpose of making sales on the premises of a prospective purchaser.
(Code 1988, § 12-151; Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 1)
Sec. 18-222. Re-inspection of facilities and premises; unsatisfactory condition grounds for license revocation.
(a) The licensee's vehicles or carts shall be subject to periodic re-inspection throughout the license period by the health officer and police department, or their representatives.
(b) If an unsatisfactory sanitary, mechanical or operational condition is noted by an inspector, the licensee shall remedy the same without delay. Failure to so remedy an unsatisfactory condition shall be cause for revocation of the applicable license.
(Code 1988, § 12-156; Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 6)
Sec. 18-223. Report of changes.
282
Each licensee shall report any changes in facilities to the clerk. No new vehicle or cart shall be put in service until a $10.00 per vehicle or cart inspection fee has been paid and the vehicle or cart has been inspected and approved.
(Code 1988, § 12-157; Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 7)
Sec. 18-224. Standards.
Each vehicular food vendor operating within the city shall operate in a safe and sanitary manner and shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing the operation of such businesses and such vehicles or carts. No vehicular food vendor shall operate in such a manner as to constitute a parking or driving hazard to vehicles.
(Code 1988, § 12-158; Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 8)
Sec. 18-225. Periods of operation.
No vehicular food vendor that moves from location to location shall remain in any one location for more than 30 consecutive minutes.
(Code 1988, § 12-159; Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 9)
Secs. 18-226--18-250. Reserved.
LICENSE
Sec. 18-251. Required.
No person shall operate as a vehicular food vendor without having first secured a valid license for each place of business operated within the city and also for each vehicle or cart to be used in the operation of any such business.
(Code 1988, § 12-152; Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 2)
Sec. 18-252. Application.
Any person desiring a license shall make application thereof in writing to the city clerk and accompany the application with the required license fee. The application shall be a form prepared by the city clerk and shall contain:
(1) The name and residence of the applicant and how long he has resided within the state. If the applicant is a corporation, the address of the business office of the corporation and the address of the corporate headquarters shall be given;
(2) The location and ownership of each place of business to be used;
(3) List of vehicles or carts to be used in the operation, including identification numbers and ownership; and
(4) Any other information requested by the clerk if relevant to the business proposed to be carried on.
283
(Code 1988, § 12-153; Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 3)
Sec. 18-253. Fees and term.
(a) The license fee shall be $25.00 for each cart or vehicle.
(b) All such licenses shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 following issuance; and the full amount of the license fee shall be paid regardless of the time of the year in which the license is issued. (Code 1988, § 12-154; Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 4)
Sec. 18-254. Investigation of facilities and vehicles prerequisite for issuance.
(a) Upon the filing of an application, the city may request that appropriate health officers investigate the facilities for storage and dispensing of food products in each vehicle or cart of the applicant. If the cart or vehicle is found to be unsatisfactory, the health officer shall so report to the city clerk and the license shall be denied. If the cart or vehicles are found to be satisfactory, the health officer shall so report to the city clerk.
(b) Upon the filing of an application hereunder, the city may request the police department to investigation each vehicle to determine that it is mechanically and operationally safe. If the vehicle is found to be unsafe, the police shall so report to the city clerk, and the license shall be denied. If the vehicle is found to be safe, the police shall so report to the city clerk.
(c) If the reports of the health officer and of the police department indicate that the vehicles or carts are in satisfactory and safe condition, the city clerk shall then issue the license.
(d) If a license is rejected because of conditions found by the health officer, the health officer shall
state the specific reasons in writing, and the clerk shall provide a copy of the reasons to the applicant. If the license is rejected because of conditions found by the police department, the police shall state the specific reasons in writing, and the clerk shall provide a copy of the reasons to the applicant. The applicant may correct the conditions and reapply upon submitting a re-inspection fee of $10.00 for each vehicle or cart to be re-inspected.
(Code 1988, § 12-155; Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 5)
Sec. 18-255. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to vehicular food vendors authorized to sell products at any city-sponsored or -approved festival or public event.
(Code 1988, § 12-160; Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 10)
Sec. 18-256. Revocation of license; appeal.
(a) Licenses issued hereunder shall be revoked by the city clerk for any of the following reasons:
(1) If a licensee has fraudulently obtained the license by willfully giving false information on any substantial matter in the application therefore;
(2) If the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article or any other division or any
284
law of the state relating to vehicular vendors;
(3) For the conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude;
(4) For conducting the business of the license in an unlawful manner or in a manner constituting a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety and general welfare of the public; and
(5) If the licensee has become ineligible to obtain a license under this article.
(b) Any person aggrieved by the revocation of his license by the city clerk may appeal to the governing body within five days after notice of such revocation.
(Code 1988, § 12-161; Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 11)
Sec. 18-257. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Code 1988, § 12-162; Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 12)
Secs. 18-258--18-280. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
MASSAGE OR SPA ESTABLISHMENTS DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric, or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power, which is utilized by a massage therapist for the purpose of administering a massage.
Massage establishment means any business established for profit which employs or contracts with one or more massage therapists or operates or maintains for profit one or more massage apparatus, and which for good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of massages. This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state.
Massage or massage therapy means the manipulation and/or treatment of soft tissues of the body, including but not limited to the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range of motion stretches, and any other soft tissue manipulation whether manual or by use of massage apparatus, and may include the use of oils, lotions, creams, salt glows, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, hot packs, and cold packs. This term shall not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint
285
manipulations, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry, or medicine is required by the state.
Massage therapist/practitioner/masseur/masseuse means any person who for good or valuable consideration administers a massage or massage therapy.
Spa establishment means any business established for profit that provides personal services such as body wraps, hydro mineral wraps, body polish, body wash, baths and hydro tub soak.
(Amd. of 12-2003, § 18-230)
Sec. 18-282. Scope of regulations.
(a) All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the certificate or permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city, county and state law.
(b) Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent, or restrict in any manner:
(1) Any physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of said profession.
(2) Any hospital or other professional health care establishment separately licensed as such by the state.
(3) Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of the state. (Amd. of 12-2003, § 18-231)
Sec. 18-283. General operating provisions.
(a) Filing of employee information. It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license under this article to annually file, along with the renewal application for the license, the name of all employees, their home address, home telephone number and place of employment. The holder of a license issued under the provisions of this article must additionally report changes in the list of employees with the names and require supplement information for new employees to be filed with the city clerk or its designee within ten days from the date of such change.
(b) Records of client information to be maintained and subject to inspection. It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the name and address of the persons receiving treatment at such establishment; the type of treatment administered; and the name of the person at the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city clerk, or its designee, or members of the county police department.
(c) Owner, manager to on premises. The establishment shall have an owner, manager, or supervisor on premise at all hours the establishment offers massage therapy. If during an inspection there is no owner, manager, or supervisor on premise the establishment must cease operations and close to the public until an owner, manager or supervisor is on-premises.
(d) Period of time records to be maintained. Records required to be maintained under this article
286
shall be kept for a minimum of two years beyond the expiration date of a license. Records shall be made available to the city clerk, during business hours, at the certificate holder's business location in the city, within ten business days of any such request.
(e) Premises subject to inspection. The establishment shall be subject to inspection at any time during business hours by the city clerk and by members of the county police department, to ensure compliance with this article.
(f) Clothing. All employees, massage therapist and other persons on the premises, with the exception of the customers, shall be completely clothed at all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this article completely clothed shall mean having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and said pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this article shall be entirely nontransparent.
(g) Hours of business. No business of a massage therapist shall be engaged in and no place of business shall be open for business except within and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(h) Signage. A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment. Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the city.
(i) Minimum lighting. Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, and additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth.
(j) Beds or mattresses. Ordinary beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any establishment.
(k) Compliance with building and safety codes. The establishment, prior to the issuance of the license, must be in compliance with all applicable building and life safety codes, and the building to be occupied must have a valid, current certificate of occupancy.
(l) Minors. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any massage establishment unless such person carries with him/her at the time of such patronage, a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly licensed physician or written permission of the underage person's parent or guardian. It shall be the duty of the holder of a license to determine the age of the person attempting to patronize a massage establishment and to prohibit such patronage by an underage person
(m) Unlawful actions of massage practitioner. No massage practitioner, or any of his employees, shall manipulate, fondle or handle the sexual organs or anus of any person.
(n) Alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any establishment licensed under this article to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages or to allow the consumption of alcohol by any person on the premises of said establishment.
(Amd. of 12-2003, § 18-235)
287
Secs. 18-284--18-305. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LICENSE
Sec. 18-306. Required; application.
(a) In addition to obtaining an occupation tax certificate as referenced in article II of chapter 70, all persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of a massage establishment shall, before engaging in such trade, business, profession, make application for a license in the form and manner prescribed in this article. The application shall include the information required on all license returns, along with the following additional information:
(b) No license for a massage establishment shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence.
(1) A letter certifying as to the good moral character of the applicant, signed by three currently qualified and registered voters Gwinnett County of good moral character. Individuals signing such letter must provide their name, address and social security number.
(2) The applicant must hold and furnish a certified copy of a diploma or certificate of graduation from a state certified school and accredited school of massage therapy. The diploma must be representative of the fact that applicant attended a course of study of not less than 500 credit hours, consisting of a curriculum of anatomy, physical culture, physiology, basic massage theory, technique and clinical practice, approach to massage, allied modalities and disease awareness and other such subjects.
(3) The applicant must furnish a certified statement from the National Certification Board of Therapeutic Massage and Body Work evidencing passage by the applicant thereof of the exam for massage therapists administered by said board.
(4) If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the foregoing information and exhibits with regard to each employee, independent contractor agent and partner, general or limited associated with the operation of the massage therapy establishment.
(5) If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall, in addition to the foregoing information, submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations, and provide the name and address for its registered agent in Gwinnett County.
(6) If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in Georgia.
(7) If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must submit a copy of a valid driver license or a valid I.D. card as reliable proof thereof. Additionally, if the applicant does not reside in Gwinnett County, the applicant must provide the name and address for an agent who
288
resides in Gwinnett County authorized to receive legal process and notices under this article on behalf of the applicant.
(c) In addition to obtaining an occupation tax certificate as referenced in article II of chapter 70, all persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of a spa establishment shall, before engaging in such trade, business, profession, make application for a license in the form and manner prescribed in this article. The application shall include the information required on all license returns, along with the following additional information:
(1) No license for a spa establishment shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence.
(2) If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the foregoing information and exhibits with regard to each employee, independent contractor agent and partner, general or limited associated with the operation of the massage therapy establishment.
(3) If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall, in addition to the foregoing information, submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations, and provide the name and address for its registered agent in the county.
(4) If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state.
(5) If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must submit a copy of a valid driver license or a valid I.D. card as reliable proof thereof. Additionally, if the applicant does not reside in the county, the applicant must provide the name and address for an agent who resides in the county authorized to receive legal process and notices under this article on behalf of the applicant.
(d) No person, firm or corporation or its officers shall be granted a license for a massage or spa establishment unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city clerk or its designee that such person, partners in the firm, officers, directors and shareholders of the corporation have not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, disorderly conduct, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of the ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate and has been released from parole or probation. No person, partner or officer under the age of 18 shall be granted a license for massage establishment or spa.
(Amd. of 12-2003, § 18-232)
Sec. 18-307. Regulatory fee; expiration and renewal.
(a) There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each massage and spa establishment licensed within the city in the amount of $60.00. The regulatory fee shall be paid with the license application.
289
(b) All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file application, with the requisite fee heretofore provided, with the city clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal applications received after November 30 shall pay in addition to said annual fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If license application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held.
(c) All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full regulatory fee must be paid for a license application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One half of a full regulatory fee shall be paid for a license application filed after July 1 of the license year.
(d) Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes.
(Amd. of 12-2003, § 18-233)
Sec. 18-308. Work permits required.
Prior to the issuance of a license the on-premises owner, manager and employee desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of massage therapy shall be required to obtain a work permit. (Amd. of 12-2003, § 18-234)
Sec. 18-309. Issuance of license.
(a) When a license application is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required herein and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted and a review of the application and an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the city clerk or its designee. The city clerk or its designee shall transmit a copy of the completed application to the county police department. Upon the payment by the applicant of the required fees, the county police department, or its designee, shall cause to be conducted a background investigation of the police record of the applicant, and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the city clerk or his designee.
(b) Upon receipt of the background investigation, and completion of review of the application in accordance with the terms of this article, the city clerk or its designee shall act on the application. The city clerk shall deny any application that:
(1) Fails to meet each of the application requirements specified herein.
(2) Fails to meet each of the minimum standards specified in Section 18-306 of this article.
(3) Contains false information in the application or attached documents. (Amd. of 12-2003, § 18-236)
Sec. 18-310. Grounds for revocation and suspension of license.
290
The license of a massage establishment or spa may be revoked or suspended upon one or more of the following grounds:
(1) Failure of the holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license.
(2) The holder is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit in his being issued the license for the practice of massage.
(3) The holder is engaged in the practice of massage under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another therapist of a like or different name.
(4) The holder has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, disorderly conduct, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony.
(5) Any of the holder's employees, independent contractors or agents has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct in connection with the operation of the massage establishment or on or about the premises of the massage establishment.
(6) Failure of the holder to maintain correct and accurate records as required by this article.
(7) Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, independent contractors, agents, customers, or others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and the customers.
(8) The holder, his employees, agents, or independent contractors associated with the establishment have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this article.
(9) The holder has violated any of the provisions of this article. (Amd. of 12-2003, § 18-237)
Sec. 18-311. Hearings.
No license for a massage or spa establishment shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided.
(1) The city clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant or license holder of his order to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or license holder of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or license holder who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city clerk may have a review thereof by appeal to the zoning board of appeals. Such appeal shall be by written petition filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the city clerk and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $500.00. The city clerk, at his
291
discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it is determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing such appeal. The zoning board of appeals may at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee by a majority vote.
(2) A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the city clerk unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. Before hearing an appeal each member of zoning board of appeals shall sign an affidavit to be part of the record that he or she is not related to or personal friends with any appellant or any owner of the establishment in question in the appeal being considered and that he or she has not financial interest in the outcome of the appeal. Should any member be unable to sign such an affidavit, that member shall not serve on that appeal and the case shall be heard by the remaining members of the zoning board of appeals.
(3) The findings of the zoning board of appeals shall be forwarded to the city clerk with 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify the appellant and the county police department of the action of the zoning board of appeals.
(4) The findings of the zoning board of appeals shall not be set aside unless found to be:
a. Contrary to law or ordinances;
b. Unsupported by an evidence on the records as a whole; or
c. So unreasonable as to constitute a gross abuse of discretion.
(5) The findings of the zoning board of appeals shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of such finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. An aggrieved party shall have all other remedies provided by law or at equity to all ordinances.
(Amd. of 12-2003, § 18-238)
Secs. 18-312--18-335. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 18-336. Findings and Purpose.
(a) Findings. The mayor and council of the city finds that adult entertainment establishments, if unregulated, may lead to an increase in prostitution, venereal and other sexually-transmitted disease, drug and alcohol offenses and other criminal activity; and the law enforcement resources available for responding to problems associated with or created by adult entertainment
292
establishments are limited and are conserved by regulating the method of operation and location of adult entertainment establishments; and based upon the experiences of other urban counties and municipalities, including but not limited to Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia; Gwinnett County, Georgia; City of Smyrna, Georgia; Phoenix, Arizona; Tucson, Arizona; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Adams County, Colorado; Manatee County, Florida; Indianapolis, Indiana; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Saint Paul, Minneosta; Las Vegas, Nevada; Ellicottville, New York; Islip, New York; New York City, New York; Times Square, New York; New Hanover County, North Carolina; Cleveland, Ohio; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Amarillo, Texas; Austin, Texas; Beaumont, Texas; Cleburne, Texas; Dallas, Texas; Houston, Texas; Newport News, Virginia; Bellevue Washington; Des Moines, Washington; Seattle, Washington; and St. Croix County, Wisconsin, which experiences the mayor and council believe are relevant to the problems faced by the city and based upon the evidence and testimony of the citizens and experts who have appeared before such other bodies, and the studies produced by such bodies, the mayor and council take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendantto the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country; it is the finding of the mayor and council that based on the above, public nudity and semi- nudity, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances relating to the sale of and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment", "adult entertainment", or "erotic entertainment" begets criminal behavior and creates undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug use and trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to pre serve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the location of such establishments in particular areas; it is also the finding of the mayor and council that based on the above, there is an increase in the commercial exploitation of human sexuality by owners of such establishments where alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises. Such exploitation takes the form of employing or permitting persons to perform or exhibit nude or semi-nude bodies to other persons as an inducement to such other persons to purchase alcoholic beverages. Such commercial exploitation of such nude or semi-nude acts is adverse to the public's interest in the quality of life, tone of commerce and total community environment in the city. Therefore, the limitation of nude or semi-nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare and is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity and semi-nudity. The mayor and council have reviewed or caused to be reviewed certain decisions of the appellate courts, including but not limited to Paramount Pictures Corporation v. Busbee, et al., 252 Ga. 250 (1982); Harris v. Entertainment Systems, Inc., 259 Ga. 701 (1989); Yarbrough v. City of Carrollton, 262 Ga. 444 (1992); Gravely v. Bacon, 263 Ga. 203 (1993); World Famous Dudley's Food & Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Parker v. Whitfield Co., 265 Ga. 829 (1995); Goldrush II v. City of Marietta, 267 Ga. 683 (1997); Quetgles v. City of Columbus, 268 Ga.619 (1997); Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, Florida, 200 F.3d 1325 (2000); Wise Enterprises, Inc. v. Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, 217 F.3d 1360 (2000); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306 (2000); University Books and Videos, Inc. v. Miami-Dade County, Florida, 132 F.Supp.2d 1008 (2001); and Flanigan's Enterprises, Inc. v. Fulton County, Georgia, 242 F.3d 976 (2001). The public health, safety,
293
welfare and convenience require that the method of operation and location of adult entertainment establishments be regulated in order to reduce the potential for harm, and in order to preserve the quality of urban life in residential and business areas of the community; and the location of an adult entertainment establishment and like or associated businesses in certain areas or in close proximity of the same tend to attract an undesirable quantity and quality of transients, adversely affecting property values, cause an increase in crime, reduces property values, and encourage residents and businesses therein to move elsewhere.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult entertainment establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-151)
Sec. 18-337. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Adult entertainment establishments shall include all of the following establishments:
(1) Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(2) Adult business means either:
a. Each of those enterprises defined in this article;
b. Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or
c. Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services, merchandise, or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(3) Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas.
(4) Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons
294
used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
(5) Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
(6) Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(7) Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(8) Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar
entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(9) Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnished or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters.
(10) Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States, or of a violation of any municipal ordinance with the exception of a simple traffic violation (which shall not include driving under the influence) within the past ten years. Conviction shall include a plea of nolo contendere or bond forfeitures.
(11) Minor means, for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years.
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female
295
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
(2) Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following:
(1) Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct; analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;
(2) Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; (3) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; (4) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; (5) Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain;
(6) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or
(7) Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. (Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-152)
Sec. 18-338. Applicability of article.
Nothing in this article adopted by the mayor and council of the city shall be construed to apply to the presentation, showing, or performance of any play, drama, ballet, or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher education, or other similar establishment as a form of an expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business
enterprise.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-184)
Sec. 18-339. Erotic dance establishment regulations.
(a) No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall operate, advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article.
(b) No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the city clerk showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year.
(c) An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of three years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers.
296
(d) No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not permitted pursuant to this article.
(e) No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an erotic dance establishment. It shall be the continuing obligation of the licensee and the employees and agents of the licensee at all times to take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that all persons in or on the premises shall be at least 18 years of age and shall be capable of proving their age at any time by the presentation of a valid driver's license or other proof that such person is, in fact, 18 years of age or older.
(f) An erotic dance establishment shall be closed within the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and shall be closed from 12:00 midnight Saturday night through 12:00 noon on Sunday.
(g) No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage, intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee.
(h) An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article.
(i) All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor.
(j) No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron.
(k) No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer.
(l) No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer.
(m) No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
(n) All areas of an erotic dance establishment shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot.
(o) If any portion or subparagraph of this section or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-153)
Sec. 18-340. Certain activities prohibited.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-154)
Sec. 18-341. Sale of alcohol prohibited.
No adult entertainment establishment shall be licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or shall allow the
297
possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-157)
Sec. 18-342. Admission of and sales to minors unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-158)
Sec. 18-343. Location.
(a) Premises for which an application is made for the licensing of adult entertainment establishment at the time of the application and at the time the license is granted, if granted, shall be located only in a HM- 1 zoning district, as the same is now or hereafter delineated and defined by the zoning ordinance of the city. Any such location shall also meet the following requirements:
(1) An adult entertainment establishment shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet from another parcel of land with an adult entertainment establishment.
(2) An adult entertainment establishment shall be located on property which is no closer than 1,000 feet from any parcel of land which is zoned for residential use.
(3) An adult entertainment establishment shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet from any parcel of land upon which a church, library, school ground, public park, playground, college campus or child care facility is located.
(4) An adult entertainment establishment shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet from any parcel of land upon which their is any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages in the city.
(5) An adult entertainment establishment shall be located on a parcel of land having at least 100 feet of road frontage.
(6) For the purposes of these standards, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary that is designed and used or to be used as a unit.
(b) The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with the ordinances of the city; regulation of the state revenue commissioner; the laws of the state; and all other pertinent laws. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when finished by the building inspector. Each building in which the business is to be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the surrounding premises are readily visible at all time. All adult entertainment facilities for which a license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways, and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-159)
298
Sec. 18-344. Adult entertainment establishment employees.
(a) Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises.
(b) Dancers not to be waiters, waitresses, etc. A dancer employed as such by an adult business, adult dancing establishment, or erotic dance establishment hereunder shall not at any time be employed by the licensee as a waiter, waitress, bartender or bus person or in any capacity for a period of 30 days after having performed as a dancer in the licensed premises or in any premises in the state in which adult entertainment is offered or allowed. It is the intent of this provision that dancers shall perform no function other than that of dancing or providing the entertainment licensed hereby and shall not at any time provide services as waiters, waitresses, bartenders, bus persons or otherwise in or about the licensed premises.
(c) City clerk approval of employees. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, the person shall file a notice with the city clerk of the intended employment on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall receive approval of such employment from the city clerk in the form of an employment permit. The prospective employee shall complete an application with the city clerk including all information necessary to conduct a background investigation, including but not limited to a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. The application shall be acted upon by the city clerk within ten business days of its submittal. Failure to grant or deny the permit within ten business days shall be deemed a grant of the permit. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may within ten days of said denial, apply to the city clerk for a hearing. The decision of the city clerk after a hearing may be appealed to the city council in the same manner provided for the appeal of license denials in sections 18-378, 18-379, and 18-436--18- 443. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice if filed. The applicant for a permit shall file with the city manager or his designee an application which shall state, truthfully and correctly, the age and current address of the applicant; all prior addresses of the applicant within the immediately preceding three-year period and the marital status of the applicant during such period; any convictions for violation of federal, state, or local laws excluding traffic violations (other than traffic violations involving alcohol or controlled substances) within the immediately preceding three years; and any other information reasonably requested by the city manager or his designee in conjunction with such application.
(d) Violations of ordinances or state law. Violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of the employment permit.
(e) Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be
299
considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensees of any adult entertainment establishment.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-160)
Sec. 18-345. Violations of article; penalty.
Any person violating the provision of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed 60 days or both. In addition to such fine, and/or imprisonment, conviction, plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere for violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-176)
Sec. 18-346. Unlawful operation declared nuisance.
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-177)
Sec. 18-347. Cleaning of licensed premises.
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-179)
Sec. 18-348. Self-inspection of licensed premises.
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the license premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city clerk. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-180)
Sec. 18-349. Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions.
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the city clerk on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city clerk shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a
300
notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city clerk may physically seal that portion of the license premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city clerk. The city clerk shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-181)
Sec. 18-350. Abatement as sanitary nuisance.
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. (Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-182)
Sec. 18-351. Prohibition of enclosed viewing rooms.
Any adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements:
(1) Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control type or view obstructing devices or materials.
(2) Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements:
a. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
b. Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same.
c. All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
d. The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned.
e. The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor.
(3) Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-183)
Secs. 18-352--18-375. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
Subdivision I.
301
In General
Sec. 18-376. License does not condone illegal activity.
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a license so to do. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-155)
Sec. 18-377. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-156)
Sec. 18-378. Renewal; fee.
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The nonrefundable license fee shall be $5,000.00 per year or any portion thereof. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be $5,000.00 per year. Any such license, after issuance, must be renewed annually not later than February 1 of each year and such license will be considered for renewal only in the event the current license holder is in full and complete compliance with all of the provisions of this article and all other ordinances of the city and the laws of the state which may apply to the licensing and operation of the premises licensed hereunder. Any license not renewed by February 1 of each year shall lapse. Operation of unlicensed premises is unlawful. (Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-167)
Sec. 18-379. Transferability.
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-168)
Sec. 18-380. Suspension or revocation.
If the licensee or if any employee of the licensee or if any stockholder, officer or agent of the licensee, if a
302
corporation, or if any partner, co-owner or joint-venturer shall violate any of the provisions hereof or shall be
convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude related to the premises licensed hereunder, whether a felony or misdemeanor and other than minor traffic violations, or shall otherwise fail to comply with the provision hereof, the license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked, terminated, suspended, otherwise limited by the mayor and council of the city after a public hearing is held for that purpose in accordance with the appropriate requirements of the due process clause of the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the state. In the event any such violation by the licensee shall, in the opinion of the mayor and council of the city, constitute such a violation and shall immediately place in jeopardy or pose an immediate threat to persons or to property, sufficient to justify immediate action, the mayor and council may, by informally providing limited due process, temporarily suspend such license provided they shall within a period of 30 days thereafter, proceed to afford to the licensee a full due process hearing, and if such a hearing is not provided, the license suspension shall be lifted.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-178)
Sec. 18-381. Persons prohibited as licensees.
No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by:
(1) An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes;
(2) Any person who is not of good moral character;
(3) Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character;
(4) Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character;
(5) Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in apart by any person who is not of good moral character;
(6) Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United Sates, the state or the city.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-165)
Secs. 18-382--18-405. Reserved.
Subdivision I.
Application
Sec. 18-406. Submittal to city clerk; application fee.
Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk or her designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable application fee of $250.00 shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be
303
supplied to the city clerk at the time such application is submitted.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-161(a))
Sec. 18-407. Application not authority to conduct business.
The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-161(b))
Sec. 18-408. Bond to be filed with application.
All applicants for licenses permitting adult entertainment establishments shall file with the clerk, along with each application, a bond conditioned to pay all sums which may become due by the applicant to the city as taxes, license fees, or otherwise arising out of the operation for which the license is sought; and the surety for the bond shall be a surety company licensed to do business in this state and the bond shall be in such form as is acceptable to the clerk. The bond shall be in the amount of $5,000.00.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-161(c))
Sec. 18-409. Investigation of application.
All applications for a license permitting an adult entertainment establishment shall be investigated by the county police county department and a report of said investigation presented to the clerk for consideration with the application.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-161(d))
Sec. 18-410. Application contents.
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information:
(1) The full true name and any other names used by the applicant;
(2) The present address and telephone number of the applicant;
(3) The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each;
(4) Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
(5) The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth;
(6) Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months;
(7) Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately
304
preceding the date of application. Such information shall be supplied regarding partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding;
(8) The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment establishment or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;
(9) All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive minor of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions;
(10) If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. If the applicant is a limited liability company or similar entity, all members shall provide information. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged;
(11) The names and addresses of the owner and/or lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the deed, lease or rental agreement;
(12) Such other identification and information as the county police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application;
(13) The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation;
(14) If the applicant, any partners of any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past ten years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed;
(15) The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant;
(16) If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly
305
recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any;
(17) At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony misdemeanor or a Municipal Code violation involving moral turpitude in the past ten years. The city clerk shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms;
(18) Address of the premises to be licensed;
(19) A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises and that the certification that the site meets the location requirements of section 18-343;
(20) Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by:
a. If the applicant is an individual, the individual;
b. If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner;
c. If a corporation, by the president or secretary of the corporation;
d. If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. (Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-162)
Sec. 18-411. Applicant to provide proof of payment of application fee.
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. (Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-163)
Sec. 18-412. Investigation of application and applicant; grant or denial.
(a) Time limit for investigation. The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant.
(b) Conditions for granting license. Upon completion of the investigation, the city clerk shall grant the license if the city clerk finds:
(1) The required fee has been paid;
(2) The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article;
(3) The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the
application;
306
(4) The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application;
(5) The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as a crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude and is of good moral character;
(6) The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application;
(7) The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning distance, fire and safety requirements and standards;
(8) The applicant is at least 18 years of age;
(9) That the applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur;
(10) That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open;
(11) That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder;
(12) That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or the United States;
(13) That the applicant has not had any license issued by the city or by any other city in the state, or by any other licensing authority in the state relating to the manufacture, distribution or sale of alcoholic or malt beverages or wine previously suspended or revoked within the past ten years;
(14) That the applicant is not related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the laws of the state;
(15) That the applicant has adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and mange its affairs and that the applicant is not a mere surrogate for a person or
307
persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever;
(16) That the applicant is not the city clerk or a member of the city council or a spouse or minor child of one of the aforesaid persons;
(17) That the applicant is at least 18 years of age and is a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully permitted for permanent residence.
(c) Failure to meet character requirements. The clerk may decline to issue a license when any person having any interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as herein set forth for the licensee.
(d) Written notice of grant or denial. The city clerk shall complete the investigation of the application and the background of the application within 30 days of the submission of the complete application, and shall either grant or deny said application within the 30-day period. Written notice of the grant or denial of the license shall be provided to the applicant within five business days of the end of the 30-day period, and failure to provide such written notice within the time period shall constitute a granting of the license.
(e) Failure to pay license fee. Should the license be granted either by express written approval of the clerk or by failure to provide written approval or denial within the time period provided, said applicant shall tender the license fee of $5,000.00 to the city by certified check within ten days of the approval. Failure to tender the required license fee within the time period provided shall constitute grounds for revocation of said license. The license fee shall be paid by certified check.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-164)
Secs. 18-413--18-435. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
APPEALS
Sec. 18-436. Time limit for filing.
Should the city clerk, following investigation of the applicant, deny the application within the time period set forth in section 18-412, said applicant shall have the right to file an appeal of the denial. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk in writing within ten days of the date of the written denial.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-166)
Sec. 18-437. Procedure.
(a) Notice of appeal. The licensee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a written notice of appeal to the city clerk.
(b) Contents of notice. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or request, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and council and the name and address of the applicant.
308
(c) Clerk to place on council meeting agenda. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal for council action.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-169)
Sec. 18-438. Council action.
When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions:
(1) Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law;
(2) Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article;
(3) The hearing provided for in this section shall be scheduled for a date which is not more than 45 days after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-170)
Sec. 18-439. City council to receive testimony and evidence.
Whenever an appeal is scheduled before the city council, at the time and date set therefore, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties, and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-171)
Sec. 18-440. Hearing officer.
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-172)
Sec. 18-441. Rules of evidence.
The council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. (Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-173)
Sec. 18-442. Hearing officer report and final decision.
Should a hearing officer have been appointed by the mayor and council to conduct an appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall submit a written report and recommendation to the council within five business days of the conclusion of said hearing. Regardless of whether or not a hearing officer has been used at said hearing, the council shall schedule a meeting for the purpose of making a final determination in the matter which meeting shall be not more than ten business days from the conclusion of the appeals hearing. At this meeting, the council shall receive the report of the hearing officer, if any, and shall make a final determination on the appeal. The
309
applicant shall be notified of the date and time of the meeting at which final action will be taken. Said notice shall be provided in writing at least five business days prior to the date of the meeting. The council's decision shall be reduced to writing at the time of the meeting and provided to the applicant appealing the decision within five business days of the date the decision is rendered by the city council.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-174)
Sec. 18-443. Appeal of council decision to superior court.
Any person whose appeal is denied by the city council, shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city council to the superior court of the county. The appeal shall be by writ of certiorari filed in accordance with all state provisions related to such an action, and the review of the superior court shall be based on the record of the appeal hearing before the city council.
(Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-175)
Sec. 18-444. Severability.
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, including but not limited to, a declaration or adjudication that such section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the article violates a constitutional provision of free speech under the Georgia Constitution or the United States Constitution, such adjudication shall in no manner effect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, all of which shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The city council hereby declares it would have adopted the remaining parts of the ordinance if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. The provisions of this article are declared severable to the maximum extent allowed by law. (Amd. of 10-2001, § 18-185)
Chapter 18
ARTICLE IX.
TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 18-600. Authority.
The legal authority for these rules is Section 16-5-71, Section 16-5-71.1, Section 16-12-5, Section 31-3-4, and Chapters 5 and 40 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated.
Sec. 18-601. Purpose.
The Body Art Studios and Body Artists Rules are adopted for the purpose of establishing reasonable standards for individuals performing body art procedures and the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards are designed to promote the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving body art services.
Sec. 18-602. Exemptions.
These rules shall not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or a technician acting under the direct on-site supervision of such licensed
310
physician or osteopath.
Sec. 18-603. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to these rules. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in these rules shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
(1) “Antibacterial Solution” means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria which is approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by FDA.
(2) “Biohazard” means any infectious agents or parts thereof presenting a real or potential risk to the wellbeing of human or other species, directly through infection or indirectly through disruption of the environment.
(3) “Body Art” means the practice of physical body adornment by the following techniques: Body Piercing, Tattooing, and Cosmetic Tattooing. This definition does not include for the purposes of these rules, piercing of the outer perimeter or lube of the ear with pre-sterilized single-use stud and clasp ear piercing systems.
(4) “Body Artist Permit” means the authorization granted by the Board of Health to the Body Artist to perform body art. Such permit is the property of the Gwinnett County Board of Health.
(5) “Body Art Studio” means any permanent building, structure, or suite located in a planned commercial center on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business permit or license, wherein a Body Artist performs body art.
(6) “Body Artist” means any person who performs body art.
(7) “Body Piercing” means puncturing or penetrating the skin or mucosa of a person with any sharp instrument and/or the insertion jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening.
(8) “Cosmetic Tattooing” means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa. Cosmetic Tattooing shall include permanent cosmetics, micro-pigmentation, permanent color technology, and micro-pigment implantation.
(9) “Board of Health” means the Gwinnett County Board of Health or its duly authorized representatives.
(10) “Currently Licensed Health Care Professional” includes but is not limited to Licensed Physicians, Registered Nurses (RN), Licensed Practical Nurses (LPN), and Licensed Medical Technicians.
(11) “Department” means the Department of Human Resources if the State of Georgia.
(12) “Owner” means a partnership, corporation, association, business entity, or person or group of persons which/who own, maintain, and control the Body Art Studio and who are legally
311
responsible for the operation of the Body Art Studio.
(13) “Parlor” means the actual room of the Body Art Studio where the Body Artist performs procedures.
(14) “Body Art Studio Permit” means the authorization granted by the Board of Health to the Owner to operate a Body Art Studio. Such permit is the property of the Gwinnett County Board of Health.
(15) “Sanitary” means clean and free of agents of infection or disease.
(16) “Sanitized” means effective antibacterial treatment by a process that provides a sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacteria count including pathogens to a safe level on equipment.
(17) “Sharps” means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts to the skin.
(18) “Standard Precautions” means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Center for Disease Control (CD) as “Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers” in Morbidity and Morality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, NO. S-6; “Recommendation for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures,” in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8; and “Recommendations for Prevention and Control of HCV Infection and HCV Related Chronic Disease” in MMWR, October 16, 1998, Vol. 47, No. RR-19. These methods of infection control require the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and other blood borne pathogens. Precaution included, but are not limited to, hand washing, gloving, personal protective equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood and body fluid contaminated products. Standard precautions include Universal Precautions. In the event that the CDC or other primary reference or regulatory authority publishes materials or amends regulations applicable to this definition shall be deemed amended to include the latest versions of these documents, regulations and recommendations.
(19) “Sterilization” means holding in instrument in an autoclave for fifteen (15) minutes at fifteen (15) pounds pressure at a temperature of 273 degree Farenheit or 121 degrees Celsius.
(20) “Sterilizer” means an autoclave certified to meet medical standards.
(21) “Sterilizer indicator” means a tape, strip, or other device designed to change color to indicate that sterilization temperature has been achieved during the sterilization procedure.
(22) “Tattoo” means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa and includes the definition of tattoo as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1(1) and as many there after be amended. The term “tattoo” also includes all forms of Cosmetic Tattooing.
(23) “Wash” means the cleansing the skin with warm water and antibacterial soap and drying with
312
single-use towels.
Sec. 18-604. Scope of Rules.
(1) All permits issued under this Article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the City of Sugar Hill, the Board of Health, the Department, and state law.
(2) The requirements of these rules shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, regulatory provisions of local, state, or federal law and shall not authorize violations of said other applicable laws.
Sec. 18-605. Body Art Studio Owner.
The Owner shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in Chapter 40 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the Department, and with the applicable rules of the Gwinnett County Board of Health, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes and rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership.
a. No person under eighteen (18) shall perform body art procedures on individuals unless under the direct on-site supervision of a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated.
b. Body Artists shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures.
c. No person shall perform body art procedures on an individual who is or reasonably appears to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other stimulants or depressants or is of unsound mind or body.
d. No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a Body Art Studio except service animals used by persons with legally recognized disabilities.
e. No tattoo procedure shall be performed on a person under the age of eighteen (18) except by a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such physician or osteopath with the written consent of a parent or guardian.
f. No body piercing procedure shall be performed on a person under the age of eighteen (18) without the written consent of a parent or guardian. The parent or guardian must be present when the piercing procedure is performed.
g. No tattoo procedure shall be performed on any person within one (1) inch of any part of the eye socket of such person.
Sec. 18-606. Body Art Studio Permit.
(1) The Owner of each Body Art Studio shall obtain a valid Body Art Studio Permit from the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section prior to beginning operation. Body Art Studios shall renew their Permit annually in accordance with Section 8 herein.
313
(2) The Permit is the property of the Gwinnett County Board of Health.
(3) To be eligible for a new Body Art Studio Permit or a renewal permit, a Body Art Studio must be in compliance with all of the requirements of these rules.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to practice body art procedures unless such procedures are performed in a Body Art Studio operating under a valid Body Art Studio Permit issued by the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section.
(5) The Body Art Studio Permit shall be displayed on the premises in a conspicuous place in public view at all times. Permits shall not be defaced or altered in any manner. A Body Art Studio shall not post a reproduction of a Permit unless the Board of Health has marked it “Duplicate.”
(6) All Body Art Studio permits issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable.
(7) A Body Art Studio Permit shall be returned to the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section if it is suspended or revoked.
Sec. 18-607. Application for Body Art Studio Permit.
(1) The application for a Body Art Studio or for the renewal of a Body Art Studio Permit shall be made on forms provided by the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section.
(2) Any application for a new Body Art Studio Permit or for the renewal of a Body Art Studio Permit shall be sworn to by the applicant as true, correct, and complete before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths.
(3) Applications for a New Permit
(a) At least thirty (30) days prior to the anticipated date of opening, the Owner of a new Body Art Studio shall submit an application to the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section for a Body Art Studio Permit to operate under these rules.
(b) The application for a new Body Art Studio Permit shall include:
a. A quarter inch per foot scale drawing of the floor plan of the Body Art Studio and a drawing of associated details shown at one and a half inch per foot scale, signed by a registered engineer or architect. Such drawing shall show the accurate placement of each of the following:
i. Hand-sinks
ii. Bathroom(s)
iii. First-Aid kits
iv. Waiting Area(s)
v. Windows
314
vi. Doors
vii. Tables
viii. Chairs
ix. Room Measurements
x. Equipment
b. A zoning certification obtained from the appropriate jurisdiction. The applicant shall comply with all applicable zoning, building, safety, fire, and other local codes and requirements;
c. A copy of the Certificate of Occupancy for the Studio;
d. A complete description of all body art services which will be provided in the Body Art Studio;
e. The full or legal name under which the Body Art Studio is conducted;
f. The address of the Body Art Studio;
g. If the Owner leases the location, the name and current address of the landlord;
h. The name and home address of the Owner; if the Owner of Body Art Studio is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the Owner is a corporation, the date and place of incorporation and the name and address of its registered agent in the state; or if the Owner is any type of association, the names of the principals of the association;
i. A list containing the full names and home addresses of all employees and staff who will be working in a Body Art Studio;
j. A copy of the written statement of policies and procedures of the Body Art Studio in accordance with Section 6 of these rules;
k. An acknowledgement signed by the Owner acknowledging that the Owner has read and understands these rules; and
l. Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the Board of Health.
(c) The applicant shall submit a non-refundable plan review fee as set by the Gwinnett County Board of Health and approved by the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners.
(4) Applications for Renewal
(a) At least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of a Body Art Studio Permit, the Owner shall submit an application to the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section for renewal of the Body Art Studio Permit.
(b) The application for the renewal of a Body Art Studio Permit shall include:
315
a. A complete description of all body art services that will be provided at the Studio;
b. The full or legal name under which the Body Art Studio is operated;
c. The address of the Body Art Studio;
d. If the Owner leases the location, the name and current address of the landlord;
e. The name and current home address of the Owner of the Body Art Studio is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the Owner is a corporation, the date and place of incorporation and the name and address of its registered agent in the state; or if the Owner is any other type of association, the names of the principals of the association;
f. An updated list containing the full names and home addresses of all current employees and staff who will be working in the Body Art Studio;
g. A copy of the written statement of policies and procedures of the Body Art Studio in accordance with Section 6 of these rules;
h. An acknowledgement signed by the Owner acknowledging that the Owner has read and understands these rules; and
i. Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the Board of Health.
Sec. 18-608. Issuance of Body Art Studio Permits & Fees.
(1) The Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section may issue a Body Art Studio Permit to an Owner after determining that the Studio is in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 40 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the Department of Human Resources, and with these rules.
(2) A Body Art Studio shall submit an application for a new Body Art Studio Permit when any of the following conditions exist:
(a) The Studio is remodeled, renovated, or expanded;
(b) There is a change in the legal ownership of the Body Art Studio; or
(c) An existing facility is moved or relocated.
(3) Body Art Studios Permits shall automatically expire on June 30th of each year.
(4) Prior to the issuance of a Body Art Studio Permit, the Owner must pay the applicable permit fee. Body Art Studio Permit fees shall not be prorated except that an Owner who submits an application for a Body Art Studio Permit on January 1 or later shall only be required to pay half of the Body Art Studio Permit fee.
316
Sec. 18-609. Application to Existing Businesses.
The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all Body Art Studios whether the Studios were established before or after the effective date of these rules. Any Body Art Studio in business on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six (6) months of the effective date.
Sec. 18-610. Body Art Studio Minimum Floor Plan Requirements.
(1) The Body Art Studio shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained so as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers and staff.
(2) The Body Art Studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the procedure adequate privacy from observers. The Parlor shall be separate from the waiting area.
(3) Each Parlor shall have a minimum of 45 square feet of floor space.
(4) Insects, vermin, and/or rodents shall not be present in any part of the Body Art Studio. Effective measures shall be taken by the Body Art Studio Owner to prevent the breeding or presence on the premises of insects, vermin, and/or rodents.
(5) The Body Art Studio shall have adequate mechanical ventilation in compliance with current state and local building codes.
(6) Walls and ceiling shall be painted or covered in a manner which allows for easy and effective cleaning. All paint and coverings shall be light in color.
(7) Parlor floors shall be constructed of nonabsorbent material which will allow for effective cleaning. Floors in the Parlor areas shall not be covered with carpet or wood.
(8) A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility shall be made accessible to customers; however, it shall be separate from the Parlor.
(9) Each Parlor shall be equipped with at least one sink providing hot and cold water under pressure trough mixing valve with hot aerator, and with foot or wrist actuated controls, for the use of the Body Artists for washing their hands and preparing customers for the Body Art procedures. This area shall be provided with dispenser soap, an antibacterial solution, dispenses single-use towels, and an individual hand brushes for each Body Artist.
(10) An equipment washing sink shall be provided in the Studio, distinct from the hand sinks and shall be located in the equipment handling and assembly area. This sink shall meet National Safety Foundation (NSF) standards.
(11) Each Parlor shall be equipped with an artificial light source equivalent to at least twenty (20) foot candles three (3) feet off the floor. Body Art procedure areas and equipment handling and assembly areas shall be provided with one hundred (100) foot candles at the level where the procedure is performed.
317
(12) Parlors shall not be used as corridors for access to other rooms.
(13) A water heater capable of heating water to 100?F shall be provided. The size and capacity of such water heater shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Health.
Sec. 18-611. Body Art Studio Furnishings and Fixtures.
(1) Furnishings of the Body Art Studio shall be maintained in sanitary condition and shall be intact and functional. The Studio shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish.
(2) Cabinets for the storage instruments, dyes, pigments, single-use articles, carbon, stencils, jewelry, studs, and other supplies shall be provided for each Body Artist and shall be designed, manufactured, and maintained in a sanitary manner so as to protect contents from contamination.
(3) Worktables and chairs shall be provided for each Body Artist.
(a) Surfaces of all worktables and chairs shall be constructed of material which is smooth, light colored, nonporous, nonabsorbent, corrosion resistant, and easily sanitized.
(b) Worktables and chairs shall be sanitized with a bacterial solution after each procedure.
Sec. 18-612. Body Art Studio Supplies.
(1) Single-use supplies shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These supplies shall be stored in an area separate from chemical supplies and toilet facilities.
(2) All materials applied to human skin including, but not limited to, ink, stencils, and single-use piercing needles shall be from single-use containers and shall be disposed of after each use.
(3) Jewelry supplies used in a Body Art Studio shall be made of implant grade high quality stainless steel, gold, platinum, titanium, niobium, or dense low porosity plastic. The jewelry shall also be smooth surfaced and scratch free.
(4) Only single-use sterile gauze and single-use antibacterial ointment dispensers shall be used.
(5) Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for any reason.
Sec. 18-613. Sterilization.
(1) Instrument Cleaning
(a) All non single-use, non-disposable instruments shall be properly cleaned and sterilized after each use by following the manufacturer’s recommendations prior to packaging and sterilization.
(b) Employees shall wear heavy-duty, multi-use, waterproof gloves while cleaning instruments.
318
(c) Used instruments shall be soaked in an EPA approved disinfectant until cleaning can be performed. The solution shall be changed as recommended by the solution manufacturer.
(d) Instruments shall be disassembled for cleaning.
(e) All instrument components shall be cleaned, either manually or in an ultrasonic cleaner, using the appropriate cleaning agent specified to the type of cleaning performed.
(2) Instrument Packaging
(a) Employees shall wear clean gloves while packaging or wrapping instruments.
(b) Instruments shall be wrapped or packaged with a Sterilizer Indicator on the package.
(c) All packages shall be labeled with the time and date of sterilization. Packages will no longer be considered sterile six (6) months after the date of sterilization.
(3) Instrument Sterilization
(a) The sterilizer shall be designed and labeled as a medical instrument sterilizer.
(b) The operator’s manual for the sterilizer shall be available on the premises, and the sterilizer shall be operated according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
(c) The sterilizer shall be cleaned and maintained according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
(d) A sterilizer load log shall be maintained for the Studio and made available for inspection by properly identified representatives of the Board of Health during normal operation hours. The log shall be kept for a minimum of one (1) year. The log shall contain the following documentation for each load.
i. Descriptions of instruments contained in the load;
ii. Date of sterilization, and time if more than one load is processed in a single day;
iii. Sterilizer cycle time and temperature;
iv. Indication of proper sterilization of instruments, as indicated by the appropriate color change of the sterilizer indicator on each package. The indicator used shall be compatible with the sterilization process being used; and
v. Action taken when appropriate color indicator change did not occur.
(4) Sterilization Monitoring
(a) Sterilizer monitoring shall be performed at least once every two (2) months (unless more frequent monitoring is specified by the manufacturer) by using a commercial biological
319
monitoring (spore) system.
(b) All biological indicators shall be analyzed by a laboratory that operates under FDA guidelines and is independent of the Studio with reports sent to the Studio and the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health System.
(c) Biological indicator test results shall be maintained in the premises for a minimum of one (1) year and must be available for inspection by properly identified representatives for the Board of Health during normal operation hours.
(d) Upon notification of a positive microbiological monitoring report, the sterilizer shall be immediately checked for proper use and function. The Studio will cease operations immediately upon receipt of a positive microbiological report. Three (3) consecutive biological tests shall be performed before the Studio is reopened. All three (3) tests must be a negative. The Studio shall have the option to purchase and install a new sterilizer in order to reopen prior to the receipt of the test result on the previous sterilizer.
(5) Instrument Storage
(a) Hands shall be washed and gloved prior to handling sterilized objects.
(b) After sterilization, the instruments shall be stored in a dry, clean area reserved for storage of sterilized instruments.
(6) Single-Use Items
(a) If the Body Art Studio operates using only pre-sterilized instruments and supplies, a sterilizer is not required.
Sec. 18-614. Disinfection of Workplace.
(1) Each Body Art Studio shall be kept clean and sanitary.
(2) The Owner shall develop the implementation of a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination, plus any tasks or procedures to be performed daily. This written schedule shall be based on the types of surfaces to be cleaned, the types of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the Body Art Studio. The Owner shall maintain a log of all scheduled cleaning. This log shall be available for review Violation of proper maintenance and documentation thereof will be grounds for immediate closure and suspension of the Owner’s Body Art Permit.
(3) All work surfaces shall be disinfected with an EPA approved disinfectant at the beginning of each work day, after completion of body art procedures on each individual, and at the end of each work day.
(4) All protective coverings such as plastic wrap and aluminum foil shall be removed after each body art procedure and replaced with unused protective coverings.
320
(5) Reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have the likelihood of becoming contaminated shall be decontaminated on a daily basis with a current EPA approval disinfectant. When contamination is visible, receptacles shall be cleaned and decontaminated immediately.
Sec. 18-615. Disposal of Waste.
(1) All disposable instruments are considered biohazardous and must be disposed of an biohazardous material. All biohazardous waste must be disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and ordinances regarding biohazardous waste. Needles, razors, and other sharp instruments shall be placed in puncture restraint, closed containers immediately after use and shall be stored in closed cabinets or drawers at the end of each workday.
(2) Needles shall not be purposely bent, broken, or otherwise manipulated.
(3) Sharps waste shall be safely discarded in a rigid and puncture restraint waste container that is leak proof on the sides and bottom with a self-closing lid. These containers shall be labeled with the international biohazard symbol and the word “BIOHAZARD.” Sharps waste shall be removed and disposed of by a company that will dispose of it in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules and ordinances regarding biohazardous waste.
(4) Biohazardous non-sharps waste shall be discarded in a biohazard bag. Waste shall be removed and disposed of by a company that will dispose of it in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules and ordinances regarding biohazardous waste.
(5) Non-biohazardous disposable wastes shall be placed in lined, easily cleanable containers with tight fitting lids to prevent leakage or spillage.
(6) Non-biohazardous disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of so as to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials.
(7) Self-closing waste containers lined with plastic bags manufactured specifically for waste containers shall be located within each Parlor and restroom and shall be emptied at least once per day into a commercially approved dumpster. This dumpster must be picked up and emptied by a commercial contractor at least once per week.
Sec. 18-616. Client Files.
(1) The Owner shall maintain a detailed client file of the body art procedures administered to each client.
(2) The client file shall be created prior to any body art procedure being performed and shall reflect the client’s name and signature, address, proof of age, body art procedure performed, date, design, its precise location upon the body, and the name of the Body Artist or Body Artists performing or assisting in the procedure. The client files shall also describe whether any complications or incidents arose during the procedure and detail what action was taken to resolve the incident. A copy of a valid state issued photo ID must be obtained from the client and maintained with the client’s file.
321
(3) Each client shall be provided with an informed consent statement that fully explains the procedure and each client shall be required to sign the informed consent statement prior to receiving any body art procedure. The informed consent statement signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client file, with a copy given to the client.
(4) A “disclaimer of liability” from promulgated by the Board shall also be signed by the client prior to receiving any body art procedure. A copy of the “disclaimer of liability” signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client file, with a copy given to the client.
(5) The client file shall contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs at the time of the body art procedure is performed.
(6) The client file shall contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she has received, read, and understood a copy of the after care procedures advising the client on proper subsequent care of the body art.
Sec. 18-617. Body Art Studio Inspections.
(1) The premises of any Body Art Studio and all records required to be maintained under these regulations shall be available for review and examination by properly identified representatives of the Board of Health during normal operation hours for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with these rules.
(2) The Owner shall be responsible for having an employee with knowledge of the Studio’s records on duty at the Body Art Studio during all hours of operation.
(3) Studio inspections shall be performed at least two (2) times annually. Additional Studio inspections shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of these rules. Any violation of these rules will require a re-inspection of the Body Art Studio to determine whether that violation has been corrected. Each re-inspection will carry a re-inspection fee.
(4) A copy of the most current inspection report shall be posted in public view, in an unobscured manner, at eye level (5 foot +/- 6 inches) within fifteen (15) feet of the main door. The inspection report shall be approachable to within one (1) foot.
Sec. 18-618. Body Art Studio Personnel.
(1) Body Artists shall obtain and maintain current certification in emergency first-aid, CPR, sterilization, blood borne pathogen, and sanitary procedures from currently licensed health care professional. All certification must be renewed at a minimum of every two (2) years unless a more frequent time period is specified by the licensing agencies.
(2) The above certifications must be obtained before each Body Artist’s employment.
(3) Each Body Artist must obtain an examination by a current licensed physician within twelve (12) months prior to the initial application for a Body Art Permit. Each Body Artist must obtain from the physician a certificate certifying that the Body Artist is free of any communicable disease in a communicable state, including but not limited to, Syphilis, Hepatitis B&C, and HIV.
322
(4) The Owner must maintain a file on all employees who perform body art procedures. Such files shall be available for inspection by properly identified representatives of the Board of Health during normal operation hours. The file shall include the following:
(a) Report of physical examination;
(b) Evidence of current emergency first-aid, CPR, sterilization, blood borne pathogen, and sanitation certification; and
(c) The home address and home telephone number of each employee.
(5) The Owner of a Body Art Studio shall only hire, employ, or use individuals who have complied with these rules.
Sec. 18-619. Body Artist Permit.
(1) No person may perform body art without first obtaining a Body Artist Permit. Body Artists shall renew their permit annually.
(2) A Body Artist Permit shall not be eligible for renewal unless all requirements of these rules are met.
(3) The Body Artist Permit shall be displayed in the Body Artist Parlor.
(4) All Body Artist Permits issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable.
(5) All Body Artist Permits shall be returned to the Board of Health if it is suspended or revoked.
(6) Proof of current certification in first-air, CPR, blood borne pathogen training, sanitation, and sterilizer training shall be required prior to the issuance of a Body Artist Permit and shall be maintained in good standing.
Sec. 18-620. Application for a Body Artist Permit.
(1) Each Body Artist shall submit to the Board of Health an application for a Body Artist Permit.
(2) The application for a Body Artist Permit shall be made on forms provided by the Board of Health.
(3) Application for a Body Artist Permit shall include the following information concerning the Body Artist:
(a) Full legal name
(b) All aliases
(c) Home address
(d) Gender
323
(e) Mailing address
(f) Home phone number
(g) Training and/or experience
(h) Evidence of current certification in CPR, First-Aid, and blood borne pathogens training, sanitation, and sterilization training completion.
(i) Physician report of physical examination
Sec. 18-621. Issuance of Body Artist Permit & Fees.
(1) The Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section may issue a Body Artist Permit to an individual after determining that the individual is in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 40 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, with any applicable rules and regulations of the Department, and with these rules.
(2) A Body Artist Permit shall automatically expire on June 30th of each year.
(3) At least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the Body Artist Permit, the Body Artist shall submit an application for renewal to the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section and pay the applicable permit fee.
(4) Prior to the issuance of a Body Artist Permit, the Body Artist shall pay the applicable permit fee.
(5) A Body Artist fee shall not be prorated except that an individual who submits an application for a Body Artist Permit on January 1 or later shall only be required to pay half the Body Artist Permit Fee.
Sec. 18-622. Application to Existing Body Artist.
The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all Body Artists, whether the Body Artist began performing body art before or after the effective date of these rules. Any Body Artist established on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six (6) months of the effective date.
Sec. 18-623. Prohibited Acts.
(1) No person shall tattoo the body of an individual who is under eighteen (18) years of age, unless the person performing the tattoo procedure is a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of the Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or a technician acting under the direct supervision if such licensed physician or osteopath in compliance with Chapter 9 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated.
(2) No person shall pierce the body, with the exception of ear lobes, of any person under the age of eighteen (18) for the purpose of allowing the insertion of earrings, jewelry, or similar objects to the body, unless the minor’s legal parent, custodian, or guardian with the proper identification is
324
present and signs a written consent form provided by the Body Art Studio. The consent form must indicate the methods and part(s) of the minor’s body upon which the body art procedure is
performed.
(3) No person shall tattoo the body of any person within any area within one (1) inch of the nearest part of the eye socket of such person.
(4) No person shall obtain the services provided in a Body Art Studio by misrepresentation of age in any place where body art procedures are performed.
Sec. 18-624. Sanitation.
(1) Body Artists shall follow standard precautions.
(2) All hand and/or arm jewelry worn by Body Artist shall be removed prior to the start of the body art procedure.
(3) Prior to performing body art on each client, the fingernails and hands of Body Artist shall be thoroughly washed and scrubbed with warm water and antibacterial soap, using an individual, single-use scrub. Surgical scrubs are not to be reused. The hands shall then be dried using single-use towels.
(4) Prior to the start of the body art procedure the Body Artist should inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Fingernails shall be trimmed to insure that the gloves are not punctured.
(5) Single-use medical-surgical disposable examination gloves shall be worn during that body art procedure. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the procedure, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whatever their integrity has been compromised.
(6) Each Body Artist shall wear a clean outer garment, apron, or smock. These items shall be changed after each client.
(7) Body Artists who are experiencing symptoms of illness including, but not limited to, diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, or skin infections shall refrain from performing body art.
(8) Adequate number of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each Body Artist for the entire day and/or night operation.
(9) Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the ear where the body art procedure will be performed.
(10) All items that come in contact with the client’s skin shall be single-use and disposed of after the procedure.
(11) All fixtures and equipment contaminated with blood shall be cleaned with an approved sanitizer or with a ten (10) percent bleach solution made fresh daily.
325
(12) Smoking, eating, or drinking by anyone is prohibited in a Parlor where body art procedures are performed.
Sec. 18-625. Dyes and Pigments.
(1) Only single-use containers of dyes and pigments that are currently FDA approved for tattooing of human skin shall be used.
(2) All dyes and pigments shall be used according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
(3) After tattooing each individual, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use container shall be discarded along with the container into a biohazard container.
(4) In preparing dyes and pigments to be used by a Body Artist, only nontoxic sterile single-use materials shall be used.
Sec. 18-626. Tattoo Preparation.
(1) Prior to placing a tattoo design on the client’s skin, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede that body art procedure shall be removed.
(2) The Body Artist shall apply an antibacterial solution to the skin in the involved areas.
(3) If a paper stencil is used by a Body Artist for transferring the design to the skin, the stencil shall be single-use and disposable.
(4) If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single-use article only.
(5) The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution.
(6) After the area had dried, a thick layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied.
(7) After the application of the antibacterial ointment, a bandage shall be applied to the tattoo using sealed non-sticking pads.
Sec. 18-627. Procedures Specific to Body Piercing.
(1) Before piercing the skin of a client, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede the procedure shall be removed.
(2) The Body Artist shall apply an antibacterial solution to the skin in the involved area prior to the procedure being performed.
(3) The Body Artist shall apply an antibacterial ointment to the skin in the involved area after the procedure is performed.
326
Sec. 18-628. Compliance.
(1) A Body Art Studio shall operate in compliance with these rules and with a valid Body Art Studio Permit issued by the Gwinnett County Board of Health.
(2) A Body Artist shall perform body art procedures in compliance with these rules and with a valid Body Artist Permit issued by the Gwinnett County Board of Health.
Sec. 18-629. Enforcement.
(1) The Board of Health shall have the power and authority to deny, suspend, or revoke any permit issued under these rules for failure to comply with the provisions thereof. When an application for a permit is denied or the permit previously granted is suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder thereof shall be afforded notice and hearing in accordance with Article 1 of Chapter 5 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and the Gwinnett County Board of Health Enforcement Rules. In lieu of a hearing and upon correction of all violations, the permit holder may request an inspection to reinstate the permit.
(2) These rules, upon adoption by the Mayor and Council of the City of Sugar Hill, shall be enforced by the Gwinnett County Board of Health as a duly adopted ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill in the Municipal Court of the City of Sugar Hill. Any person violating any provision of these rules shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and/or by confinement in the county jail for a total term not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both.
(3) The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of these rules on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impost other punishment allowed by the law.
(4) The Board of Health is also empowered to institute appropriate proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining a violation of any applicable provision of Chapter 40 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, of the rules and Regulations of the department, or the Rule of the Gwinnett County Board of Health.
(5) Any person, firm, or corporation operating a Body Art Studio without a valid permit or performing body art outside of a permitted Body Art Studio shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 18-630. Grounds for Denial, Suspension, or Revocation.
(1) The permit of Body Art Studio may be denied, suspended, or revoked upon one (1) or more of the following grounds:
(a) Failure of the permit holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the permit;
(b) The Owner allows or permits any person who does not have a valid Body Artist Permit to perform a body art procedure in the Body Art Studio;
(c) The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the
327
applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information covered therein;
(d) Failure of the Owner to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the customers; or
(e) The Owner or the Owner’s employees associated with the Body Art Studio have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of these rules.
(2) The permit of a Body Artist may be denied, suspended, or revoked upon one (1) or more of the following grounds:
(a) Failure of the Body Artist to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the Body Artist Permit;
(b) The Body Artist has violated any of the provisions of these rules; or
(c) The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the Body Artist has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein.
Sec. 18-631. Conflict with Other Laws.
Should any section or provision of these rules be in conflict with any other applicable ordinance, rule,
regulation, provision, requirement, or law, then the more restrictive ordinance, rule, regulation, provision, requirement, or law shall control.
Sec. 18-632. Severability.
In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this resolution shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this resolution, which shall retain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The Gwinnett County Board of Health hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the resolution if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Sec. 18-633. Effective Date.
The provisions of these rules shall become effective immediately upon adoption by the City of Sugar Hill.
Secs. 18-634-18-699. Reserved.
Chapter 22
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES*
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers,
328
O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority to provide for police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1).
Article I. In General Secs. 22-1--22-20. Reserved.
Article II. Emergency Management Organization
Sec. 22-21. Definitions.
Sec. 22-22. Office of the county emergency management director.
Sec. 22-23. County emergency management agency.
Sec. 22-24. Powers of mayor and/or county during an emergency or disaster.
Sec. 22-25. Volunteers.
Sec. 22-26. Penalties for violation of article.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 22-1--22-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION*
* State Law References: Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 3 8-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 3 8-3-27.
Sec. 22-21. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions.
(Code 1988, § 12-176; Ord. of 8-8-1994, § 1)
Sec. 2 2-22. Office of the county emergency management director.
(a) Appointment. It is the desire and intent of the governing officials of the city that the city be a part of the county emergency management agency. The present emergency management director will serve as director for the entire county. Should that office become vacant the chairman, and county commissioners of the county, with concurrence of the mayors of cities within the county, shall
329
nominate for appointment, by the governor, a director of emergency management for the county.
(b) Duties. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties:
(1) To represent the governing officials of the cit on matters pertaining to emergency management.
(2) To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations.
(3) To develop, in conjunction with city and county department, the county plan for emergency functions set forth in section 22-2 1. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities therein for approval.
(4) To maintain the emergency management agency and to oversee the carrying out of the day to day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency.
(5) To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc.
(6) To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center.
(7) To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials.
(Code 1988, § 12-177; Ord. of 8-8-1994, § 2)
Sec. 22-23. County emergency management agency.
(a) Departments and functions. The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing city and county departments and the emergency functions described in section
22-21 above are assigned as follows:
Department/Agency
Functions
(1)
Chairman, County
Commissioners, Mayors of
Cities....
Direction and Control
(2)
County Police Department,
Sheriff's Office, City
Police....
Communications and
Warning
(3)
County Administrator's
Office....
Emergency Public
Information
(4)
County Police Department,
City Police Department,
Sheriff's Department....
Search, Rescue and
Recovery
(5)
County Police Department,
City Police Department,
Sheriff's Department....
Law Enforcement Services
(6)
County Police Department,
City Police Department,
Fire Department....
Evacuation Services
330
(7)
Fire Department....
Fire Services
(8)
Administrative Services,
Board of Education....
Transportation Services
(9)
County Public Utilities,
City Public Utilities....
Public Works Services
(10)
Fire, County Police
Department, City Police....
Medical and Deceased,
Identification Services
(11)
American Red Cross,
Emergency Management....
Emergency Shelter
Services
(12)
American Red Cross,
Board of Education....
Food Services
(13)
DFACS....
Human Services
(14)
Fire....
Radiological Protection
(15)
Fire....
Damage Assessment
Services
(16)
Fire and Emergency
Services....
Resources Management
(17)
Fire....
Hazardous Materials
(18)
Emergency Management....
Attack Preparedness, Dam
Failure Preparedness
(Note: As appropriate to the local organization, these functions can be assigned to existing departments or may be separate. Functions should be assigned consistent with the local emergency operations plan.)
(b) Annexes to local EOP. Heads of city departments listed above are responsible for assisting county department heads in developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval.
(Code 1988, § 12-178; Ord. of 8-8-1994, § 3)
Sec. 22-24. Powers of mayor and/or county during an emergency or disaster.
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor of the city, separately, or jointly with the chairman, county commissioners, or in their absences their legally appointed successors may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise, for such period as
such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers:
(1) To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources;
(2) To seize or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public;
(3) To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies;
(4) And, to perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county.
(Code 1988, § 12-179; Ord. of 8-8-1994, § 4)
331
Sec. 22-25. Volunteers.
(a) Compensation. All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve without compensation.
(b) Immunities. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees.
(Code 1988, § 12-180; Ord. of 8-8-1994, § 5)
Sec. 22-26. Penalties for violation of article.
Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for committing a misdemeanor.
(Code 1988, § 12-181; Ord. of 8-8-1994, § 6)
Chapters 23--25
RESERVED
Chapter 26
ENVIRONMENT*
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.
Article I. In General
Secs. 26-1—26-20. Reserved.
Article II. Wetlands
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 26-21. Findings of fact.
Secs. 26-22—26-40. Reserved.
Division 2. Wetlands Protection District
Subdivision I. In General
Sec. 26-41. Title and purpose. Sec. 26-42. Definitions.
Sec. 26-43. Application of article. Sec. 26-44. District boundaries. Sec. 26-45. Permitted uses.
Sec. 26-46. Prohibited uses.
Sec. 26-47. Monitoring and enforcement.
Sec. 26-48. Penalties for violation of article.
Sec. 26-49. Judicial review.
Sec. 26-50. Amendments.
Sec. 26-51. Assessment relief. Secs. 26-52--26-75. Reserved.
332
Subdivision 2. Local Development Permits
Sec. 26-76. Requirements.
Sec. 2 6-77. Temporary emergency permit.
Sec. 26-78. Development plans.
Sec. 26-79. Activities to comply with development plans.
Sec. 26-80. Filing review fee.
Sec. 26-81. Enforcement authority. Sec. 2 6-82. Review procedures.
Sec. 26-83. Appeals.
Sec. 26-84. Duration and permit validity.
Article III. Water Resources
Sec. 26-101. Outdoor Irrigation.
ARTICLE 1.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 26-1—26-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
WETLANDS*
* State Law References: Wetland protection ordinances required, O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8(b).
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 26-21. Findings of fact.
(a) The wetlands in the City of Sugar Hill are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the State of Georgia.
(b) Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare.
(c) The Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Georgia Department of Community Affairs have determined that each local government with classified wetlands located in its jurisdiction must adopt a Wetlands Protection Ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8(b) and the rules promulgated thereunder.
(d) It is therefore necessary for the city to ensure maximum protection for wetlands by discouraging
333
development activities in wetlands that may adversely affect wetlands.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 1)
Secs. 26-22--26-40. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. WETLANDS PROTECTION DISTRICT
Subdivision I. In General
Sec. 26-41. Title and purpose.
This article shall be known as the Wetlands Protection Ordinance of the city. The purposes of this article are to promote wise use of wetlands and protect wetlands, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities which may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined by a permitting process. The objective of this article is to protect wetlands from alterations which will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, ground water recharge, aesthetic nature, and wildlife areas and to comply with the requirements of state law related to wetland protection.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, §1.2 )
Sec. 26-42. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Functions means the beneficial roles that wetlands serve, including; storage, conveyance, and attenuation of floodwater and storm water; protection of water quality and reduction of erosion; habitat for wildlife, including rare, threatened and endangered species; food chain support for a wide variety of wildlife and fisheries; educational, historical, and archeological value protection; and scenic, aesthetic, and recreational amenities.
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
Hydric soils means soils that form as a result of saturated soil conditions. A list of these soils is maintained by the state soil and water conservation service.
Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plants tolerant of or dependent on saturated soil conditions.
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §1344, as amended.
334
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. except those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended.
Silviculture means the art of producing, reproducing and growing a forest of distinctive stands of trees.
Temporary emergency permit means a temporary permit that may be issued in certain circumstances specified herein.
Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an authority designated by the corps.
Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city which are indicated on the generalized wetland map as wetlands providing significant wildlife habitat and/or which may be subject to extensive mitigation.
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. (Res. of 12-11-2000, § 2)
Sec. 26-43. Application of article.
This article shall apply to all wetlands within the wetland protection district as defined herein and located within the jurisdiction of the city. The generalized wetland map, adopted as part of this article shows the general location of wetlands and of the wetland protection district and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands before engaging in a regulated activity. The generalized wetland map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The generalized wetland map shall be on file in the office of the city planning and development department.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 3.1)
Sec. 26-44. District boundaries.
The generalized wetland map is a general reference document and wetland boundaries indicated on the map are approximations. The purpose of the generalized wetland map is to alert developers/landowners if they are within proximity to a wetland, which means that there is a high likelihood of the presence of a jurisdictional wetland and a need for the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers guidance as to whether a section 404 Permit will be required prior to any activity. The generalized wetland map does not necessarily represent the exact boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 3.2)
Sec. 26-45. Permitted uses.
335
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances.
(1) Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish or other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit.
(2) Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing.
(3) Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
(4) The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture.
(5) The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed.
(6) Education, scientific research, and nature trails.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 4)
Sec. 26-46. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district.
(1) Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants;
(2) Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. (Res. of 12-11-2000, § 5)
Sec. 26-47. Monitoring and enforcement.
The city or other designees, their agent, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the city or their designee deems necessary.
(1) The city manager or its designee shall have authority to enforce this article; issue permits there under; and address violations or threatened violations thereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders, and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees, and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator.
(2) Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the city manager or its designee in enforcement.
336
(3) The city manager or its designee shall have authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified herein.
(4) The city or its designee may require a bond as set forth in section 26-79 and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit. The particular amount and the conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 7)
Sec. 26-48. Penalties for violation of article.
(a) Any person, who commits, takes part in, or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by law. Each violation of this act shall be a separate offense, and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
(b) When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may be required to remove the structure, at the discretion of the city or its designee. The violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the city or its designee.
(c) If the city or its designee discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of provisions of the Clean Water Act as amended, the city or its designee may issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner.
(d) The city or its designee may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitation set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The city or its designee may cause notice of its denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation, or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 8)
Sec. 26-49. Judicial review.
(a) Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city concerning denial, approval, or conditional approval of a special permit shall be reviewable in court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the city may, within the time specified by the court, elect to:
(1) Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land;
(2) Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or
337
(3) Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fail within the jurisdiction of the city. (Res. of 12-11-2000, § 9)
Sec. 26-50. Amendments.
These regulations and the generalized wetland map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding, or botanical species peculiar to wetlands become available.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 10)
Sec. 26-51. Assessment relief.
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation restriction with the government or a nonprofit organization to permanently control some or all regulated activities in the wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the controlled wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water mains.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 11)
Secs. 26-52--26-75. Reserved.
Local Development Permits
Sec. 26-76. Requirements.
No regulated activity will be allowed within the wetland protection district without written permission from the city or its designee in the form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent on full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not exempted in section 2 6-45 shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a local development permit. The city planning director will consult the generalized wetland map to determine if proposed for development is located within 50 feet of the wetland protection district boundary. If it is determined by the planning director that the proposed development is within 50 feet of a wetland protection district, the development proposal shall require a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present and that a section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission is required, a local development permit will be issued only following issuance of the section 404 permit or letter of permission. If the planning director determines that the proposed development is not near a wetland protection boundary; or it is not the type of activity that would cause the alteration of wetlands, the city may proceed with normal procedures in issuing a local development permit.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 6.1)
Sec. 26-77. Temporary emergency permit.
A temporary emergency permit can be issued by the city or its designee for the following reasons:
(1) Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures or facilities are not
338
materially changed or enlarged and that, prior to the commencement of work, written notice has been given to the city or its designee and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns, and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland, are not impaired and that any adverse effect of the aquatic environment will be minimized.
(2) Temporary water level stabilization measures associated with silvicultural operations, provide that they are necessary to alleviate abnormal wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected.
(3) Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating, or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided that the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration, or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provisions of section 26-45.
(4) Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses, or other similar water-related structures, provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 6.2)
Sec. 26-78. Development plans.
Applications for a development permit within the generalized wetland protection district shall include a development plan, drawn at a scale of one inch represents 50 feet (the city may approve a different scale where
necessary to clearly provide the required information) with the following information:
(1) A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale, vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings.
(2) Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of +/- 200 feet.
(3) The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body.
(4) Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet.
(5) Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials.
(6) All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. (Res. of 12-11-2000, § 6.3)
Sec. 26-79. Activities to comply with development plans.
339
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the development plan shall conform with the specifications of said development plan. The development plan may be amended only with the approval of the city or its designee. The city may require a bond up to the larger of $5,000.00 or $1,000.00 per acre of project area and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions and limitations set forth in the permit. The particular amount and conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. In the event of a breach of condition of any such bond, the city or its designee may collect such bond or institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 6.4)
Sec. 26-80. Filing review fee.
At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified by the city or its designee. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment and mitigation measures as deemed necessary by the city or its designee. In any case, the filing fees shall not be less than the amount necessary for evaluation of the application in a manner consistent with the intent of this article. (Res. of 12-11-2000, § 6.5)
Sec. 26-81. Enforcement authority.
The city manager is hereby established as the administrator of this article. (Res. of 12-11-2000, § 6.6)
Sec. 26-82. Review procedures.
The application shall be made to the city and will be reviewed within 60 days or in accordance with established review procedures for the type of development being considered, whichever is greater. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval or disapproval) by the city. The applicant will receive
written notification of the findings thereof. (Res. of 12-11-2000, § 6.7)
Sec. 26-83. Appeals.
Appeals from any decision of the city shall be directed to the zoning board of appeals within 15 days after any decision by the city manager and thus specifying the grounds thereof for appeal. A public hearing shall be held for appeals. Public announcement of the hearing may be printed in local newspapers at least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the hearing. Any person may offer testimony at the hearing. The decision of the zoning board of appeals may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 6.8)
Sec. 26-84. Duration and permit validity.
(a) If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire.
(b) If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date work ceased.
(c) Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit may be issued by the city.
340
(Res. of 12-11-2000, § 6.9)
Article III. Water Resources
Sec. 26-101. Outdoor Irrigation.
(1) Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4 P.M. and 10:00 A.M.
(2) Paragraph (1) of this section shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: (a) Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3;
(b) Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state guidelines;
(c) Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations adopted pursuant thereto;
(d) Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water;
(e) Irrigation of personal food gardens;
(f) Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation;
(g) Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
(h) Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
(i) Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property;
(j) Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
(k) Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
(l) Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or
(m) Hydroseeding.
Secs. 26-102—26-120. Reserved.
Chapters 27—29
RESERVED
Chapter 30
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION*
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority to provide for police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1).
Sec. 30-1. Open burning.
(a) Prohibited; exceptions. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning in any area located within the corporate boundaries of the city at any time except as follows:
(1) The burning is for the purpose of carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops;
341
(2) The burning is for recreational purposes or the cooking of food for the immediate human consumption;
(3) The fire is set for the purpose of training fire fighting personnel and has been authorized by the appropriate government entity and the guidelines set by the state department of natural resources and other appropriate government agencies are strictly observed;
(4) The fire is in connection with the operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame making equipment;
(5) The fire is a small fire established and maintained by a contractor or tradesman which is necessary for activities such as street paving work or installation or repair of utilities. All such fires shall be kept small in size, shall produce no smoke emissions exceeding 40 percent opacity and shall comply with all other regulations which may prohibit or regulate all such activities;
(6) The fire is for the disposal of packaging materials previously containing explosives and is used in accordance with U.S. Department of Labor Safety Regulations.
(7) Burning of leaves, limbs and other natural vegetation that may fall on one’s own property, provided that said burning is conducted in accordance with the following requirements and restrictions:
(i) Between October 1st and April 30th of each year;
(ii) During daylight hours and all remnants of fire have been extinguished prior to
dusk;
(iii) When prevailing winds are not in excess of 15 mph;
(iv) When the fire is located at least 30 feet from the property lines of all adjoining property owners;
(v) Only on parcels of property that are in excess of ½ acre in total land area;
(vi) All fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until extinguished;
(vii) There shall be a garden hose connected to a water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use; and
(viii) After obtaining a burn permit from the city. The City Manager shall create an application permit process for burn permits. In considering burn permits, the City Manager shall consider the location of the property and shall not issue burn permits to numerous properties in close proximity for the same time period. A burn permit shall be valid only for the day stated on said permit. There shall be no charge to obtain a burn permit.
Amend. November, 2011.
(b) Enforcement. This section may be enforced by the city manager and the city manager's designees including, but not limited to, the staff of the planning and development department. In addition, the fire marshal's office and personnel of the county department of fire and emergency services will have the authority to summarily abate any conditions which are in violation of any other provisions of this section and which may constitute an immediate threat to life or property.
(Ord. of 12-8-1997)
State Law References: Air quality control programs authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(13).
342
Chapters 31--33
RESERVED
Chapter 34
FLOODS*
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.
Article I. In General Secs. 34-1--34-20. Reserved.
Article II. Flood Damage Prevention
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 34-21. Definitions.
Sec. 34-22. Findings of fact.
Sec. 34-23. Statement of purpose.
Sec. 34-24. Objectives of article.
Sec. 34-25. Lands to which this article applies.
Sec. 34-26. Basis for area of special flood hazard
Sec. 34-27. Establishment of development permit.
Sec. 34-28. Compliance with article provisions.
Sec. 34-29. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
Sec. 34-30. Interpretation and application of article.
Sec. 34-31. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
Sec. 34-32. Penalty for violation of article.
Secs. 34-33--34-55. Reserved.
Division 2. Administration Sec. 34-56. Designation of administrator.
Sec. 34-57. Permit procedures.
Sec. 34-58. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Secs. 34-59--34-80. Reserved.
Division 3. Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 34-81. General standards.
Sec. 34-82. Specific standards.
Sec. 34-83. Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones).
Sec. 34-84. Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO ZONES).
Sec. 34-85. Standards for subdivisions.
Sec. 34-86. Variance procedures.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 34-1--34-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
343
DIVISION 1.
ORDINANCE
The Mayor and City Council of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, hereby ordain that the Code of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia and the City of Sugar Hill Floodplain Management Ordinance shall be amended as follows:
By repealing The 2004 Floodplain Management Ordinance and any amendments thereto and enacting the ordinance contained below as its replacement. Further, by deleting Chapter 34. Floods (Section 34-1 through and including Section 34-86) of the Code of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia in its entirety and replacing it with the following ordinance:
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 34-1. Findings.
It is hereby determined that:
(1) The flood hazard areas of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(2) Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas.
(3) Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can (a) Protect human life and health; (b) Minimize damage to private property; (c) Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and (d) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
(4) Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, do ordain this ordinance and establish this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property.
Sec. 34-2. Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream
344
corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to:
(1) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(2) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion;
(3) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
(4) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands;
(5) Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and,
(6) Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas.
Sec. 34-3. Applicability.
This ordinance shall be applicable to all Areas of Special Flood Hazard within the corporate boundaries of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
Sec. 34-4. Basis for Area of Special Flood Hazard – Flood Area Maps and Studies
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following are adopted by reference:
(1) The Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 26, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for unincorporated Gwinnett County, dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference.
(2) Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include:
(a) Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia; or
(b) Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee.
(3) Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include:
345
(a) Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia; or
(b) Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia, which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee.
(4) The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at Department of Planning and Development in City Hall.
Sec. 34-5. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Sec. 34-6. Definitions.
"Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered New Construction.
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the Director of Planning and Development or his designee's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance.
"Area of Shallow Flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
"Area of Special Flood Hazard" is the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other flood prone areas as referenced in Section 34-4. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated.
"Base Flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood.
"Base Flood Elevation" means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood.
"Basement" means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
346
"Building" means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
"Elevated Building" means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.
"Existing Construction" Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 22, 1997.
"Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 22, 1997.
"Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
"FEMA" means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
"Flood" or "Flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(b) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
"Flood Hazard Boundary Map" or "FHBM" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A.
"Flood Insurance Rate Map" or "FIRM" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
"Flood Insurance Study" or "FIS" means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.
"Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding.
347
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
"Floodway" or "Regulatory Floodway" means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot.
"Functionally Dependent Use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.
"Future Conditions Flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood.
"Future-Conditions Flood Elevation" means the flood standard equal to or higher than the Base Flood Elevation. The Future-conditions Flood Elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood.
"Future-Conditions Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood.
"Future-Conditions Hydrology" means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community’s zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation.
"Highest Adjacent Grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building.
"Historic Structure" means any structure that is;
(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
348
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
"Lowest Floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this ordinance.
"Manufactured Home" means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a “mobile home” regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
"Mean Sea Level" means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this ordinance the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988.
"National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
"New Construction" means any structure (see definition) for which the “start of construction" commenced after July 22, 1997 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure.
"New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 22, 1997.
"North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988" is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
"Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site.
"Permit" means the permit issued by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity.
"Recreational Vehicle" means a vehicle which is:
(a) built on a single chassis;
(b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and,
(d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
“Repetitive Loss” means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals,
349
or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
"Site" means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located.
"Start of Construction" means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank.
"Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway.
"Substantial Damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
"Substantial Improvement" means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during a 10-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the structure means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred “repetitive loss” or "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the Code Enforcement Official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project.
"Substantially Improved Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
"Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance.
350
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Sec. 34-7. Compatibility with Other Regulations.
This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.
Sec. 34-8. Severability.
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance.
Sec. 34-9 – 34-19. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION.
Sec. 34-20. Designation of Ordinance Administrator
The Director of the Department of Planning and Development of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance.
Sec. 34-21. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator.
Duties of the Ordinance Administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding;
(2) Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file;
(3) When Base Flood Elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of Divisions 3 and 4 of this ordinance;
351
(4) Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures;
(5) Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed;
(6) When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect;
(7) Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
(8) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this ordinance. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and,
(9) All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee and shall be open for public inspection.
Sec. 34-22. Permit Application Requirements.
No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an Area of Special Flood Hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this ordinance prior to commencing the proposed activity.
Unless specifically excluded by this ordinance, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the Department of Planning and Development a permit application on a form provided by the Department of Planning and Development for that purpose.
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this ordinance.
Sec. 34-23. Floodplain Management Plan Requirements.
An application for a development project with any Area of Special Flood Hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management / flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items:
(1) Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to:
(a) Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and
352
location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment;
(b) For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site;
(c) Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities;
(d) Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities;
(e) Proposed grading plan;
(f) Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations;
(g) Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain;
(h) If applicable, the location of the floodway; and
(i) Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor.
(2) Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to:
(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures;
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed;
(c) Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in Section 34-71(2);
(d) For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 34-70(5).
(e) Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s).
(3) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development;
(4) Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, Special Flood Hazard Areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS;
(5) Copies of all applicable State and Federal permits necessary for proposed development; and
353
(6) All appropriate certifications required under this ordinance.
The approved floodplain management / flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans.
Sec. 34-24. Construction Stage Submittal Requirements.
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management / flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee a certified as-built Elevation Certificate or Floodproofing Certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. A final Elevation Certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project.
Sec. 34-25 – 34-39. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT.
Sec. 34-40. Definition of Floodplain Boundaries.
(1) Studied “A” zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available.
(2) For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the Department of Planning and Development. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the Department of Planning and Development, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee.
Sec. 34-41. Definition of Floodway Boundaries.
(1) The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the Department of Planning and Development. If floodway data is not available from the Department of Planning and Development, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee.
354
Sec. 34-42. General Standards.
(1) No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following:
(a) Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot;
(b) Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity;
(c) Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or,
(d) Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation.
(2) Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under (1) above shall also meet the following conditions:
(a) Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel;
(b) Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent;
(c) Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased;
(d) Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of Section 34-43;
(e) Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and
(f) Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee using the
355
Community Consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).
Sec. 34-43. Engineering Study Requirements for Floodplain Encroachments.
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of Section 34-73 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include:
(1) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development;
(2) Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles;
(3) Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future- conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development;
(4) The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments.
Sec. 34-44. Floodway Encroachments.
Located within Areas of Special Flood Hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in (2) below.
(2) Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical
356
data and certification thereof; and,
(3) If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee until an affirmative Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee.
Sec. 34-45. Maintenance Requirements.
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee may direct the property owner (at no cost to the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the Department of Planning and Development.
Sec. 34-46 – 34-69. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION.
Sec. 34-70. General Standards.
In all Areas of Special Flood Hazard the following provisions apply:
(1) New construction of principal buildings (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of Sections 34-42, 34-43 and 34-44 have been met;
(2) New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
(3) New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
(4) New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(5) Elevated Buildings - All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
(a) Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
357
(i) Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and,
(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions.
(b) So as not to violate the "Lowest Floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and,
(c) The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
(6) All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
(7) Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces;
(8) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
(9) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
(10) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; and,
(11) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced.
(12) If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence.
Sec. 34-71. Building Standards for Structures and Buildings Within the Future-Conditions Floodplain.
The following provisions, in addition to those in Section 34-70, shall apply:
(1) Residential Buildings
358
(a) New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of Sections 34-42, 34-43 and 34-44 have been met. If all of the requirements of Sections 34-42, 34- 43 and 34-44 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 34-70(5).
(b) Substantial Improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future- conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 34-70(5).
(2) Non-Residential Buildings
(a) New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of Sections 34-42, 34-43 and 34-44 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of Sections 34-42, 34-43 and 34-44 may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered Professional Engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee.
(b) Substantial Improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1- 30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered Professional Engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee.
359
(3) Accessory Structures and Facilities
(a) Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with Section 34-70(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(4) Standards for Recreational Vehicles
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or
(b) The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for Residential Buildings— Substantial Improvements (Section 34-71(1)(b)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements.
(5) Standards for Manufactured Homes
(a) New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of Sections 34-42, 34-43 and 34-44 have been met.
(b) Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future- conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade.
(c) All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of Section 34-70(7).
Sec. 34-72. Building Standards for Structures and Buildings Authorized Adjacent to the Future-Conditions Floodplain.
360
(1) Residential Buildings – For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher.
(2) Non-Residential Buildings – For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher.
Sec. 34-73. Building Standards for Residential Single-Lot Developments on Streams Without Established Base Flood Elevations and/or Floodway (A-Zones).
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has Areas of Special Flood Hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a Federal, State, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this ordinance.
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater.
(2) In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with Section 34-70(5).
Sec. 34-74. Building Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO-Zones).
Areas of Special Flood Hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply:
(1) New and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 34-70(5).
(2) New and substantial improvements of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components
361
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and,
(3) Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure.
Sec. 34-75. Standards for Subdivisions.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data;
(2) All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required;
(3) All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with Section 34-23.
(4) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(5) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and,
(6) All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards.
Sec. 34-76 – 34-99. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
Sec. 34-100. Appeals and Variance.
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above.
(1) Requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance shall be submitted to Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard.
(2) Any person adversely affected by any decision of the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Mayor and
362
Council of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia in accordance with procedures for a variance as set forth in the City’s 2000 Zoning Ordinance. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard.
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor and Council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County, Georgia, as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated.
(4) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a Historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(5) Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this Section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(6) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(7) In reviewing such requests, the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee and Mayor and Council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this ordinance.
(8) Conditions for Variances:
(a) A variance shall be issued only when there is:
(i) a finding of good and sufficient cause;
(ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and,
(iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance.
(b) The provisions of this ordinance are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a Historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building.
(c) Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
363
(d) The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(9) Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee and Mayor and Council shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request.
(10) Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee and the Mayor and Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this ordinance.
(11) Variances shall not be issued “after the fact.”
Secs. 34-101 – 34-129. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
Sec. 34-130. Generally.
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this ordinance or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this Section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief.
Sec. 34-131. Notice of Violation.
If the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this ordinance without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site.
The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person;
(2) The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance
364
with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and,
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient).
Sec. 34-132. Penalties.
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties.
(1) Stop Work Order -The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations.
(2) Withhold Certificate of Occupancy - The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein.
(3) Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit - The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations.
(4) Civil Penalties - In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial
365
measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation.
(5) Criminal Penalties - For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear before the Municipal Court of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
(6) Other Remedies – In any case in which a violation of this ordinance has occurred, the city, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain or abate such unlawful use or activity.
Chapters 35—37
RESERVED
Chapter 38
HEALTH AND SANITATION*
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule
powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority to provide for public health, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); health generally, O.C.G.A. § 3 1-1-1 et seq.
Article I. In General Secs. 38-1--38-20. Reserved.
Article II. Storage of Junk
Sec. 38-21. Definitions.
Sec. 3 8-22. Accumulation of junk prohibited.
Sec. 3 8-23. Abatement of nuisance--By property owner after notice.
Sec. 3 8-24. Same --By city.
Sec. 38-25. Disposition of junk after removal by city; notice.
Sec. 38-26. Procedure upon objection to city action.
Sec. 38-27. Abandoned motor vehicles.
Sec. 3 8-28. Determination of existence of nuisances.
Sec. 38-29. Penalties.
Sec. 3 8-30. Summary abatement; liability.
Secs. 38-31--38-85. Reserved.
Article III. Noise Control Sec. 38-86. Definitions.
Sec. 38-87. Excessive noise prohibited.
Sec. 38-88. Maximum permissible sound levels.
366
Sec. 38-89. Exemptions to sound limits.
Sec. 3 8-90. Specific prohibitions.
Sec. 3 8-91. Penalty for violation of article.
Sec. 3 8-92. Responsibility for enforcement of article.
Secs. 38-93--38-150. Reserved.
Article IV. Tourist Courts
Sec. 38-151. Definitions. Sec. 38-152. Permit.
Sec. 38-153. Plan review.
Sec. 38-154. Inspections.
Sec. 38-155. Water supply.
Sec. 38-156. Toilet facilities. Sec. 3 8-157. Sewers.
Sec. 38-158. Sewage disposal.
Sec. 38-159. Plumbing.
Sec. 38-160. Refuse disposal.
Sec. 38-161. Insect and rodent control.
Sec. 38-162. Construction, layout and furnishings.
Sec. 38-163. Heating.
Sec. 38-164. Food service.
Sec. 38-1 65. Swimming pools. Sec. 38-166. Laundry rooms. Sec. 38-167. Grounds.
Sec. 38-168. Enforcement.
Secs. 38-169--38-190. Reserved.
Article V. Vector Control Sec. 38-191. Definitions.
Sec. 38-192. General provisions.
Sec. 38-193. Enforcement.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 38-1—38-20. Reserved
ARTICLE II.
STORAGE OF JUNK
Secs. 38-21.
Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Junk means any automobile, truck, trailer or vehicle of any kind or type not in good and safe operating condition, any used parts removed from an automobile, any other vehicle, machinery, appliance, implement or other property, not real property, of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured or originally intended or which is not properly stored.
in full compliance with all appropriate ordinances of the city, the laws of the state, and with this Code.
Nuisance means the unsheltered storage of junk for a period of 30 days or more on any location within
367
the corporate limits of the city, other than in a junkyard.
Owner means the legal owner of junk, the lessee of junk, the person in possession of junk, the tenant, occupant or owner of real property on which junk is located, or any combination or all of such persons.
Person means a natural person, a corporation, a partnership, a limited partnership, a trust, an unincorporated association, and any other entity recognized at law or in equity as having the rights to sue, be sued, or own property in its name.
(Code 1988, § 12-41)
Sec. 38-22. Accumulation of junk prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any property in the city other than a person who is a licensed junk dealer to permit to accumulate on such property any junk, as such term is defined in section 38-21, including any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked motor vehicles, or parts thereof. (Code 1988, § 12-42)
Sec. 38-23. Abatement of nuisance--By property owner after notice.
The owner of any personal property located within the city which constitutes a nuisance shall abate such nuisance within ten days after receiving notice from the city of the existence of such nuisance and a request that it be abated. Abatement of such nuisance shall be done by prompt removal of the personal property into a completely enclosed building authorized to be used for such storage purposes, to a location or locations outside the city limits, into a junkyard, or the restoration of the personal property to a condition legally useable for the purpose for which it was manufactured or originally intended.
(Code 1988, § 12-43)
Sec. 38-24. Same--By city.
When a nuisance has not been abated within such ten days the city may, but shall not be required to, remove or cause to be removed the personal property from such location where it is stored to a location selected by the city. The expense for the removal and any expense incurred in connection with the storage thereof shall be paid by the owner, and such expenses shall be a lien against the personal property, having the same weight as a levy for taxes.
(Code 1988, § 12-44)
Sec. 38-25. Disposition of junk after removal by city; notice.
Personal property so removed or caused to be removed by the city may be sold by the city at any time after 30 days from its removal. Notice, after which the property may be sold, of the time, date and place of the sale of the personal property shall be given to the owner, if known, by certified or registered mail sent to the owner's address or by personally delivering notice to the owner or the owner's residence at least ten days prior to such sale date. If the owner of the personal property cannot be readily determined, after reasonable effort has been made, notice shall be given by publication of such notice once a week for two successive weeks prior to the sale date in a newspaper where sheriff's sales are advertised, which notice shall contain a general description of the
368
personal property, the date, time and place of the proposed sale, and the location from which the sale will be conducted, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a prominent place at the city hall. The proceeds from the sale of such personal property shall be applied first toward any expenses incurred by the city in the renewal, storage and sale of same, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner if the owner can be located and
identified, or, if the owner, after reasonable effort, cannot be located, such balance shall be deposited in the city treasury for the general use of the city at the expiration of 12 months following the sale. If the proceeds from the sale are insufficient to pay the cost and expenses incurred by the city in connection with the removal, storage and sale, the deficiency shall constitute a claim against the owner and may be collected by the city by lawsuit or other available legal means.
(Code 1988, § 12-45)
Sec. 38-26. Procedure upon objection to city action.
(a) Filing of written objection. At any time after notice as provided in section 3 8-23 above and prior to sale as provided in section 3 8-25 above, the owner or any other person having any legal or equitable interest whatsoever in such personal property may make a statement in writing and file same with the city clerk, which statement shall contain any legal or equitable defense that may be available to such person to oppose the action or proposed action of the city.
(b) Hearing. Upon the receipt of such written statement, the city clerk shall advise the mayor and council of same and a hearing shall be held before the mayor and council at the next regular council meeting, notice of the time, date and place of which shall be given by the city clerk to such person, to determine the merits of the allegations contained in such written statement. After such hearing the mayor and council may order that the proceedings relating to the junk in question proceed, be terminated, or they may take such other action as may be appropriate in connection therewith.
(c) Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the order or action of the mayor and council may appeal their decision in the same manner as provided under state law for appeals to the probate court.
(Code 1988, § 12-46)
Sec. 38-27. Abandoned motor vehicles.
For the purposes of this article, the term "abandoned motor vehicle" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1, shall be considered junk; provided, however, that as to any such abandoned motor vehicle the city shall, in addition to complying with the provisions of this article, comply with all provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq., to the extent such code provisions are applicable and relevant to the city.
(Code 1988, § 12-47)
Sec. 38-28. Determination of existence of nuisances.
For the purposes of this article, if a factual issue exists as to whether or not there is a nuisance, as defined herein, the city may proceed as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq., in addition to any other remedies that may be available to the city, either under the provisions of this article or otherwise.
(Code 1988, § 12-48)
Sec. 38-29. Penalties.
369
The creation of a nuisance as herein defined, the continuation of such a nuisance, or the failure to abate such a nuisance within ten days after being requested in writing to do so by the city, by any person, shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of up to $500.00, by a jail sentence of up to 30 days, or both, for each separate violation. Each day such a nuisance continues unabated shall constitute a separate violation. Prosecution of a criminal offense hereunder shall not affect the right of the city, in its discretion, to proceed to abate the nuisance in any manner herein provided or otherwise authorized.
(Code 1988, § 12-49)
Sec. 38-30. Summary abatement; liability.
Personal property which is on public or private property which is so located or of such condition as to create a present and immediate danger to the public, or which is a public nuisance as provided by state law may, in the discretion of the city, be removed without prior notice. After removal, any further proceeding in connection with such personal property shall be as herein provided. The city shall not be liable for not removing such personal property. The city shall not be liable for any damage which may be done to such personal property in connection with its removal and storage. No action or lack of action by the city shall relieve any owner or other person of any liability or responsibility for creating a public or private nuisance or for moving such junk so as to eliminate any such present and immediate danger or public nuisance.
(Code 1988, § 12-50)
Secs. 38-31--38-85. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
NOISE CONTROL
Sec. 38-86. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. All terminology used herein and not defined shall be defined in accordance with the American National Standards Institute publication S.1.1.-1960 as revised in 1971 published by the American Standards Institute, 1930 Broadway, New York, NY 10018.
Alarm means any fire, burglary, motor vehicle or civil defense alarm, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device.
A-weighted sound pressure level means the sound pressure level as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The standard notation is dB(A) or dBA.
Commercial area means an area as defined by the city zoning ordinance.
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.
Domestic Power Tool means any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, generator, lawnmower, hedge trimmer, edger, or any other similar tool or device (other than leaf blowers).
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.
Emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle belonging to a fire department or an ambulance, or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; provided said vehicles are in use as an emergency vehicle by one authorized to use the vehicle for that purpose.
370
Emergency work means any work for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency.
Industrial area means an area as defined by the city zoning ordinance.
Land use category means the classification of an area, such as residential, multifamily dwelling, commercial, industrial, noise-sensitive area or public space, according to its use. Any area not otherwise classified shall be considered a commercial area. In case of multiple use, the more restrictive use category shall apply.
Multifamily dwelling means a building or other shelter that has been divided into separate units to house more than one family.
Noise-sensitive area means an area where a school, hospital, nursing home, church, court or public library is located.
Person means any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the state or of the United States.
Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
Public space means any real property or structures thereon owned by a governmental entity and normally accessible to the public, including, but not limited to, parks and other public recreational areas.
Real property line means a line along the surface, and its vertical plane extension which separates the real property owned, rented or leased by one person from that owned, rented or leased by another person, excluding intrabuilding real property division.
Residential area means an area as defined in the city zoning ordinance.
Sound level means the A-weighted sound pressure level obtained by use of a sound level meter as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI SI. 4-1971, as amended).
(Code 1988, § 12-91; Ord. of 12-11-1989, § 1)
Sec. 38-87. Excessive noise prohibited.
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or excessive noise which unreasonably interferes with the comfort and repose of others within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Code 1988, § 12-92; Ord. of 12-11-1989, § 2)
Sec. 38-88. Maximum permissible sound levels.
(a) No person shall operate, suffer, allow or permit any source of sound from any location in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in Table 1 for the receiving land use category more than ten percent of any measurement period, which period shall not be less than ten minutes. Sound
371
levels in excess of those established for the land use districts of the city, in times herewith listed, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such sound is excessive and unnecessary noise.
(b) For any source of sound, the sound level shall not exceed the maximum permissible sound level limit set forth in Table 1 by 15 dB(A) for all land use categories.
(c) When a source of sound can be identified and its sound measured in more than one land use district, the sound level limits of the most restrictive land use district shall apply.
Table 1
Land Use Category
Time
Sound Level Limit (dB(A))
Residential, noise-sensitive
7:01 a.m. – 9:00 p.m.
60
area or public space.
9:01 p.m. – 7:00 a.m.
55
Commercial.
At all times
65
Industrial.
At all times
75
(Code 1988, § 12-93; Ord. of 12-11-1989, § 3, Amd. of 4-10-06)
Sec. 38-89. Exemptions to sound limits.
The following are exempt from the sound level limits of Table 1;
(a) Domestic power tools, lawn mowers and agricultural equipment, when operated with a muffler, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends and holidays.
(b) Sound from public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or authorized public safety personnel for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency;
(c) Any sound resulting from activities of a temporary duration, for which a special permit has been granted pursuant to this article, and which conforms to the conditions and limits stated thereon.
(d) Unamplified bells, chimes or carillons while being used in conjunction with religious services.
(e) Sound from construction activity, except within 500 feet of a residential or noise sensitive area after 7:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday; after 9:00 p.m. Friday, Saturday and the day prior to a holiday; before 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday; and before 9:00 a.m Saturday, Sunday and holidays.
(f) Emergency construction activity.
(g) Sound from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or events.
372
(h) Excavation, demolition, or construction necessary to repair public facilities, infrastructure or utilities by or on behalf of a municipality, county or state government.
(i) Sound from an exterior alarm of any building, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within five (5) minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted or ten (10) minutes if intermittent;
(j) The generation of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration;
(k) Sound from any practice or performance sponsored by or associated with the educational process administered by a recognized institution of learning, including, but not limited to band, choir, and orchestral performances; and
(l) Sound from activities of an organized sports league.
(Code 1988, § 12-94; Ord. of 12-11-1989, § 4)
Sec. 38-90. Specific prohibitions.
In addition to the general prohibitions set out above, the following specific acts are declared to be in violation of this article:
(1) Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any motor vehicle or any street or public place in the city continuously and/or incessantly for a period in excess of 60 seconds, except as a danger warning.
(2) Radios, televisions, musical instruments and similar devices.
a. The operating or playing of any radio, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound on the public rights-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the operator of the device.
b. The operating or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in a motor vehicle or public park in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet.
c. The operating or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth in Table 1 for the land use category.
(3) Loudspeakers and sound amplifiers. The using or operation of any loudspeaker, loud- speaker system, sound amplifier or other similar device between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, and 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays, within or adjacent to residential or noise-sensitive areas such that the sound therefrom is plainly audible across the real property line of the source; provided, however, that this shall not apply to any public performance, gathering or parade from which a permit has been obtained from the city.
373
(4) Animals. The owning, possessing or harboring of any animal which frequently, or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which create excessive and unnecessary noise across a residential or commercial real property line or within a noise-sensitive area. For the purpose of this subsection, excessive and unnecessary noise shall mean an animal that makes such noise, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously and or incessantly for a period of ten minutes, or intermittently for one - half hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the animal is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed making an excessive and unnecessary noise if, at the time the dog is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon property in or upon which the dog is situated.
(5) Powered model vehicles. The operating of, or permitting the operation of, powered model vehicles between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays.
(6) The collection of trash or refuse within 100’ of a residential area is prohibited between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Code 1988, § 12-95; Ord. of 12-11-1989, § 5)
Sec. 38-91. Procedures for the determination of sound levels.
(a) Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including but not limited to, design, maximum and fluctuating rates. All noise measurements shall be made at or within the property line of the impacted site, unless otherwise directed in this article. When instrumentation cannot be placed at or within the property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto as is reasonable. For the purposes of this article, noise measurements are measured on the A-weighted sound scale, as applicable, of a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics established by ANSI.
(b) Measurements shall be taken by code enforcement officers appropriately trained in the use of a sound level meter.
Sec. 38.92. - Enforcement procedures; miscellaneous.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the City may prosecute noise related violations by issuance of a City ordinance citation, in which case, the penalty for a violation shall be as set forth in section 7.13 of the Code. In addition to issuing a fine as provided in section 7.13, or in lieu thereof, the municipal court judge may issue an order requiring immediate abatement of any sound source alleged to be in violation of this section.
(b) Whenever any City resident shall complain to the City that a dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or a cat which habitually cries or howls, is being kept by any person in the City, a City code enforcement officer, prior to the issuance of a citation, shall notify the owner of such dog or cat that a complaint has been received. If the notice given to the owner alleged to be keeping a dog or a cat in violation of this article is ineffective, then the City shall issue a formal warning to the owner of such dog or cat that the owner shall take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the barking, howling, yelping or crying. If the warning given to the owner is ineffective, a citation shall be issued to the owner of the dog or cat.
(c) No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefore, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this section or from other law.
374
Sec. 38-93. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1988, § 12-96; Ord. of 12-11-1989, § 6)
Sec. 38-94. Responsibility for enforcement of article.
The city manager or his designee shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. (Code 1988, § 12-97; Ord. of 12-11-1989, § 8)
Secs. 38-95.--38-150. Reserved.
Ord. Amended 9-14-15
ARTICLE IV.
TOURIST COURTS
Sec. 38-151. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
County board of health means the county board of health established by the state health code (O.C.G.A. § 3 1-3-1) or its representative.
Department means the department of human resources of the state.
Dependent trailer means a trailer which is dependent upon a service building housing toilet facilities.
Health authority means the county board of health if functioning in the administration and enforcement of O.C.G.A. ch. 3 1-28 and the rules, regulations and standards adopted thereunder; and if not so functioning, the department.
Operator means the person who has the duty and responsibility of overall management of the tourist court, or his representative.
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation and association, and may be extended and be applied to bodies, politics and corporate.
Tourist court is hereby defined as any facility consisting of two or more rooms or dwelling units providing lodging and other accommodations for tourist and travelers and includes tourist courts, tourist cottages, tourist homes, trailer parks, trailer courts, motels, motor hotels, hotels and any similar place by whatever name called and any food, beverage, laundry, recreational or other facilities or establishments operated in conjunction therewith.
375
Trailer means any house car, house trailer, trailer coach, mobile home or other similar unit so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes.
(Code 1988, § 18-91; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 1)
Sec. 38-152. Permit.
(a) Any person operating a tourist court shall process and display prominently a valid permit issued by the health authority on forms prepared by the department. The permit shall be framed.
(b) To be eligible for a permit, the tourist court shall be in satisfactory compliance with these rules and regulations and the provisions at law which apply to the location, construction and maintenance of tourist courts and the safety of persons therein.
(c) Application for a permit to operate such tourist courts shall be made in duplicate upon forms provided by the department. Such forms shall be completed in all details and signed by the applicant or his agent and submitted at least ten days before the scheduled opening. The original shall be filed with the health authority.
(d) Upon receipt of an application for permit the health authority shall review the application and shall take such action relative to approve or deny the permit as is provided in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. ch. 3 1-28 and these regulations.
(e) The permit, if granted, or a statement of reason, if denied, shall be forwarded to the tourist court operator by the health authority.
(f) A permit shall not be transferable with respect to person or location. (Code 1988, § 18-92; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 2(1))
Sec. 38-153. Plan review.
When a tourist court is hereafter constructed or remodeled, or when an existing structure is converted for use as such, properly prepared plans and specification for such construction, remodeling, or alteration, showing layout, arrangement, and construction materials of work areas, and the locations, size and type and installation of fixed equipment and facilities shall be submitted to the health authority for approval before such work is done.
(Code 1988, § 18-93; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 2(2))
Sec. 38-154. Inspections.
(a) All tourist courts shall be subject to inspection at reasonable hours, no less than twice annually, and as often as is deemed necessary by the health authority to ensure adequate compliance with the provisions of these rules. One of the two inspections shall be made prior to the onset of cold weather.
(b) The operator may accompany the health authority representative on tours of inspection, shall be given the opportunity to sign the completed inspection report and retain a copy for the tourist court's file.
(c) The signature of the operator shall not mean his agreement with all of the findings recorded thereon but shall mean his receipt of the report and the notification of alleged noncompliance with the rules.
376
(d) The report of inspections shall show compliance or noncompliance with this rule, the corrective measures to be taken, and the date when it is anticipated such corrections are to be completed. This report shall show the date of inspection and the signature of the person making the inspection.
(e) The entire report shall be discussed at the time of inspection with the tourist court operator and explained. When violations are found, corrective measures should be carefully explained.
(f) A re-inspection shall be made on or about the date set for the completion of the corrective measures and the report processed as outlined in this rule.
(g) The health authority shall review all reports on re-inspection and on the basis of corrective measures taken shall institute such action as is deemed proper in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. ch. 3 1-28 and these regulations.
(Code 1988, § 18-94; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3)
Sec. 38-155. Water supply.
(a) The water supply shall comply with all federal, state and local laws and/or ordinances.
(b) Below grade stop and wastes cocks or hose bibs shall not be used.
(c) Hose used for filling trailer water tanks shall be stored under sanitary conditions, used for no other purpose, and be so handled that back siphonage cannot occur, and that contaminants will not be introduced into the trailer's water tank.
(d) Where water glasses and other multiuse utensils are used, they shall be cleaned and sanitized, in a manner approved by the health authority, after each occupancy. Where approved sanitizing methods are not provided, single service paper or plastic cups shall be made available in lieu of glasses, and shall be used only once.
(e) Single service items, water glasses and other multiuse utensils, shall be protected from contamination in a manner approved by the health authority.
(f) Drinking founts, shall be constructed of impervious material and shall have an angle-jet nozzle above the overflow rim of the bowl. The nozzle shall be protected by a nonoxidizing guard and the bowl shall be constructed of an easily cleanable material.
(g) Ice shall be from a source approved by the health authority, stored in a clean place and handled in a sanitary manner. Scoops, buckets and other ice handling equipment shall be of easily cleanable material and construction, shall be stored in a clean place and shall be kept clean.
(h) The water supply shall be adequately protected to preclude the possibility of back siphonage. (Code 1988, § 18-95; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 4)
Sec. 38-156. Toilet facilities.
(a) Toilet, lavatory bathing facilities shall be provided at all tourist courts except as provided in
377
subsection (i) of this section. Such facilities shall be easily accessible, convenient and available to patrons at all times.
(b) Bedrooms in permanent structures shall be provided with private or connecting baths except, however, central toilet facilities may be used to serve existing multistoried tourist courts provided toilet facilities are within the building, located on each floor and adequate to serve the tourists therein.
(c) Toilet rooms and fixtures shall be kept clean and in good repair. Walls and ceilings shall be finished in a light color and shall be kept clean and in good repair.
(d) Where ventilation ducts are used, ducts from toilet rooms shall not be connected into return ventilation ducts to any other room. All guest rooms, public rooms, washrooms, bathrooms, toilet rooms, halls and stairways and any other room used for general habitation or work shall be ventilated in a manner that will maintain comfortable living conditions, remove objectionable odors and fumes and prevent excessive condensation. Ventilation system shall be subject to applicable state and local fire prevention requirements.
(e) Toilet rooms, lavatories and bathing facilities shall be provided with soap, artificial light, and hot and cold water under pressure.
(f) Unused, individually wrapped soap shall be provided in guest rooms. Soap furnished in public washrooms or baths shall be dispensed from approved containers in such a manner that contamination of the contents by individuals contact is impossible.
(g) Individual towels shall be provided in guest rooms and shall have been laundered by a method approved by the health authority since last used. If fabric bath mats are provided, they shall have been laundered or cleaned since last used. Towels, whenever provided in the public wash rooms or baths, shall be individual towels, and if cloth, shall have been laundered since last used.
(h) Toilet tissue shall be provided.
(i) Where dependent trailers are located, central toilet facilities shall be provided for each ten trailer spaces, or fraction thereof, with not less than one commode, one lavatory, and one tub or shower head for each sex. In addition, at least one urinal shall be provided in each central toilet designated for men.
(j) Central toilets shall be plainly marked, separate for each sex, lighted at night and located within 200 feet of the dwelling units or trailer spaces served.
(Code 1988, § 18-96; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 5)
Sec. 38-157. Sewers.
(a) Design and construction. Sewers shall be designed in accordance with recognized engineering practices for the estimated sewage flow and shall be laid with watertight joints to a grade that will ensure a self-cleaning velocity. Sewers shall be constructed of durable materials properly vented and shall be installed at sufficient depth to withstand anticipated loads or other equally suitable means for protection of the pipe shall be used.
378
(b) Connections. Each trailer space shall be provided with a sewer connection not less than three inches in diameter. Suitable fittings shall be provided at each sewer connection to permit a watertight junction to be made with the trailer outlet. Each sewer connection shall be so constructed that it can be closed and when not in use shall be capped to prevent escape of odors.
(Code 1988, § 18-97; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 6)
Sec. 38-158. Sewage disposal.
(a) Connection shall be made to a public sewer whenever possible and feasible as determined by the health authority.
(b) Where public sewers are not available, sewage disposal shall be provided to effectively dispose of all water carried wastes in a sanitary manner. No sewage, waste water, or other liquid effluent shall be discharged in such manner as to enter surface or subsurface water except following a treatment process approved prior to construction in conformity with existing state and local laws. Such sewage disposal systems shall be constructed and maintained in a manner to prevent the creation of insanitary conditions. Existing private sewage disposal systems giving satisfactory service as determined by the health authority may be approved by the authority.
(Code 1988, § 18-98; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 7)
Sec. 38-159. Plumbing.
All plumbing in tourist courts shall comply with state and local laws, ordinances or regulations. (Code 1988, § 18-99; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 8)
Sec. 38-160. Refuse disposal.
(a) At least one health authority approved container for waste shall be provided for each dwelling unit to be rented.
(b) Refuse shall be stored in health authority approved fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof, containers which shall be located within 100 feet of dwelling units or trailer spaces. Containers shall be supported on racks or otherwise in such manner as to eliminate tipping or spillage and the area around such containers shall be kept clean.
(c) Refuse shall be collected in accordance with municipal practices where available. Where such services are not available, the tourist court operator shall dispose of the refuse in compliance with all federal, state, local laws and or ordinances. Incinerators shall be operated only when attended by a person specifically authorized by the operator of the tourist court.
(Code 1988, § 18-100; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 9)
Sec. 38-161. Insect and rodent control.
(a) Effective measures, approved by the health authority, intended to eliminate the presence of rodents and flies, roaches and other insects on the premises shall be utilized. The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of insects or rodents.
(b) Openings to the outside shall be effectively protected against the entrance of rodents and shall be protected against the entrance of insects by tight-fitting, self-closing doors, closed windows,
379
screening, controlled air currents, or other means. Screen doors shall be self-closing and screens for windows, doors, skylights, transoms and other openings to the outside shall be tight-fitting and free of breaks. Screening materials shall not be less than 16 mesh to the inch.
(Code 1988, § 18-101; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 10)
Sec. 38-162. Construction, layout and furnishings.
(a) Construction; maintenance. Floors, walls, ceilings, windows, doors and all other appurtenances shall be of sound construction, properly maintained in good repair and shall be kept clean.
(b) Ventilation. Ventilation shall be provided for all rooms. Where ventilation is provided by means of windows, they shall open directly to the outside air and the openable window area of each room shall be not less than 1/20 of the floor area served. Where ventilation is provided by other means, it shall be at the rate of one complete change of air every 20 minutes.
(c) Lighting. All rooms shall be well lighted. When natural light fails to provided sufficient illumination, evenly distributed artificial light shall be provided to maintain a lighting intensity of not less than ten footcandles at 30 inches above floor levels.
(d) Furniture and accessories. Furniture, draperies, carpets and other accessories shall be maintained in good repair and shall be kept clean.
(e) Mattress pads or covers shall be used on all mattresses. Beds, mattresses, springs, slats, mattress pads, mattress covers, pillows and pillow covers shall be clean and free from vermin. Each bed shall be provided, as a minimum, with two sheets and one pillow and pillowcase. Sheets and pillowcases shall be changed daily with freshly laundered linens.
(Code 1988, § 18-102; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 11)
Sec. 38-163. Heating.
(a) The construction and installation of the heating appliances shall be such that all of the flue gases shall be carried to the outside of building through the flue outlet.
(b) Unvented combustion type heaters shall not be used.
(c) Gas water heaters shall not be installed in bathrooms and bedrooms or closets connected thereto.
(d) Each gas-fired heating unit shall be inspected at least annually by a qualified heating contractor before its use at the onset of cool weather. Points to be inspected are proper construction and installation, malfunctions and adjustments of controls and burners, faulty heat exchangers and vent obstructions. Any defects found on inspection must be corrected by a qualified heating contractor prior to use of the equipment. Upon request, the operator shall provide evidence of inspection and/or correction of any deficiency.
(Code 1988, § 18-103; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 12)
Sec. 38-164. Food service.
Food service facilities shall comply with provisions of title 26, ch. 3, art. 13 (O.C.G.A. § 26-3-370 et
380
seq.) and the rules and regulations and standards adopted thereunder.
(Code 1988, § 18-104; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 13)
Sec. 38-165. Swimming pools.
Regulations of the city in which the tourist court is located shall be applicable in design, construction, operation and maintenance of swimming pools operated in conjunction therewith and where no such regulations exist, then the state standards shall prevail.
(Code 1988, § 18-105; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 14)
Sec. 38-166. Laundry rooms.
Where laundry facilities are provided, they shall be separated from other facilities, of sound construction and shall be kept clean and in good repair. Laundry rooms for transient guest use shall open to the exterior and shall be well lighted and ventilated. Laundry equipment shall be provided with hot and cold water under pressure. Dryers shall be vented to the outside.
(Code 1988, § 18-106; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 15)
Sec. 38-167. Grounds.
(a) The grounds of a tourist court shall be graded to drain. Serviceable walks and driveways shall be provided.
(b) Grounds shall be kept clean. Space beneath building and trailers shall be kept clean.
(c) There shall be not less than 15 feet clear space between trailers and building, not less than ten feet between trailers and internal driveways within the trailer park.
(d) Each trailer space shall be distinctly marked. Trailer spaces shall shut on a well-defined all weather driveway of not less than 20 feet of unobstructed width and such driveway shall have clear access to a public thoroughfare.
(e) Grounded and weatherproof electrical outlets supplying at least 115 volts shall be provided at each trailer space. All electrical work and materials shall comply with state and local laws, ordinances or regulations. In the absence of such state and local laws, ordinances or regulations, the provisions of appropriate sections of the "Southern Standard Building Code" as published by the Southern Standard Building Codes Conference shall prevail.
(Code 1988, § 18-107; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 16)
Sec. 38-168. Enforcement.
The administration and enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be as prescribed in the title 31, ch. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 3 1-5-1 et seq.).
(Code 1988, § 18-108; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 17)
Secs. 38-169--38-190. Reserved.
Article V.
Vector Control
381
Sec. 38-191. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Business building means any structure, permanent or temporary, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy, for transaction of business, for rendering professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares or merchandise or for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, apartment buildings, rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories and all outhouses, sheds, barns and other structures on premises used for business purposes.
Health authority means the local county health board.
Health officer means the authorized representative of the local county health board.
Nuisance means whatever is detrimental to human health or whatever renders or tends to render soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome.
Occupant means the individual, partnership, or corporation that uses or occupies any buildings or a part thereof, whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of a vacant building or any portion of a building or premises, the owner, agent, or other person having custody of the building or premises shall have the responsibilities of an occupant of the building or premises.
Owner means the actual owner of a building whether an individual, partnership or corporation, who owns or holds title to a building and includes also the agents for the building or other person having custody or managerial control. In the case of business buildings leased or rented with a clause in the contract specifying that the lessee or tenant is responsible for maintenance and repairs, the lessee or tenant will be considered the owner.
Person means any person, firm, corporation, municipality, association or society.
Rat control means any method as may be approved by the health authority to control the rat population.
Rat harborage means any condition under which rats may find shelter or protection, and shall include any construction or condition which permits the entrance of rats into any business building. Any buildings through the exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings, foundations and other places that may be reached and entered by rats by climbing, burrowing, or otherwise. The material to be used for rat proofing shall include cement concrete, brick masonry laid in cement, concrete mortar, sheet metal, and minimum eighteen (18) gauge wire cloth having a mesh not larger than one-half inch. All material for rat proofing shall be of such strength and thickness as to be impervious to rat gnawing. Windows and other openings for light or ventilation that may be reached or entered by rats shall be covered with wire cloth screen incorporated into a metal frame conforming to the above gauge and dimensions. All exterior doors shall be protected against the gnawing of rats by the use of materials prescribed above. When closed, all exterior doors shall have a maximum clearance between doors, door sills and jambs not exceeding three-eighths of an inch.
Sec. 38-192. General provisions.
(a) Maintaining a nuisance. No person shall create, maintain, support, aid or continue a nuisance.
382
Nuisances included, but are not limited to the following:
(1) Conditions conducive to the breeding of flies or mosquitoes.
(2) Trash, garbage, refuse, or any foul, decaying, or putrescent material kept or used in such a manner or place as to be or become offensive, objectionable or detrimental to health or well being.
(3) Keeping of horses, mules, asses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or similar fowl or animals except under the following conditions: any housing or enclosures used by such animals or fowl shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health authority.
(b) Buildings to be ratproofed. The owners of all business buildings shall have such buildings rat proofed, and kept rat proofed in accordance with this article.
(c) Compliance with article. All business buildings hereafter erected, enlarged or repaired, shall be rat proofed and kept rat proofed in accordance with this article.
(d) Elimination of rat harborage. Whenever conditions inside or under any such business buildings or on any premises provide harborage for rats such that the health authority deems it necessary that the harborage be eliminated, the owner shall take steps toward the elimination of the harborage.
(e) Occupant requirements. The occupants in charge of any business building or premises shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
(1) Store all garbage in a rat proof and insect proof metal container or a type approved by the health authority, pending removal of such garbage.
(2) Keep such buildings and/or premises free of trash, debris, rubbish, salvage or similar materials which provide nesting places and harborage for rats.
(3) Maintain such buildings and/or premises in a rat free conditions by pursuing a program of rat control approved by the health authority.
(f) Owner and occupant requirements. Owners and occupants of any dwelling shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
(1) Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall maintain the shared or public area of the dwelling and premises thereof in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit and those parts that she/he occupies and controls shall be maintained in a condition not conducive to rat infestation.
383
(3) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all rubbish in a clean, sanitary and safe manner.
(4) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all garbage, refuse, and any other organic waste which might provide food for insects and/or rodents in a clean, sanitary, safe manner. All garbage cans and refuse containers shall be rat proof, insect proof, water tight, structurally strong to withstand handling stress, easily filled, emptied and cleaned; shall be provided with tight-fitting covers or similar closures, and shall be maintained at all times in a clean sanitary condition. Plastic bags may be used as garbage and refuse container liners, but shall not be used without the container for on-site storage of garbage or refuse. Other types of containers meeting the requirements of this regulation may be specifically approved by the health authority.
(5) The total capacity of all provided garbage and/or refuse cans and bulk storage containers shall be sufficient to meet the needs of the occupants of the dwelling.
(6) Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall supply facilities or refuse containers for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case of a single- or two-family dwelling it shall be the responsibility of each occupant to furnish such facilities or refuse containers.
(7) Every owner of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of rats on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever the dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rat proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(8) No occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall accumulate rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rat harborage in or about any dwelling or dwelling unit. Stored materials shall be stacked neatly at least 18 inches above the ground.
(9) No owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rat harborage in or about the shared or public areas of a dwelling or is premises. Materials stored by the owner shall be stacked neatly at least 18 inches above the ground.
(10) No owner or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store, place, or allow to accumulate any materials which may serve as food for rats in a site accessible to rats.
(11) Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied fixtures and facilities therein in a clean, sanitary and operable condition and shall be responsible for the proper use and operation thereof.
384
(g) Removal of ratproofing. It shall be unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber or other person to remove the rat proofing from any building for any purpose and fail to restore same in satisfactory condition, or to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats.
Sec. 38-193. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the county board of health, as a duly adopted ordinance of the city. Any person violating any provision in this regulation shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city, and upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or by confinement in the county jail for a total term not to exceed 60 days, or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this regulation on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law.
Chapters 39--41
RESERVED
Chapter 42
LAW ENFORCEMENT*
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority to provide for police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1).
Sec. 42-1. Provisions of county code which the county police department may enforce within the city.
(a) Provisions incorporated by reference. The members of the county police department are hereby authorized to enforce within the corporate boundaries of the city the following provisions of the Code of Ordinances, Gwinnett County, Georgia, which ordinances are incorporated herein by reference:
(1) Chapter 10, Animals (sections 10-1 through 10-81).
(2) Chapter 18, Business.
a. Article 3, Pool Rooms (sections 18-81 through 18-88).
b. Article 5, Massage Parlors (sections 18-131 through 18-135).
c. Article 9, Canvasser or Solicitor (sections 18-23 1 through 18-239).
(3) Chapter 38, Emergency Services (sections 38-26 through 38-3 1).
(4) Chapter 42, Environment.
a. Article 2, Nuisances (section 42-26).
385
b. Article 3, Noise (sections 42-46 through 42-48).
(5) Chapter 74, Offenses (sections 74-1 through 74-6).
(6) Chapter 78, Parks and Recreation (sections 78-1 through 78-47).
(7) Chapter 90, Solid Waste (sections 90-2 through 90-30).
(b) Authority; terms and conditions. Members of the county police department are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of these ordinances of the county within the municipal boundaries of the city under the same terms, conditions and restrictions as said ordinances may be enforced within the unincorporated areas of the county, and to issue such citations as may be necessary to enforce said ordinances.
(c) Jurisdiction. Jurisdiction to prosecute any citations issued by the members of the county police department regarding violations of the above-referenced ordinances shall lie within the recorder's court of the county and said court is hereby authorized to retain any fines assessed for violation of said ordinances and to otherwise exercise the jurisdiction of said court within the municipal boundaries of the city. The provisions of this section shall in no way affect or limit the jurisdiction of the municipal court of the city, and to the extent any intergovernmental agreements are necessary to provide for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this section, the city manager is hereby authorized to enter into such intergovernmental agreements provided said agreements do not require or commit the city to any financial expenditures.
(Ord. of 9-11-2000)
Chapters 43--45
RESERVED
Chapter 46
MUNICIPAL COURT*
* State Law References: Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.
Article I. In General Sec. 46-1. Session dates and times.
Sec. 46-2. Prosecutor; witnesses.
Sec. 46-3. Bailiff.
Sec. 46-4. Record of cases.
Sec. 46-5. Service of summons.
Sec. 46-6. Issuance, service of subpoenas.
Sec. 46-7. Failure to obey summons or subpoena.
Sec. 46-8. When bond required.
Sec. 46-9. Forfeiture of bond.
Sec. 46-10. Court costs.
Sec. 46-11. Collection of fines.
Sec. 46-12. Appeals.
Secs. 46-13--46-45. Reserved.
Article II. Indigent Defense Program
386
Sec. 46-46. Internal operating procedures of the county judicial circuit's indigent defense program adopted by reference.
Sec. 46-47. Definitions.
Sec. 46-48. Panel of attorneys.
Sec. 46-49. Fees and expenses.
Sec. 46-50. Determination of right to appointed counsel.
Sec. 46-51. Appeal.
Sec. 46-52. Attorneys eligible for appointment.
Sec. 46-53. Chief judge to develop procedures, etc., to effectuate this article.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec. 46-1. Session dates and times.
Court shall be regularly held on the third Friday of every month and shall commence at 2:00 p.m. in the City Hall Annex or other such location as the Municipal Court Judge shall designate. Additional court sessions may be cancelled or rescheduled by the City Manager after consultation with the Municipal Court Judge.
(Code 1988, § 16-1; Ord. of 9-9-1991; Amd. of 5-2002, Amd. of 2-14-06); Amend. January, 2012.
Sec. 46-2. Prosecutor; witnesses.
The City Attorney may be the prosecutor to represent the City in connection with each trial or other matter brought before the court at each session, and a Code Enforcement Officer shall be the primary prosecuting witness, together with such additional witnesses as may be required by the city or prosecutor.
(Code 1988, § 16-2, Amd. of 2-14-06)
Sec. 46-3. Bailiff.
(a) The city manager or his designee, if directed by the council, shall serve as the bailiff of the municipal court.
(b) The duties of the bailiff shall consist generally of seeing that the courtroom is in proper condition for sessions of court, of assisting in keeping order while court is in session, and of doing such other acts of assistance as may be required of him by the judge of the court and the city clerk.
(Code 1988, § 16-3)
Sec. 46-4. Record of cases.
A record of all cases heard in the municipal court for violation of this Code or other city ordinances shall be kept in a suitable bound volume by the city clerk. Such record shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final disposition of the case and the date of final disposition. (Code 1988, § 16-4)
Sec. 46-5. Service of summons.
Any person charged with violating any city ordinance or any section of this Code shall receive notice by citation or service of summons. Such notice may be issued by a Code Enforcement Officer, the City Clerk, the City Manager, or other designated city personnel. The notice shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, the time and place, as far as practicable, of the offense charged, and the date, hour and place of trial, requiring the accused to appear before the Sugar Hill Municipal Court to answer the accusation
387
made. Notice shall be served upon the accused by certified mail, return receipt requested; personal service verified by a signature; or by leaving a copy at the most notorious place of abode of the accused. However, notice issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking, abandonment or junked automobile may be directed to an unknown person as owner of the automobile designated in the notice and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. (Code 1988, § 16-5, Amd. of 02-14-06)
Sec. 46-6. Issuance, service of subpoenas.
The City Clerk or the Clerk of the Sugar Hill Municipal Court shall issue subpoenas for the appearance of all witnesses necessary for the prosecution or for the defense in any case pending before the Municipal Court. All subpoenas shall be personally served or by leaving the subpoena at the most notorious place of abode of the person being subpoenaed.
(Code 1988, § 16-6, Amd. of 2-14-06)
Sec. 46-7. Failure to obey summons or subpoena.
Any person who fails to appear at the time and place set out in any summons or subpoena served upon such person shall be guilty of contempt of court and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for same. (Code 1988, § 16-7)
Sec. 46-8. When bond required.
When any authorized law enforcement officer or the city marshal has arrested any person for violation of any provision of this Code or any city ordinance and a trial cannot be had immediately, the officer may take a cash bond not exceeding the maximum fine for the offense, or a bond with a good security, for the appearance of such person before the judge of the municipal court. If such person fails or refuses to give a bond, the officer may cause such person to be confined in the the county jail until a trial can be held, provided that the mayor or the municipal judge, in the discretion of either, may release such person in such person's own recognizance without security.
(Code 1988, § 16-8)
Sec. 46-9. Forfeiture of bond.
Upon the failure of a person to appear in the municipal court at the time and place fixed by the summons, the judge of said court shall enter a judgment of forfeiture on any cash bond, or, in the case of a security bond, shall pass a rule requiring the principal and surety on such bond to show cause on the date named therein, which date shall not be less than ten days from the passage of such ruling, why they should not be required to pay the amount of said bond. If no sufficient cause is shown, the judge shall enter judgment against the principal and surety for the amount of the forfeited bond and shall direct the city clerk to issue execution thereon.
(Code 1988, § 16-9)
Sec. 46-10. Surcharges and Court Costs.
(a) State surcharges. The municipal court shall impose all add on fees or surcharges required by state, federal, or local law and said fees or surcharges shall be transmitted to the appropriate entity as required by law.
(b) Interpreter fees. The municipal court shall be authorized to impose fees for providing an accused
388
with the services of an interpreter in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth by the Georgia Supreme Court.
(c) Court costs. The municipal court shall impose a surcharge not to exceed sixty dollars ($60.00) to any penalty imposed for a violation of city ordinances or codes to defray the costs of operation associated with the prosecution of such offense. If the addition of the sixty dollar surcharge results in a total monetary penalty exceeding that which is allowed by law, said surcharge shall be reduced to ensure compliance with all applicable laws. The surcharge imposed by this subsection shall be paid into the city treasury.
Amend. April, 2010
Sec. 46-11. Collection of fines.
When directed by the judge of the municipal court, the city clerk shall issue executions for fines
imposed by said court, including the costs, which executions may be levied upon any goods or chattels, lands or tenements of the person so fined.
(Code 1988, § 16-11)
Appeals from decisions of the municipal court shall be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided for appeals from the court of probate.
(Code 1988, § 16-12)
State Law References: Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-8.
Sec. 46-12. Appeals.
Appeals from decisions of the Sugar Hill Municipal Court shall be taken by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County, Georgia.
(Amd. of 2-14-06)
Secs. 46-13--46-45. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
INDIGENT DEFENSE PROGRAM*
* Editors Note: Exhibit A, referred to in this article is not set out herein but can be found on file in the city clerk's office.
Sec. 46-46. Internal operating procedures of the county judicial circuit's indigent defense program adopted by reference.
The internal operating procedures of the Gwinnett Judicial Circuit's Indigent Defense Program as accepted by the Gwinnett County Indigent Defense Committee on January 30, 2002, and as ordered by the Superior Court of Gwinnett County on January 30, 2002, the State Court of Gwinnett County on February 7, 2002, the Magistrate Court of Gwinnett County on February 17, 2002, the Gwinnett Circuit Juvenile Court on February 7, 2002, and the Recorder's Court of Gwinnett County on February 7, 2002, a copy of which is hereby set forth as exhibit A is hereby adopted as the official policy of the city as modified herein.
(Amd. of 1-2003, § 2-200)
389
Sec. 46-47. Definitions.
All references to the county or any office of the county including, but not limited to, the administrative office of the courts, in exhibit A shall be considered to be references to the City of Sugar Hill. All references to the "committee" or "governing committee" in exhibit A with respect to the selection of panel attorneys for the municipal court of the city and the processing and consideration of invoices from attorneys shall be considered to be references to the municipal court of the city.
(Amd. of 1-2003, § 2-201)
Sec. 46-48. Panel of attorneys.
The panel of attorneys from which appointments may be made by the municipal court of the city may be compiled by periodically soliciting attorneys who are on the panel of qualified attorneys created by the Gwinnett County Indigent Defense Governing Committee. The city panel of attorneys need not be categorized as in part X of exhibit A. Any attorney on the county's panel of attorneys who is involuntarily removed for cause pursuant to section 10.4(B) of exhibit A hereto shall be ineligible for appointment by the municipal court of the city. Any other qualified attorney not appearing on the county's panel of qualified attorneys may request his or her inclusion on the city panel and may be included on the city panel if found to be qualified by the chief municipal court judge. Any attorney accepting an appointment by the municipal court of the city shall be required to comply with the guidelines and standards applicable to panel attorneys and other appointed counsel set forth in exhibit A, as modified.
(Amd. of 1-2003, § 2-203)
Sec. 46-49. Fees and expenses.
Any fee or expense invoice submitted by appointed counsel shall be submitted to the municipal court
clerk and shall be reviewed by the city municipal court judge who made the appointment or the chief judge, whose decision regarding city panel attorneys, payment of fees, expenses, and costs shall be final and may not be appealed except as may be provided by law.
(Amd. of 1-2003, § 2-204)
Sec. 46-50. Determination of right to appointed counsel.
To the extent that exhibit A assumes a standard for determining an indigent defendant's right to appointed counsel inconsistent with the holding of Alabama v. Shelton, it shall be the policy of the city to apply the standards of Alabama v. Shelton.
(Amd. of 1-2003, § 2-205)
Sec. 46-51. Appeal.
The term "appeal" as used in section 8.2 and section 3 of exhibit A shall be construed to include a petition for certiorari to be filed in the superior court of the county after a conviction in the municipal court of the city. However, unless otherwise ordered by the municipal court, any appointment of counsel by the municipal court of the city shall terminate upon the entry of an order binding the case over to a court of record prior to any adjudication of the merits of the case by the municipal court.
(Amd. of 1-2003, § 2-206)
Sec. 46-52. Attorneys eligible for appointment
390
The municipal court clerk shall maintain a list of attorneys deemed eligible for appointment by the chief municipal court judge. The municipal court clerk shall provide a form for requesting appointed counsel to any defendant in a case pending in the municipal court and shall forward any such form or other request for appointed counsel to the chief judge of the municipal court. If no such forms have been developed or are not available at the time a request for appointed counsel is made, the clerk shall notify the chief judge of such request.
(Amd. of 1-2003, § 2-207)
Sec. 46-53. Chief judge to develop procedures, etc., to effectuate this article.
The chief judge of the municipal court of the city may develop internal operating procedures and forms and other documents as may be necessary to effectuate this article.
(Amd. of 1-2003, § 2-208)
Chapters 47--49
RESERVED
Chapter 50
NUISANCES*
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.
Sec. 50-1. Nuisances declared.
Sec. 50-2. Complaint of nuisance; hearing.
Sec. 50-3. Abatement by city.
Sec. 50-4. Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement.
Sec. 50-5. Offense; penalty.
Sec. 50-1. Nuisances declared.
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances:
(1) Stagnant water on premises;
(2) Any dead or decaying matter, weeds or vegetation over 12 inches in height, any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city;
(3) The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city;
(4) The pollution of public water;
(5) Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl;
(6) Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit;
391
(7) Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple - family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse area;
(8) All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property;
(9) Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities;
(10) Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed;
(11) Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and
(12) The outdoor storage of inoperative vehicles, machinery, equipment, used building materials, trash, solid waste, appliances and similar items and materials in any location other than a lawfully approved junk yard, landfill or other commercial enterprises requiring the short-term storage of items being repaired; and
(13) Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law.
(Code 1988, § 17-1; Ord. of 11-9-1992, § 1); Amend. January, 2011.
Sec. 50-2. Complaint of nuisance; hearing.
Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the city marshal, city building inspector or city manager, who shall investigate or cause the complaint to be investigated, and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The court, after a summons to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and, upon finding that a nuisance does exist, shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control, or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public.
(Code 1988, § 17-3; Ord. of 11-9-1992, § 3)
Sec. 50-3. Abatement by city.
(a) In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the judge, that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the city manager directing the nuisance to be abated. The city manager, in such case, shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as city revenues.
392
(b) Other city employees shall assist the city manager as directed or as necessary in abating nuisances hereunder.
(Code 1988, § 17-4; Ord. of 11-9-1992, § 4)
Sec. 50-4. Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger.
(Code 1988, § 17-5; Ord. of 11-9-1992, § 5)
Sec. 50-5. Offense; penalty.
(a) It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Persons convicted of maintaining a nuisance shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00.
(Code 1988, § 17-6; Ord. of 11-9-1992, § 6)
Sec. 50-6. Graffiti.
It shall be unlawful for any person having a legal or equitable interest in a parcel of real property to permit graffiti to remain on a structure located thereon for a continuous period of more than 72 hours. For purposes of this section, the term “graffiti” shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction determines that a person has violated the provisions of this section, the court may, on its own motion or at the request of the city, issue an order directing the city to remove the graffiti from the property on such terms as the court deems appropriate. The court may also specify that the property owner may be liable for the cost incurred in the removal of the graffiti.
Chapters 51--53
RESERVED
Chapter 54
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 54-1. Disorderly conduct.
Sec. 54-2. Discharging firearms, air guns, etc.
Sec. 54-3. Throwing of missiles.
Sec. 54-4. Adoption by reference of county offenses regulations.
Sec. 54-1. Disorderly conduct.
393
(a) Purpose of section. The purpose of this section is to preserve the peace and tranquility when it is endangered by the irresponsible actions of a person or persons.
(b) Definitions. The terms "alcoholic beverage" and "retail consumption dealer" shall have the same meaning as found in chapter 6 of this Code. Other terms shall have the same meaning as found in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. §§ 16-1-3, 16-6-2, 16-6-9). For the purposes of this section only, "public place" shall include the jails, penal and correctional institutes of this county.
(c) Prohibited acts.
(1) No person, including the patron of a business, shall possess and give the appearance of consuming any type of alcoholic beverage on the premises of a business that is not licensed as a retail consumption dealer. This prohibition extends to shopping center parking lots, fast food establishments and any other places of business.
(2) No person shall engage in any noisy, boisterous or unruly conduct that disturbs or infringes upon the peace of another, particularly at an hour or time which is not common for such activity.
(3) No person shall jostle, roughly crowd or push any person in a public place.
(4) No person or persons shall willfully refuse the request or command of a duly authorized law enforcement officer to summon help or assistance, via telephone or police radio or whatever means of communication may be readily available where such refusal could result in injury to any person or damage to any property.
(5) No person shall intentionally interfere with another's lawful attempt to summon police assistance through the use of telephone, radio, or other communication device.
(6) No person shall intentionally urinate or defecate while in a public place other than a public restroom.
(7) No person shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language.
(8) No person shall recklessly or knowingly commit any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, or procession.
(9) No person shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb or health.
(10) No person shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or
394
destroyed.
(11) No person shall, without provocation, use to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called fighting words.
(12) No person shall, without provocation, use obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace.
(13) No person shall commit any of the following acts in a public place:
a. An act or a simulated act of sexual intercourse or sodomy;
b. A lewd exposure or indecent fondling of the sexual organs;
c. A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person; or
d. A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity.
(14) No person shall enter or remain upon the private recreational facilities of another, without the consent of the owner, or such person authorized to give such consent, for the purpose of utilizing such recreational facilities which are normally reserved for the residents or employees of any residential neighborhood, apartment complex, business or association.
(15) No person shall without authority cross any type of barrier or barrier tape erected by any police, fire or other public official for the purpose of excluding the public from the scene of any incident or emergency.
(16) No person shall refuse to disperse when requested to do so by a law enforcement officer at the scene of any incident, emergency or other occurrence where the public safety and order are threatened.
Any singular or combined presence of the acts enumerated in this subsection may constitute a violation of this section.
(d) Authority for incorporating state code sections. Authority for incorporating certain sections from the Official Code of Georgia Annotated is contained in the criminal code which specifically authorizes municipalities to implement ordinances that proscribe the described conduct.
State Law References: Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-1 1-39.
Sec. 54-2. Discharging firearms, air guns, etc.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within 300 feet of any street, alley or building, or at any point upon the land of any other person without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof; or to discharge, at any time, any air gun,
395
BB gun or toy gun which projects lead or any other missile.
(b) This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending persons or property.
(Code 1988, § 14-3)
Sec. 54-3. Throwing of missiles.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to throw any stone, rock or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place.
(Code 1988, § 14-4)
Sec. 54-4. Adoption by reference of county offenses regulations.
Chapter 74, offenses, of the Code of Ordinances, Gwinnett County, Georgia, as it existed on the adoption date of this Code, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Code with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein.
RESERVED
Chapter 56
MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME PARKS, SUBDIVISIONS AND TRAILER PARKS*
* Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; solid waste management, § 11-21 et seq.; parks and recreation,
Ch. 19; planning and development, generally, Ch. 20; soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 20-21 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 25; zoning, App. A.
Article I. In General
Sec. 56-1. Purpose and intent. Sec. 56-2. Title.
Sec. 56-3. Interpretation, construction of terms or words.
Sec. 56-4. Definitions.
Sec. 56-5. Applicability of chapter provisions.
Sec. 56-6. Permitted locations.
Sec. 56-7. Discontinuance of nonconforming uses.
Sec. 56-8. Enforcement.
Sec. 56-9. Violation; penalties.
Sec. 56-10. Conflict with other provisions.
Secs. 56-11--56-38. Reserved.
Article II. Licenses and Permits Sec. 56-39. Mobile home park and trailer park licenses.
Sec. 56-40. Construction permits.
Sec. 56-41. Individual permits.
Secs. 56-42--56-70. Reserved.
Article III. Plans and Specifications Sec. 56-71. Area and space requirements.
Sec. 56-72. Mobile home lots.
Sec. 56-73. Trailer and camper spaces.
Sec. 56-74. Roads and streets.
396
Sec. 56-75. Automobile parking.
Sec. 56-76. Additional minimum facilities--For mobile home parks and subdivisions. Sec. 56-77. Same --For trailer parks.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 56-1. Purpose and intent.
In pursuance of the authority conferred by the state and in order to provide for the placement of mobile homes, trailers and campers in an environment that will provide pleasant and satisfactory living conditions; to provide no adverse effects on neighboring properties; the city council does ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections.
(Code 1988, 15-1; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. I)
Sec. 56-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Mobile Home Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia."
(Code 1988, 15-2; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. II)
Sec. 56-3. Interpretation, construction of terms or words.
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter have their customary dictionary definitions.
Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
The word "map" or "zoning map" means the zoning map of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
The word "person" includes the words "individuals," "firms," "trusts," "partnerships," "corporations," "associations" and "governmental bodies."
The word "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary.
The word "used" or "occupied" shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designated to be used or occupied."
(Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. III, § 3.01)
Sec. 56-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words or terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed:
Camper means any self-propelled vehicle designed and constructed so as to permit occupancy thereof as a temporary dwelling unit or sleeping place.
397
City means the City of Sugar Hill, Gwinnett County, Georgia.
Lot means a developed or undeveloped tract of land in one (1) ownership, legally transferable as a single unit of land.
Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured generally perpendicular to the front lot line.
Lot, through means a lot having frontage on two (2) streets that are approximately parallel.
Lot width means the horizontal distance between the sidelines of a lot measured at the front building line.
Mobile home means a structure designed as a moveable dwelling; built upon its own permanent chassis; transported on its own chassis (normally by towing) in one (1) or more sections; occupiable with or without a foundation; and containing within all the normal utility systems (plumbing, electrical, heating, and cooling). Mobile homes constructed after June 15, 1976, shall be certified to comply with the State of Georgia Department of Community Affairs and the U.S. Government Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards. All mobile home units constructed prior to June 15, 1976, shall comply with the specifications prescribed by the American National Standards Institute.
(1) Single-wide mobile home: A mobile home constructed and transported as a single unit.
(2) Double-wide mobile home: A mobile home constructed and transported in more than one (1) unit, and which must be joined at the site of placement into a single whole.
Mobile home lot means a parcel of land for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
Mobile home park means a parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of four (4) or more mobile homes for permanent or semi-permanent use. Pads within a mobile home park remain the property of the park owner and are rented to tenants. A mobile home park does not include the provision of space for storage, inspection or sale of unoccupied mobile homes.
Mobile home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of not more than one (1) mobile home of single- family occupancy.
Mobile home subdivision means a tract of land planned and improved for the placement of four (4) or more mobile homes for permanent use on individually owned private lots.
Modular homes means a factory- fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a structure.
Nonconforming use means any building or land lawfully occupied at the time of passage or amendment
of this chapter which does not conform, after the passage or amendment of this chapter, with these regulations.
Owner means any person who is authorized to operate and maintain a mobile home, mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or trailer park, under the provisions of these regulations.
Parking space or of-street parking space consists of space adequate for parking a vehicle with room for
398
opening doors on both sides, maneuvering room, and an access to a public street.
Service building means a building housing office, laundry, restroom, maintenance and similar facilities intended for use by residents of the mobile home park or trailer park only.
Street means a public way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
(1) Major street: A main thoroughfare designed and used for high traffic volumes, and designated as such on the zoning map of the city.
(2) Collector street: A street designed and used primarily for low traffic volumes and access to individual lots, and designated as such on the zoning map of the city.
Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground.
Trailer means a vehicle, including a motor home, designed and/or maintained for use as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place, for travel or recreational purposes, having no foundation other than wheels or jacks.
Trailer park means a parcel of land which is used solely for the rental or lease of lots for transient campers, trailers, motor homes, or temporary parking of any other recreational vehicle.
Yard means an open space on a lot situated between the principal mobile home, building, or use on the lot and a lot line, and unoccupied by any structure except as otherwise provided herein.
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal mobile home, building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the nearest street right-of-way line and the front line of the mobile home or building, projected to the side lines of the lot.
Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal mobile home, building or use, unoccupied except by an accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the mobile home or building, projected to the side lines of the lot.
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal mobile home, building or use, located between the mobile home or building and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard.
(Code 1988, 15-4; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. III, § 302)
Sec. 56-5. Applicability of chapter provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the operation of all mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions and trailer parks within the corporate limits of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as "the city," as now or hereafter may be established. No mobile home, trailer or camper shall be used or occupied except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter.
(Code 1988, 15-5; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. IV, § 401)
Sec. 56-6. Permitted locations.
399
(a) Mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions and trailer parks will be permitted only in areas designated "Mobile Home Park and Mobile Home Subdivision District (MH)" on the zoning map.
(b) The parking of a mobile home in any district other than MH shall be prohibited; provided, however, that:
(1) This chapter shall not prevent the storage of mobile homes on commercial sales lots for mobile homes when the same are unoccupied and are not used for any purpose other than inspection and display. The sales office for such a mobile home sales lot may be located in a mobile home.
(2) Construction trailers and mobile homes used as offices may be placed on construction sites while construction is in progress, however, the same shall not be used for living quarters. When not in active use, construction trailers may be stored at the contractor's commercial base of operations.
(c) The parking or storage of not more than two (2) travel trailers or campers will be permitted in the side yard or rear yard of any residential lot, however the travel trailer or camper shall not be used for living, sleeping or commercial or utility purposes while the same is so parked or stored. Mobile homes may not be parked or stored except in approved mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions or commercial sales lots. (Code 1988, 15-6; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. IV, § 402)
Cross References: Zoning, App. A.
Sec. 56-7. Discontinuance of nonconforming uses.
The lawful use of any mobile home or land existing on July 28, 1986, may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter. In the event the use of any nonconforming mobile home is discontinued for a period of one (1) year or more, the same may not be continued as a nonconforming use or moved to any other nonconforming site. A nonconforming mobile home may be replaced with another nonconforming unit and such replacement unit may contain more floor space than the original unit
but not less floor space than the original unit.
(Code 1988, 15-7; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. V, § 504)
Sec. 56-8. Enforcement.
The city manager of Sugar Hill and the Gwinnett County Board of Health shall be among the officials charged with enforcing this chapter.
(Code 1988, 15-8; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. VII, § 701)
Sec. 56-9. Violation; penalties.
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided by the law. Any structure, use or improvement established contrary to the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated, enjoined or otherwise regulated by all existing laws and regulations of the city. Upon violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, any license granted by the mobile home subdivision, trailer park, or for the occupancy of a mobile home may, at the option of the mayor and council of the city, be revoked or suspended. In providing for penalties under
400
the law, each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Any person who furnishes water, gas or electricity to a mobile home located in the city for which no registration permit has been issued shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Code 1988, 15-9; Ord. of 6-28-1986, Art. VII, § 702)
Charter References: Power of city to define a nuisance and provide for its abatement, whether on public or private property, § 1.12(28).
Sec. 56-10. Conflict with other provisions.
Whenever the regulations of this chapter require or impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or covenants, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or covenant require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statutes or covenants shall govern.
(Code 1988, 15-10; Ord. of 6-28-1986, Art. VIII, § 801)
Secs. 56-11--56-38. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
LICENSES AND PERMITS*
* Cross References: Occupational licenses and business regulations, Ch. 18.
Sec. 56-39. Mobile home park and trailer park licenses.
(a) Required; application; fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, enlarge, maintain or operate or to permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him, a mobile home park or trailer park within the city unless such a person shall first obtain a valid written business license therefore from the city. The application for a business license or the renewal thereof shall be filed, with the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee of twelve dollars ($12.00) per lot in the park.
(b) Conformity with chapter; nonconforming uses; variances. Business licenses may not be issued until the proposed establishment conforms to the requirements set forth in these regulations, except that the maintenance of a park that is in existence on July 28, 1986, may be continued as a nonconforming use for a period of three (3) years. Beginning three (3) years after the July 28, 1986, full compliance with these regulations will be required of all parks, except that minimum lot sizes and minimum spacing requirements will not be imposed in cases where noncompliance existed at the time of adoption of the chapter. The mayor and council may, upon the recommendation of the planning commission, grant a permanent variance in cases where continued noncompliance by a park which existed on July 28, 1986, is demonstrated to beyond the control of the park owner. The license to operate shall expire one (1) year from its date of issuance but may be renewed for additional periods of one (1) year each.
(c) Notice to owners. The city clerk shall notify each existing park and subdivision owners in writing of the adoption of this chapter and its requirements. This notice shall be sent by certified mail no later than five (5) days after July 28, 1986. A proposed plan for compliance with this chapter and timetable for completion of necessary improvements must be submitted by the park owner to the planning commission within six (6) months after the mailing of notice by the city clerk.
(Code 1988, 15-21; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. V, § 501)
401
Sec. 56-40. Construction permits.
(a) Application; term. Application for permits to construct or enlarge a mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or trailer park shall be made in triplicate upon forms provided by the city clerk. Such forms shall be completed in all details by the applicant, signed by him in his name in his own behalf or as authorized agent for the owner, as the case may be. One (1) approved copy shall be returned to the applicant for his own file and one (1) copy shall be filed with the city clerk. Permits shall be void after six (6) months from their date of issuance unless construction of the proposed facility has begun. Construction of the minimum facilities required by this chapter and shown on the approved plat for any one (1) of development must be completed prior to occupancy of any portion of that specific phase.
(b) Information required. Accompanying the application for a permit to construct and/or operate a mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or trailer park shall be three (3) copies of a plan prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor showing the following information:
(1) All property lines with dimensions, lot numbers and block numbers.
(2) Adjoining street with right-of-way and paving widths, and distance to nearest intersection.
(3) Location of buildings and other structures referenced to the centerline of adjoining streets and to the property lines of the tract.
(4) Entrances and exits, streets and street names, right-of-way lines and off-street parking areas.
(5) North arrow, district number and land lot, date, name of owner, scale and date of plat.
(6) Driveways, walkways and mobile home or camper sites.
(7) Location and size of all utility lines, existing and proposed.
(8) Location of outdoor lighting.
(9) Location of creeks, ponds and storm drainage facilities.
(10) Existing topography and proposed final topography in the form of a site place having a minimum scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet and a maximum contour interval of five (5) feet.
(11) Recreational areas with description of type and quantity of facilities to be provided.
(12) Names of all adjoining subdivisions and names of recorded owners of adjoining land.
(13) Any additional information specifically requested by the city manager.
402
(Code 1988, 15-22; Ord. of 1-28-1986, Art. V, § 502)
Sec. 56-41. Individual permits.
Before any mobile home is parked, placed or temporarily or permanently located within the corporate limits of the city, the owner, tenant, lessee or any other individual, partnership or corporation owning or occupying same shall notify the city clerk that the mobile home is to be moved into the city and shall pay the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) to the city for the purpose of registering the unit. Prior to the issuance of the registration, the owner, tenant, leasee or occupier shall state in writing the proposed location of such mobile home within the city. No permit indicating registration of a mobile home shall be issued by the city unless the mobile home is to be located in an approved mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.
(Code 1988, 15-23; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. V, § 503)
Secs. 56-42--56-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS Sec. 56-71. Area and space requirements.
A mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or trailer park shall be no less than three (3) acres in size, and shall be located on a well drained site, properly graded to ensure positive drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. An overall density of not greater than six and five tenths (6.5) mobile homes per acre will be permitted.
(Code 1988, 15-31; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. VI, § 601)
Sec. 56-72. Mobile home lots.
(a) Each mobile home lot shall be at least forty (40) feet in width at the building setback line. Mobile home park lots shall provide a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet in area, and mobile home subdivision lots shall provide a minimum of eight thousand (8,000) square feet in area. For each lot provided, the developer must also furnish land dedicated for common recreational use as provided in section 56-76(6). Greater lot areas will be required to comply with Gwinnett County Health Department regulations where community sanitary sewerage is not available. Plans utilizing unique sitting of mobile homes, such as a cluster development, may, with the approval of the planning commission, provide individual lots of not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet; however, overall density requirements must still be met.
(b) No mobile home shall be located within:
(1) Ten (10) feet of its individual lot line.
(2) Twenty (20) feet of another such unit.
(3) Thirty (30) feet of the right-of-way line of any major public street or highway or twenty (20) feet of the right-of-way line of any collector street.
403
(4) Fifteen (15) feet of any exterior boundary of the park or subdivision or any building within the park.
(5) Twenty (20) feet of any service building within the park or subdivision.
(Code 1988, 15-32; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. VI, § 602)
Sec. 56-73. Trailer and camper spaces.
Each space provided for transient parking and camping at an approved trailer park shall at least three thousand (3,000) square feet and shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet in width.
(Code 1988, 15-33; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. VI, § 603)
Sec. 56-74. Roads and streets.
(a) All mobile home spaces in mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions shall abut upon a paved internal street not less than twenty (20) feet in width. Spaces at trailer parks may abut a gravel surfaced driveway. The entrance road from the public street shall have a minimum width of at least twenty-four (24) feet extending at least one hundred (100) feet into the park or subdivision.
(b) Privately owned internal streets shall service all lots and parcels within mobile home parks and trailer parks. Public streets with a mobile home subdivision shall have a minimum right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet.
(c) Streets within mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions shall have a minimum 80- foot curve radius at all deflections in alignment. Dead-end streets shall have a minimum 80- foot diameter paved turnaround. Streets shall be constructed upon a sound compacted sub-grade and shall have a minimum of six (6) inches of crushed stone base and a minimum of two (2) inches of asphalt pavement. All streets in mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions will be provided with curbs, gutters and storm drainage. All mobile home park and trailer park streets and off-street paved parking spaces shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times by the park owner.
(d) No street name shall be used within a mobile home park or subdivision which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing public streets.
(Code 1988, 15-34; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. VI, § 604)
Sec. 56-75. Automobile parking.
Two (2) off-street paved parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home lot at a location convenient to the occupants of the mobile home. One (1) off-street automobile parking space shall be provided at each camp space at a travel trailer park.
(Code 1988, 15-35; Ord. of 7-28-1986, Art. VI, § 605)
Sec. 56-76. Additional minimum facilities--For mobile home parks and subdivisions.
404
Each mobile home park or subdivision shall provide the following minimum facilities:
(1) All-weather paved walkways of not less than two (2) feet n width to each trailer space and to all service buildings and public facilities.
(2) A weatherproof electric outlet supplying 110/220 volt, 100-ampere-power at each mobile home lot. Overhead power lines shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet to any trailer. The electrical system shall conform in every respect to the National Electrical Code.
(3) Each mobile home space shall be connected with the city water system and, if available, the city sewerage system, in conformance with the plumbing code of the city.
(4) Each mobile home lot shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of a fire hydrant. Existing nonconforming parks shall be brought into compliance with this provision within three (3) years of July 28, 1986.
(5) Garbage and refuse collection facilities acceptable to the city.
(6) Recreation areas containing at least ten thousand eight hundred ninety (10,890) square feet for mobile home parks having less than twenty (20) lots, and containing five hundred fifty (550) square feet per lot for all other parks reserved and improved for recreational use. Required buffer zones will not be included as a part of the recreation areas.
(7) A planted buffer zone of at least twenty (2) feet is required in addition to side and rear yards where a mobile home or trailer use abuts a single-family residential district. The buffer zone shall be planted or permanently maintained in trees and shrubbery that will, within five (5) years after planting, be at least six (6) feet in height and will obscure objects behind the buffer zone at a distance of fifty (50) feet.
(8) Outdoor lighting for all streets.
(9) Tie-downs shall be provided for each mobile home in accordance with the building code requirements of Gwinnett County. The ties shall consist of wire cable or rust-resistant steel straps, and withstand a minimum stress of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds. The cable or strap shall be secured to the mobile home frame and the anchor with a yoke-type fastener and tensioning device, but not with hook-end turnbuckles. Mobile homes having factory installed over-the-top tie-downs shall have these ties secured to the anchors in addition to the frame ties. Double-wide mobile homes do not require over-the-top tie-downs, but are subject to the frame tie requirements applicable to single-wide mobile homes. Acceptable types of anchors include expanding anchors, screw augers and concrete deadmen. Auger type anchors shall be installed to a depth of four (4) feet minimum in the ground. All anchors shall be designated to withstand a pull of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds.
(10) Foundation piers shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) inches by eight (8) inches concrete blocks with wood wedges.
(11) The space beneath each mobile home or modular home shall be fully enclosed with manufactured aluminum mobile home skirting, brick, stone, concrete block, or other approved weatherproof skirting within sixty (60) days after the certificate of occupancy is issued to protect this space
405
from the elements and to create an aesthetic appearance for each unit. Materials used for enclosure purposes shall be rigidly mounted and shall be acceptable for exterior use.
(12) All mobile home park owners must identify each rental space within their mobile home park by letter or number, or a combination of both, so as to properly identify each such space and to facilitate the location of mobile homes occupying such spaces by city utility crews, postal service employees, emergency vehicles, etc. Park owners are required to install identifying numbers and/or letters so as to make them plainly visible from the street immediately adjacent to each space, and in a manner so as not to create confusion. Numbers and/or letters may be installed on the rental space occupant’s mailbox. If an area is set aside for the common location of all mailboxes within a mobile home park, then the owner must erect four-by-four-inch treated posts of not less than three (3) feet in height, affixing the identifying numbers and/or letter to such posts for each rental space. Identifying numbers and/or letters must be of a light-reflecting material and must be of a uniform size, no smaller than three (3) inches in height.
(Code 1988, 15-36; Ord. of 6-28-1986, Art. VI, § 606)
Sec. 56-77. Same--For trailer parks.
Each trailer park shall provide the facilities required by section 56-76(2), (5), (6) and (7), and the following:
(1) Separate toilet and bathing facilities for each sex within three hundred (300) feet of each trailer or camper space; provide one (1) commode, one (1) lavatory and one (1) tub or shower head for each sex for each ten (10) trailer spaces or fraction thereof; also provide one (1) urinal for each ten (10) spaces or fraction thereof in the facilities for men.
(2) Laundry facilities at the rate of two (2) washing machines and one (1) dryer for each fifty (50) trailer spaces or fraction thereof.
(Code 1988, 15-37; Ord. of 6-28-1986, Art. VI, § 607)
Chapter 57
RESERVED
Chapter 58
PARKS AND RECREATION*
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority to provided for police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1).
Article I. In General
Sec. 58-1. Development of municipal recreation programs.
Secs. 58-2--58-25. Reserved.
Article II. Public Parks and Recreation Facilities Sec. 58-26. Hours of operation.
Sec. 58-27. Restoration of site by usery.
Sec. 58-28. Conduct; use regulations.
Sec. 58-29. Prohibited acts.
Sec. 58-30. Permit for group activities.
406
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 58-1. Development of municipal recreation programs.
The authority to develop programs of recreational activities and services designed to meet the leisure time, interests and needs of all citizens of the city is hereby granted to and vested in the recreation board, which board shall have the power to maintain and equip parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, and the buildings associated therewith, and to develop, maintain and operate all types of recreation facilities, as provided in O.C.G.A. ch. 36-64 (O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.).
(Code 1988, § 19-1)
Secs. 58-2--58-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES Sec. 58-26. Hours of operation.
(a) Generally; posting. The public parks shall be open daily to the public during the hours as from time to time established by the recreation board and posted in prominent places at any park; and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons, other than city personnel conducting city business therein, to occupy or be present in such parks during any other hours.
(b) Partial, temporary closings. Any section or part of a park, or an entire park, may be declared closed to the public by the city manager at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals.
(Code 1988, § 19-21)
Sec. 58-27. Restoration of site by usery.
Each person, firm, or corporation using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition.
(Code 1988, § 19-22)
Sec. 58-28. Conduct; use regulations.
(a) Games. It shall be unlawful for any person to take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball and soccer is prohibited except in the fields, courts or areas provided therefore.
(b) Camping. It shall be unlawful for any person to set up tents, shacks or any other temporary
407
shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such purpose, such as a house-trailer, camp-trailer, camp-wagon or the like, unless a special permit has been given by the city manager.
(c) Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the park and recreation board. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
(d) Animals. It shall be unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any park, and it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is on a leash not more than eight feet long.
(e) Automobiles. It shall be unlawful to drive or park any automobile except on a street, driveway or parking lot in any park; or to park or leave any such vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking.
(f) Sales. It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, sell, peddle or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park unless given a special condition permit by the city manager.
(g) Alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person within any park to have in his or her possession, custody or control any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever.
(h) Signs. It shall be unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park, except that these provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any official duty.
(i) Picnic area. No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas, or of any of the buildings or structures therein, for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(Code 1988, § 19-23)
Sec. 58-29. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation using such parks, grounds or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts:
(1) Damage to park property. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove, any buildings; bridges; tables; benches; fireplaces; railings; paving or paving material; waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or placards,
408
whether temporary or permanent; monuments; stakes, posts or other boundary markers; or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
(2) Water pollution. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
(3) Trees, plants. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof.
(4) Animals. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest or young of any other animal.
(5) Trash, rubbish. Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the presence of same, and properly disposed of elsewhere.
(6) Disturbing the peace. Disturb the peace, or use any profane or obscene language.
(7) Public safety. Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
(8) Fighting. Commit any assault or battery, or engage in fighting.
(9) Alcoholic beverages. Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic beverage in the park.
(10) Violation of park rules. Violate any rule for the use of the park, made or approved by the recreation board.
(11) Interference with peace, enjoyment of park. Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and with the rules applicable to such use.
(12) Swimming, wading, etc. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted.
(13) Dressing, undressing. Dress or undress in any vehicle, toilet, or other place except in houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose.
(Code 1988, § 19-24)
Sec. 58-30. Permit for group activities.
(a) Required; application. Whenever more than 15 members of any group, association or organization desire to use any park facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties or
409
theatrical or other entertainment performances, a representative of such group, association or organization shall first obtain a permit from the city clerk for such purpose.
(b) Issuance. The city clerk shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group, association or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members of the public, and if the group, association or organization meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the city manager.
(c) Bond. Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the city from any liability of any kind or character and to protect city property from damage.
(Code 1988, § 19-25)
Chapters 59--61
RESERVED
Chapter 62
PLANNING*
* State Law References: Authority to adopt plans, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; planning generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.
Secs. 62-1--62-30. Reserved.
Article II. Planning Commission Sec. 62-3 1. Adoption of state regulations.
Sec. 62-32. Composition, appointment and tenure.
Sec. 62-33. Vacancies.
Sec. 62-34. Removal from office.
Sec. 62-35. Compensation.
Sec. 62-36. Officers and rules of procedure.
Sec. 62-37. Powers and duties.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 62-1--62-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PLANNING COMMISSION
Sec. 62-31. Adoption of state regulations.
The rules, regulations and provisions contained in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated governing the creation, appointment, organization, powers and duties of municipal and county planning commissions are hereby adopted as the rules, regulations and provisions governing the city planning commission. (Code 1988, § 2-151)
Sec. 62-32. Composition, appointment and tenure.
The planning commission shall consist of five members appointed by the council. Except for initial appointments, the terms of the members shall be for three years each. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed. The seats on the planning commission shall be designated post number one, post number two, post number three, post number four, and post number five, and the mayor and council shall designate the post to
410
which an individual is being appointed at the time of appointment.
(Code 1988, § 2-152; Amd. of 2-2001)
Sec. 62-33. Vacancies.
Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only and in the same manner as for original appointments.
(Code 1988, § 2-153)
Sec. 62-34. Removal from office.
All members of the planning commission shall serve at the pleasure of the council and may be removed from office at any time by a majority vote of the city council.
(Code 1988, § 2-154; Amd. of 2-2001)
Sec. 62-35. Compensation.
All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation. (Code 1988, § 2-155)
Sec. 62-36. Officers and rules of procedure.
The planning commission shall elect one of its members as chairperson who shall serve for one year or until such person is reelected or a successor is elected. A second appointive member shall be elected as vice-chairperson who shall serve for one year or until such person is reelected or a successor is elected. The commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the city or of the planning commission. The planning commission shall meet at least once each quarter at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the chairperson or commission shall determine, shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, and shall keep a record of its proceedings, which record shall be open to public inspection. Employees and staff may be appointed by the planning commission as necessary when authorized by the council. (Code 1988, § 2-156)
Sec. 62-37. Powers and duties.
The planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and prepare plans for physical, social and economic growth in an effort to promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity or general welfare of the city. In carrying out its objectives, the planning commission shall have the following specific powers and duties:
(1) To prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the city.
(2) To prepare and recommend for adoption a zoning ordinance and map for the city.
(3) To prepare and recommend for adoption regulations for the subdivision of land within the city limits and to administer the regulations that may be adopted.
(4) To prepare and recommend for adoption a plat or plats or an official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, unlined or narrowed streets, public open spaces, or public building sites and to provide for the regulation of construction of
411
buildings or other structures within such lines.
(5) To cooperate with, contact with, or accept funds from federal, state or local public or quasi- public agencies and to expend such funds.
(6) To exercise all other powers and duties conferred upon municipal planning commission by state law. (Code 1988, § 2-157)
Chapters 63--65
RESERVED
Chapter 66
SOLID WASTE*
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific grant of constitutional authority relative to garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.
Article I. In General Sec. 66-1. Surcharge for solid waste deposited in city landfill.
Secs. 66-2--66-25. Reserved.
Article II. Litter Control
Sec. 66-26. Purpose and intent. Sec. 66-27. Statutory authority. Sec. 66-28. Title.
Sec. 66-29. Definitions.
Sec. 66-30. Littering prohibited; exceptions.
Sec. 66-31. Evidence of littering. Sec. 66-32. Penalties.
Sec. 66-33. Enforcement.
Sec. 66-34. Collection practices.
Article III. Solid Waste Collection and Disposal
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 66-1. Surcharge for solid waste deposited in city landfill.
(a) Authority. Effective January 1, 1992, there shall be paid to the city a surcharge of $1.00 per ton or any fraction thereof of solid waste deposited in the city landfill by the present operator or any person or entity otherwise authorized to deposit solid waste in that facility. This surcharge is imposed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39 and shall be in addition to any other negotiated charges or fees presently in existence or in existence at any time following January 1, 1992.
(b) Fund. The surcharge shall be remitted to the city on a monthly basis and such funds shall be deposited into a restricted account and shall be used for solid waste management purposes only. (Code 1988, § 12-1; Ord. of 12-9-1991)
412
Secs. 66-2--66-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
LITTER CONTROL*
* State Law References: Littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.
Sec. 66-26. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this ordinance are:
(1) Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or provide property; and
(2) Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter.(Code 1988, § 12-21; Ord. of 7-13-1987, art. I, Amd. of 8-18-06)
Sec. 66-27. Applicability.
This ordinance shall apply to all public and private property within the City of Sugar Hill.
(Code 1988, § 12-22; Ord. of 7-13-1987, art. II, Amd. of 8-18-06).
Sec. 66-28. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "The Litter Control Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia."
(Code 1988, § 12-23; Ord. of 7-13-1987, art. III, Amd. of 8-18-06)
Sec. 66-29. Compatibility with Other Regulations.
This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence.
(Code 1988, § 12-24; Ord. of 7-13-1987, art. IV, Amd. of 8-18-06)
Sec. 66-30. Severability.
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance.
(Code 1988, § 12-25; Ord. of 7-13-1987, art. V, § A, Amd. of 8-18-06)
413
Sec. 66-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings:
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, cigarette butts or packages, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description.(Amd. 7-14-08)
Public or private property means the right of way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties.
(Code 1988, § 12-26; Ord. of 7-13-1987, art. VI, Amd. of 8-18-06)
Sec. 66-32. Littering of Public or Private Property or Waters Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property or any waters in this city unless:
(1) Such property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property;
(2) Such litter is placed into a litter receptable or container installed on such property; or
(3) Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of said owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. (Code 1988, § 12-27; Ord. of 7-13-1987, art. V, §§ B, C, Amd. of 8-18-06)
Sec. 66-33. Vehicle Loads Causing Litter.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. (Code 1988, § 12-28; Ord. of 7-13-1987, art. VII, Amd. of 8-18-06)
Sec. 66-34. Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this ordinance. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. (Code 1988, § 12-29; Ord. of 4-8-1996, Amd. of 8-18-06)
414
Sec. 66-35. Evidence.
(1) Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article.
(2) Except as provided in subsection (1) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writing which displays the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. (Code Amd. of 8-18-06)
Sec. 66-36. Penalties.
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
(1) By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,200.00; and
(2) In addition to the fine set out in subsection 1 above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and
(3) (a) In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or
(b) In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and
(4) The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this ordinance.
(Code Amd. of 8-18-06)
Sec. 66-37. Enforcement.
All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. (Code Amd. of 8-18-06)
Sec. 66-38. Collection practices.
The city will provide for the chipping of tree limbs, at no charge, provided that the tree limbs are no greater than four inches in diameter and provided that such service is limited to regular city business hours.
415
(Code. Amd. of 8-18-06)
ARTICLE III.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
ARTICLE III. SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Sec. 66-101. Title.
This Article of Chapter 66 shall be known and cited as the "Solid Waste Collection and Disposal Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill."
Sec. 66-102. Definitions.
All terms shall have their ordinary dictionary meaning except as specifically defined herein.
Construction and Demolition Waste: building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings, and other structures. Such waste includes but is not limited to waste containing asbestos, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper, cardboard, and other nonputrescible wastes associated with construction and demolition activities which have a low potential for ground-water contamination. Inert waste landfill materials approved by authorized state and/or federal agencies for disposal in landfills permitted by rule and regulation other than residential solid waste as defined in this Chapter are also included in this definition if disposed in a construction or demolition waste landfill.
Commercial Solid Waste: refuse, trash, garbage, rubbish, all types of solid waste and other waste material that is generated by apartments, condominiums, other multi-family residential units, offices, businesses, stores, warehouses, industries, restaurants and other nonmanufacturing activities excluding single-family dwellings, duplexes and industrial wastes (as defined below) within the City limits.
Garbage collector: the city, its agents or employees or such person, firm or corporation as the city may contract or otherwise delegate responsibility for the collection and/or disposal of residential, commercial and industrial solid waste within the boundaries of the City.
Industrial Solid Waste: solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes that is not a hazardous waste regulated under the Hazardous Waste Management Act and regulations promulgated by the Georgia Board of Natural Resources, Chapter 391-3-11. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, wastes resulting from the following manufacturing processes: Electric power generation; fertilizer/agricultural chemicals; food and related products/by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel manufacturing; leather and leather products; nonferrous metals manufacturing/foundries; organic chemicals; plastics and resins manufacturing; pulp and paper industry; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textile manufacturing; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil or gas waste.
Recycling: any process, both commercial and residential, by which materials which would otherwise become
416
solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products;
(1) Commercial recycling means recycling conducted from apartments, condominiums, other multi-family residential units, offices, retail, service, food, or other businesses located within the corporate limits of the City, both present and future, which properties are not eligible for residential waste collection;.
(2) Residential recycling means recycling conducted from single-family residences located within the corporate limits of the City, both present and future, or other residences which qualify for residential waste collection.
Recovered Materials: Those materials which have known use, reuse or recycling potential; can feasibly be used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing [these materials include, but are not limited to, all newspapers, glass, food and beverage containers, plastic soda bottles and milk jugs, tin food cans, cardboard and aluminum beverage cans.]
Recovered Materials Processing Facility: A facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such terms shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste.
Residential Solid Waste: all household refuse, trash, garbage, yard debris, or rubbish including but not limited to putrescible animal, fruit and vegetable matter resulting from the preparation, cooking, storage, sale and serving of food, cans, glass, paper, and other containers, material that is generated as household garbage, and inert yard waste such as grass clippings, leaves and branches generated from residences.
Solid Waste: commercial sold waste, industrial solid waste and residential solid waste as defined in this Section.
Yard Trimmings: leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations.
417
Sec. 66-103. Regulations.
The following regulations are hereby adopted in order to promote the safe, efficient and proper collection of solid waste, recyclables, recovered materials and yard trimmings within the city limits:
(1) All residential solid waste, with the exception of yard trimmings, to be collected by the Garbage Collector shall be placed in specialized plastic bags provided to designated retail outlets and the City by the Garbage Collector or in 95 gallon or 65 gallon containers as provided by the Garbage Collector.
(2) All yard trimmings shall be separated for collection and removal from all other types of solid waste, construction and demolition waste, recovered materials and recyclables. After separation, yard trimmings to be collected shall be placed in bags or bundled for easy collection and removal and placed at the curb by 7:00 a.m. for Monday through Friday pick up. All limbs must be cut no longer than 6 feet in length and no limbs over 4 inches in diameter.
(3) Commercial and industrial solid waste to be collected by the Garbage Collector shall be placed in containers provided to commercial and industrial customers by the Garbage Collector.
(4) All residential solid waste to be collected shall be placed on private property at curb, alley or at the rear or side of residences, not earlier than 6 p.m. on the day before scheduled collection by the Garbage Collector and removed not later than midnight of that same scheduled collection day.
(5) Residential solid waste to be collected shall be easily accessible to the garbage collector for collection, preferably in a paved area. In the event that said containers are not easily accessible or are so situated that the garbage collector must contend with dogs or other pets, animals or livestock of the owner, tenant, or person in possession of the premises, so as to cause said collector to be apprehensive about his safety, collection of residential solid waste shall be excused until such time as the problem is remedied. Such situation shall not excuse payment for the service to be rendered or responsibility of the owner, tenant, or person in possession of the premises to comply with this chapter.
(6) Solid waste to be collected by special haul services provided for hereinafter shall be placed so as to be easily accessible to the Garbage Collector.
(7) Construction and demolition waste shall be separated from all other forms and types of waste or yard trimmings and shall be placed in containers provided by an approved hauler or collector.
418
Sec. 66-104. Rates
The rates and charges for the collection of residential, commercial and industrial solid waste within the city limits shall be as established in the agreement between the city and the approved garbage collector for the city.
Sec. 66-105. Burning of trash, paper, etc., prohibited.
(a) No person shall burn or incinerate, or cause to be burned or incinerated, any rubbish, paper, pasteboard boxes, rags, straw, packing materials, shavings, and similar materials within the city, except in an incinerator equipped with spark arrestor devices and meeting all standards and requirements as may now be or as may hereafter be established by the air quality control branch of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources or the county fire marshal. The open burning shall be governed of Section 30-1 of the Code of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
(b) Hand-warming fires on a construction site are permitted if the weather reaches fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit or below. Such hand warming fires shall be contained within a fifty-five (55) gallon barrel or drum. The barrel or drum containing the fire shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from the structure being built on the site, and only wood may be burning inside the barrel or drum.
(c) It shall be unlawful for construction and demolition waste to be burned within the city.
Sec. 66-106. Exclusive Franchise Rights.
It shall be unlawful for any individual, entity, company, corporation, or group either private or commercial other than the City or its designated Garbage Collector to collect or haul or attempt to collect or haul waste materials other than Construction and Demolition Waste, as defined in this Article, or to interfere in any manner with any receptacle containing such waste or to remove any such receptacle from the place where the same are placed by the owner, agent, or person lawfully in control thereof or to remove the contents of such receptacles.
Sec. 66-107. Recycling.
(1) Purpose
The purpose of this section is to encourage the practice of and facilitate the process of recycling within the corporate limits of the City of Sugar Hill by providing an open and hospitable environment for personal, private, commercial, and residential recycling.
(2) Residential Recycling, Curbside Containers and Collection Bins
The Garbage Collector shall provide collection containers for the purpose of residential recycling at curbside. These containers will be made of rigid plastic construction and will be of uniform color and size. These collection containers are to be placed at the curbside of the public street at each residential location and will be serviced pursuant to City’s Agreement with the Garbage Collector.
The City may also, from time to time, designate certain collection points where recyclable items may be brought to a designated collection bin. It shall be an offense punishable as stated in Subsection (4) below to place any garbage or household waste other than recyclable items, in or around designated recycling bins.
(3) Commercial Recycling and Registration
419
Any individual, entity, company, corporation, or group both private or commercial, who seeks to engage in the business of commercial recycling, as defined herein, may do business within the corporate limits of the City of Sugar Hill, upon registering with the City Clerk and providing a sworn statement, in the form attached as Exhibit A, affirming that it is engaged only in the business of commercial recycling as defined herein and is utilizing a Recovered Materials Processing Facility as defined herein. Each container placed within the City for purposes of commercial recycling shall contain a conspicuous notice designating the container as a container for recycled goods only. Should any individual, entity, company, corporation, or group, place a commercial recycling container at any commercial location that does not also maintain a waste disposal container, a rebuttable presumption shall exist that the commercial recycling container is being used for waste disposal in violation of this Ordinance.
(4) Enforcement
Should any person or entity deposit waste materials, as defined herein, within any curbside container or designated collection bin or should any person or entity engage in commercial recycling without proper prior registration said person or entity shall be in violation of this ordinance, and may be cited and fined an amount of not less than $500 per day nor more than $1,000 per day. Each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Sec. 66-108. Burial pits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury or cause to be buried any construction and demolition debris, residential solid waste, commercial solid waste, industrial solid waste, stumps, logs, branches, limbs, trash, garbage, waste paper, refuse matter, filth, food scraps, litter, decayed matter, or any other materials or any sort within the city limits.
Sec. 66-109. Construction and Demolition Waste
(1) Collection of Construction and Demolition Waste
Any individual, entity, company, corporation, or group both private or commercial, who seeks to engage in the business of collecting and hauling Construction and Demolition Waste, as defined herein, may do business within the corporate limits of the City of Sugar Hill, upon registering with the City Clerk and providing a sworn statement, in the form attached as Exhibit B, affirming that it is engaged only in the business of collecting and hauling Construction and Demolition Waste as defined herein and is depositing all such waste in a landfill approved for disposal of such waste by Georgia and certified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources.
(2) Proof of Disposal
The City may require any Construction and Demolition Waste hauler or collector to provide documentary evidence of appropriate and lawful disposal of Construction and Demolition Waste for the previous calendar year as a prerequisite to approving registration or at any time during the period in which the hauler or collector is doing business in the City.
(3) Violations and Enforcement
(a) Should any individual, entity, company, corporation, or group either private or commercial other than the City or its designated Garbage Collector collect or haul or attempt to collect or haul Construction and
420
Demolition Waste, as defined herein, without registering with the City Clerk and providing a sworn statement as required above, said person or entity shall be in violation of this ordinance, and may be cited and fined an amount of not less than $500 per day nor more than $1,000 per day. Each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(b) Should any individual, entity, company, corporation, or group haul or attempt to haul Construction and Demolition Waste to an unauthorized or illegal site or disposal facility or should any individual, entity, company, corporation or group be unable to provide proof of proper disposal of Construction and Demolition Waste under subsection (2) of this section said party shall be in violation of this ordinance and may be cited and fined an amount of not less than $500 per day nor more than $1,000 per day and may also be subject to revocation of their registration and right to collect Construction and Demolition waste in the City.
Sec. 66-110. Violations, enforcement and penalties.
(1) Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this chapter or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues without abatement shall be considered a separate offense.
(2) Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Director of Planning and Development or his designee, who is hereby given authority, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Director of Planning and Development shall be empowered to issue citations for violations under this Chapter directing offenders to appear before the Municipal Court of the City.
(3) Penalties. Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), unless other minimums are set forth elsewhere in this Article.
Secs. 66-111—150 Reserved.
Amend. February, 2010
421
Exhibit A
AFFIDAVIT
Personally appeared before me, the undersigned attesting officer duly authorized to administer oaths, who, first being duly sworn, says on oath as follows:
1.
My name is and I am over the age of eighteen (18) and am otherwise competent to give this affidavit. If I am giving this Affidavit on behalf of a corporation or other entity, my position with that corporation or entity is , and the name of the corporation or entity is _________________________________________.
2.
I understand and acknowledge the provisions set forth in Article III of Chapter 66 of the Sugar Hill Code of Ordinances whereby recycling means any process, both commercial and residential, by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or return to use in the form of raw materials or products.
3.
I understand and acknowledge that recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse or recycling potential; can feasibly be used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing [these materials include, but are not limited to, all newspapers, glass, food and beverage containers, plastic soda bottles and milk jugs, tin food cans, aluminum beverage cans, and cardboard.]
4.
I understand and acknowledge that all commercially recovered materials shall be delivered to a recovered materials’ processing facility which means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such terms shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid
422
waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste.
5.
I represent and warrant I or the corporation or entity that I represent are engaged in the business of commercial recycling, which is defined as recycling conducted/collected from multi-family dwellings, retail, service, food, or other businesses located within the corporate limits of the City, both present and future, which properties are not eligible for residential waste collection, and that I or the corporation or entity I represent will abide by all City Ordinances related to commercial recycling. I further represent and warrant that I or the corporation or entity that I represent has paid occupation tax to the City of Sugar Hill or that occupation tax has been paid to another city or county or is not required, and proof of payment or exemption is attached to this affidavit.
6.
I understand and acknowledge that I may be required to submit documentation for inspection by City officials verifying my compliance with the representations set forth herein and recycling provisions of Article III of Chapter 66 of the Sugar Hill Code of Ordinances.
Amend. February, 2010
Chapters 67--69
RESERVED
Chapter 70
TAXATION*
* State Law References: Local government taxation, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV; taxation generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq.
Article I. In General Secs. 70-1--70-20. Reserved.
Article II. Occupation Tax
Sec. 70-21. Occupation tax required for business dealings in the city.
Sec. 70-22. Definitions.
Sec. 70-23. Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure.
Sec. 70-24. Occupation tax levied; restrictions.
423
Sec. 70-25. Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state.
Sec. 70-26. Each line of business to be identified on business registration.
Sec. 70-27. Number of businesses considered operating in the city.
Sec. 70-28. Professionals, as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)1--18.
Sec. 70-29. Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government.
Sec. 70-30. Purpose and scope of tax.
Sec. 70-31. Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intra or interstate locations.
Sec. 70-32. Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose.
Sec. 70-33. Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed.
Sec. 70-34. Evidence of qualification required if applicable.
Sec. 70-35. When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent; liability of officers and agents.
Sec. 70-36. Penalty for article violation.
Sec. 70-37. City clerk; subpoena powers.
Sec. 70-38. Businesses not covered by this article.
Sec. 70-39. Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law.
Sec. 70-40. Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year.
Sec. 70-41. Filing of return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid.
Sec. 70-42. When occupation tax due and payable; payment options.
Sec. 70-43. Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses.
Sec. 70-44. More than one place or line of business.
Sec. 70-45. Returns confidential.
Sec. 70-46. Inspections of books and records.
Sec. 70-47. Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books.
Sec. 70-48. Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax.
Sec. 70-49. Enforcement of article.
Sec. 70-50. Requirement of public hearing before tax increase.
Sec. 70-51. Conflicts between specific and general provisions.
Secs. 70-52--70-75. Reserved.
Article III. Insurers
Sec. 70-76. Definitions.
Sec. 70-77. Insurer license fees.
Sec. 70-78. License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.
Sec. 70-79. Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers.
Sec. 70-80. Gross premiums tax, all other insurers.
Sec. 70-81. Due date for license fees.
Secs. 18-82--18-105. Reserved.
Article IV. Financial Institutions
Sec. 70-106. Occupation tax.
Sec. 70-107. Filing of returns.
Sec. 70-108. Due date.
Secs. 70-109--70-130. Reserved.
Article V. Psychic Reading, Fortune Telling and Related Practices Sec. 70-131. Occupation tax certificate required.
Sec. 70-132. Maintenance of records.
Sec. 70-133. Enforcement.
Sec. 70-134. Restrictions on owners and employees.
Sec. 70-135. Penalties.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 70-1--70-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
424
OCCUPATION TAX*
* State Law References: Local occupational license taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48 -1 3-1 et seq.
Sec. 70-21. Occupation tax required for business dealings in the city.
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk, her deputies, or to any police officer of said city upon request. (Code 1988, § 18-1; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 1)
Sec. 70-22. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings set forth in this section unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax.
City means the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived.
Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following:
(1) Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred;
(2) Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness;
(3) Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services;
(4) Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and
(5) Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income.
The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following:
(1) Sales, use or excise tax;
(2) Sales returns, allowances and discounts;
(3) Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(I), or between or among the units of a
425
brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2);
(4) Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and
(5) Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts.
Location or office means any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location of office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any business, profession, or occupation at such site.
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes.
Person wherever used in this article shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which provide proof of a federal nonprofit identification number.
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation.
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax.
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees.
(Code 1988, § 18-2; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 2)
State Law References: Occupational license definitions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1.
Sec. 70-23. Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure.
(a) A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $50.00 shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start up, renewal or reopening of those accounts.
(b) A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. The regulatory fee does not include an administrative fee.
426
(c) The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is as follows:
(1) Mobile home parks, per lot, $12.00.
(2) Construction, see appendix A to the ordinance from which this section is derived. (Code 1988, § 18-3; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 3)
State Law References: Regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-8, 48-13-9.
Sec. 70-24. Levied.
(a) Based on gross receipts; maximum amount levied. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. The maximum occupation tax levied shall be $25,000.00. A table presenting the classification of businesses into profit/tax classes is attached to the ordinance adopted December 27, 1994, as Appendix "B."
(b) Schedule.
Profit Class
Tax Rate On Gross
Receipts
Profit/Tax Class 1
.00040
Profit/Tax Class 2
.00045
Profit/Tax Class 3
.00050
(c) Restrictions.
(1) No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations.
(2) No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of business's gross receipts.
(3) No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states.
(4) An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the city and sell property inside the limits of the city.
(5) An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section.
(6) Occupational taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the municipality or in the state.
(7) Out-of-state businesses with no location in the state shall be assessed occupation taxes
427
based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in O.C.G.A. § 14-13-7 (see section 70-22) which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state.
(Code 1988, § 18-4; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 4; Ord. of 3-8-1999)
Editors Note: Appendix B referred to in subsection (a) of this section is not set out herein but can be found on file in the city clerk's office.
State Law References: Determination of amount of occupational license, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9.
Sec. 70-25. Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state.
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner:
(1) Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or
(2) Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Code 1988, § 18-5; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 5)
Sec. 70-26. Each line of business to be identified on business registration.
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts.
(Code 1988, § 18-6; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 6)
Sec. 70-27. Number of businesses considered operating in the city.
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the levy of an occupation tax.
(Code 1988, § 18-7; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 7)
Sec. 70-28. Professionals, as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)1--18.
(a) Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following:
(1) The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in section 70-24.
(2) A fee of $200.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework.
(3) This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 31 of each year.
428
(b) Lawyers as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) subject to payment of an occupation tax, as elected in subsection (a) of this section, shall not be subject to the penalties described in section 70-36 of this article; however, the city clerk shall seek to enforce payment of an occupation tax due the city by lawyers through any and all available legal remedies afforded by law.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to waive or repeal any other requirements ordained under this Code.
(Code 1988, § 18-8; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 8; Amd. of 7-2003)
Sec. 70-29. Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government.
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice.
(Code 1988, § 18-9; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 9)
Sec. 70-30. Purpose and scope of tax.
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance.
(Code 1988, § 18-10; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 10)
Sec. 70-31. Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intra or interstate locations.
For those businesses who have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupational tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. In the case were the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following:
(1) Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and
(2) Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments.
Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation.
(Code 1988, § 18-11; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 11)
Sec. 70-32. Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose.
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose unless the
429
organization provides proof of a federal nonprofit identification number.
(Code 1988, § 18-12; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 12)
Sec. 70-33. Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed.
(a) Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued.
(b) Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid.
(Code 1988, § 18-13; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 13)
Sec. 70-34. Evidence of qualification required if applicable.
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification.
(Code 1988, § 18-14; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 14)
Sec. 70-35. When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent; liability of officers and agents.
(a) Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by February 1 of each year, and be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein after February 1 of each year. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 70-36(b). Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied.
(b) Any person or such person's manager, agent or employee who does business in the city after the registration for said business has been revoked as above; or is hereby required to make occupation tax returns and fails to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided; who refuses to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth; who makes false returns; or who refuses to permit an inspection of books in their charge when an officer, agent, employee, or representative of the city requests such inspection during the business hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. For those practitioners of whom the local government cannot suspend the right to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent payment of occupation taxes.
430
(c) In addition to the above remedies, the city manager or his designee may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions.
(Code 1988, § 18-15; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 15; Amd. of 12-2002)
Sec. 70-36. Penalty for article violation.
(a) (1) Any person, who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of the occupational tax ordinances of the city may, upon conviction, be punished as provided in such ordinance or in the absence of such provision, by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each offense and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed five days in the discretion of the city judge, each day constituting a separate offense.
(2) To ensure compliance with the ordinances of the city that require the payment of special taxes, occupational taxes and business license fees, the chief building official/code enforcer is hereby empowered to cite violators of the various ordinances of the city providing for business license taxes, occupation taxes and special taxes related to certain businesses to the city municipal court. Such citations shall state the provision of the specific ordinance allegedly violated by the individual cited by the chief building official/code enforcer.
(3) The city municipal court is empowered to criminally prosecute persons violating the municipal ordinances of the city by failing to pay the special taxes, occupational taxes or business license ordinances of the city. This remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies provided for by local law or by state law.
(b) Any person failing to obtain a renewal between January 1 and February 1 of each year, or any person failing to obtain a business license prior to commencement of a new business, shall, after 90 days, be liable for an additional ten percent of the amount required to be paid as a penalty for failure to obtain the appropriate license or licenses; provided, however, that the minimum penalty shall be $1.00. (Code 1988, § 18-16; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 16; Amd. of 12- 2002)
Sec. 70-37. City clerk; subpoena powers.
The city clerk's office and its duly designated officers and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy business inspector with full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article.
(Code 1988, § 18-17; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 17)
Sec. 70-38. Businesses not covered by this article.
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law:
(1) Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission.
(2) Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A.
§ 46-3-1 et seq.).
431
(3) Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness.
(4) Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105.
(5) Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 3 3-8-8 et seq.
(6) Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15.
(7) Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. §48-5-355, (businesses which purchase carloads of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal and hulls).
(8) Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356.
(9) Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
(10) Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. (Code 1988, § 18-88; Ord. Of 12-27-1994, § 18)
Sec. 70-39. Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law.
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States.
(Code 1988, § 18-19; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 19)
Sec. 70-40. Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year.
(a) All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the calendar year. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer and to eliminate the necessity of making numerous returns, those businesses subject to the occupation tax levied in section 70-24 hereof shall, on or before the times hereinafter set forth, file with the city clerk the returns hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as an estimate for making payments on the occupation tax for current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in a current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure hereinafter set forth.
(b) The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall at the end of the preceding year and on or before February 1 of the current calendar year, file with the city clerk on a form furnished by the city clerk, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year to be used as an estimate of the gross receipts for the current year.
(c) Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be set forth in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis, which figure shall bear the same ratio to the amount of gross receipts for such part
432
year as the full year bears to such part. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year. (Code 1988, § 18-20; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 20; Amd. of 12-2002)
Sec. 70-41. Filing of return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid.
(a) On or before February 1 of each year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the city clerk on a form furnished by the city clerk a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year.
(b) If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 70-40 hereof, the difference in said amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on January 1 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before February 1.
(c) If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 70-40, the difference in said amount shall be refundable by the city to the taxpayer; or, if said business continues to be conducted in said city during the current year, such difference in any amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by said business for the current year. This election is to be taken by the city. (Code 1988, § 18-21; Ord. of 12-27- 1994, § 21; Amd. of 12-2002)
Sec. 70-42. When occupation tax due and payable; payment options.
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the city at the office of the city clerk on January 1 of each year and is delinquent if not paid on or before February 1 of each year.
(Code 1988, § 18-22; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 22; Amd. of 12-2002)
Sec. 70-43. Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses.
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year.
(Code 1988, § 18-23; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 23)
Sec. 70-44. More than one place or line of business.
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location.
(Code 1988, § 18-24; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 24)
Sec. 70-45. Returns confidential.
433
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of said return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as "employees." Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state or of the United States, and other local governments.
(Code 1988, § 18-25; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 25)
Sec. 70-46. Inspections of books and records.
In any case the city clerk, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the person or business for which the returns are made. The city clerk shall have the right to inspect the books or records of the business for which the return was made in the city and upon demand of the city clerk such books and records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure to submit such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city clerk at her discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of ten percent per month shall be assessed for the period delinquent. (Code 1988, § 18-26; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 26)
Sec. 70-47. Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books.
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its
books as provided above, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 70-41. For those practitioners of whom the local government cannot suspend the right to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent payment of occupation taxes.
(Code 1988, § 18-27; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 27)
Sec. 70-48. Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax.
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city clerk, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the person, partnership or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon the property of defendant
434
located in said city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the charter of said city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes.
(Code 1988, § 18-28; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 28)
Sec. 70-49. Enforcement of article.
It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the city municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city clerk and his agents to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder.
(Code 1988, § 18-30.1; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 31)
Sec. 70-50. Requirement of public hearing before tax increase.
After January 1, 1996, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. (Code 1988, § 18-30.3; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 33)
Sec. 70-51. Conflicts between specific and general provisions.
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control.
(Code 1988, § 18-30.5; Ord. of 12-27-1994, § 35)
Secs. 70-52--70-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
INSURERS
Sec. 70-76. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5.
(Amd. of 11-12-2001, § 18-31)
Sec. 70-77. Insurer license fees.
435
There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $75.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 70-78, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $75.00.
(Amd. of 11-12-2001, § 18-32)
State Law References: Annual license fee, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.
Sec. 70-78. License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $26.25 per location for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter.
(Amd. of 11-12-2001, § 18-33)
Sec. 70-79. Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers.
There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 3 3-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 70-77 of this article.
(Amd. of 11-12-2001, § 18-34)
Sec. 70-80. Gross premiums tax, all other insurers.
There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3 3-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 3 3-8-4.
The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 70-77 of this article. (Amd. of 11-12-2001, § 18-35)
Sec. 70-81. Due Date for license fees.
License fees imposed in sections 70-77--70-79 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 2002 and on the first date of each subsequent year.
(Amd. of 11-12-2001, § 18-36)
Secs. 18-82--18-105. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS Sec. 70-106. Occupation tax.
436
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied annually an occupation tax upon state and national banking associations, state trust companies, federal savings and loan associations, credit unions, and state building and loan associations at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of occupation tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00.
(Code 1988, § 18-221; Ord. of 5-13-1996)
Sec. 70-107. Filing of returns.
Each depository financial institution located in the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return.
(Code 1988, § 18-222; Ord. of 5-13-1996)
Sec. 70-108. Due date.
The due date of the occupation taxes levied by this article shall be April 15 of each year. (Code 1988, § 18-223; Ord. of 5-13-1996)
Secs. 70-109--70-130. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
PSYCHIC READING, FORTUNE TELLING AND RELATED PRACTICES Sec. 70-131. Occupation tax certificate required.
(a) All persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of psychic reading, fortune telling, astrology, phrenology, palmistry, clairvoyance, or related practices where a charge is made, or a donation is accepted for services; shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, make application for an occupation tax certificate in the form and manner prescribed by the ordinances of the city.
(b) The application shall include but shall not be limited to the information required on all occupation tax returns.
(Code 1988, § 14-5; Ord. of 6-11-2001; Amd. of 7-2002(a))
Sec. 70-132. Maintenance of records.
(a) It shall be the duty of all persons holding an occupation tax certificate under this article to annually file, along with the renewal application for the occupation tax certificate, the names of all employees, their home address, home telephone number and places of employment. The holder of an occupation tax certificate issued under the provisions of this article must additionally report changes in the list of employees with the names and required supplemental information for new employees to be filed with the licensing and revenue manager within ten days from the date of such change.
437
(b) It shall be the duty of any person granted a certificate under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the name and address of the persons receiving services at such establishment; the type of services administered; and the name of the person at the establishment administering the services. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city manager, or designee, or the county police. These records shall not be a public record.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any psychic, fortune teller or related establishment. It shall be the duty of the holder of an occupation tax certificate to determine the age of the person attempting to patronize an establishment and to prohibit such patronage by an underage person.
(d) Records required to be maintained under this article shall be kept for a minimum of two years beyond the expiration date of an occupation tax certificate. Records shall be made available to the city manager, or designee at the business location within ten business days of any such request.
(Code 1988, § 14-5; Ord. of 6-11-2001; Amd. of 7-2002(b))
Sec. 70-133. Enforcement.
Sworn officers of the county police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments registered under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. Such inspection shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article. This section is not intended to limit the authority of the city manager or any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the Code.
(Code 1988, § 14-5; Ord. of 6-11-2001; Amd. of 7-2002(c))
Sec. 70-134. Restrictions on owners and employees.
No occupation tax certificate shall be granted to and no person shall be employed at the business who is under the age of 18 or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate.
(Code 1988, § 14-5; Ord. of 6-11-2001; Amd. of 7-2002(d))
Sec. 70-135. Penalties.
A violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 and each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Code 1988, § 14-5; Ord. of 6-11-2001; Amd. of 7-2002(e))
Chapters 71--73
RESERVED
Chapter 74
UTILITIES*
438
* State Law References: Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific grant of constitutional authority relative to municipal utilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2), (a)(7), (a)(8); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority to acquire water and sewer systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4.
Article I. In General Sec.
Sec. 74-1. Cross-connections and backflow prevention.
Secs. 74-2--74-20. Reserved.
Article II. Prevention of Damage to Underground Utilities Sec. 74-21. Definitions.
Sec. 74-22. Prohibition.
Sec. 74-23. Filing requirements of utility operators.
Sec. 74-24. Notice of intent to excavate or demolish--Required; time; information; records. Sec. 74-25. Same --Response to notice.
Sec. 74-26. Emergency excavation or demolition.
Sec. 74-27. Precautions to avoid damage.
Sec. 74-28. Excavation or demolition damage.
Sec. 74-29. Permit not to relieve responsibility for compliance.
Sec. 74-30. Civil penalties.
Secs. 74-31--74-51. Reserved.
Article III. Fees and Charges Sec. 74-52. Gas and water deposit fees.
Sec. 74-53. Gas rates.
Sec. 74-54. Delinquent service bills.
Sec. 74-55. Lighting of pilot lights.
Secs. 74-56--74-69. Reserved.
Article IV. On-Site Sewage Management Systems Sec. 74-70. Administration and enforcement.
Sec. 74-71. Applicability.
Sec. 74-72. Definitions.
Sec. 74-73. On-site sewage management system required.
Sec. 74-74. Construction permit--Required.
Sec. 74-75. Same --Issuance or denial.
Sec. 74-76. Inspections.
Sec. 74-77. Maintenance.
Sec. 74-78. Prohibited discharge.
Sec. 74-79. Design limits on conventional septic tank systems.
Sec. 74-80. Submission of plans, specifications, and soil data.
Sec. 74-81. Soil data acceptability.
Sec. 74-82. License, bond and certificate required.
Sec. 74-83. Repair or alteration.
Sec. 74-84. Sewers.
Sec. 74-85. Septic tanks.
Sec. 74-86. Distribution boxes and dosing tanks.
Sec. 74-87. Absorption fields.
Sec. 74-88. Privies; minimum design and construction.
Sec. 74-89. Alternative and experimental on-site management systems and site modifications. Sec. 74-90. Percolation tests and test borings.
Sec. 74-91. Septage removal and disposal.
Sec. 74-92. Grease traps.
Sec. 74-93. Sewage flow.
Sec. 74-94. Subdivision and mobile home parks--Development requirements.
Sec. 74-95. Same --Water and sewage.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
439
Sec. 74-1. Cross-connections and backflow prevention.
(a) Program of inspections. A program of cross-connection and backflow inspections at the residential level is hereby enacted in order to ensure water system safety.
(b) Inspection of new water systems. The city shall have the city plumbing inspector inspect each new water system for possible cross-connections and for the proper installation of all required backflow devices. (Dual-checks at the meter, hose bibb vacuum breakers on all outside sill cocks and at least one pressure relief valve to prevent thermal expansion damage due to the system now being contained.)
(c) Installation of devices. The city plumbing inspector shall make sure that all devices are properly installed and that all work is in compliance with the Georgia and Sugar Hill plumbing codes.
(d) Certificate of plumbing code compliance required. A certificate of plumbing code compliance, signed by the licensed plumber who did the work, and the builder, must be presented to the inspection department before a certificate of occupancy will be issued.
(Code 1988, § 25-1; Ord. of 12-12-1988)
Secs. 74-2--74-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
PREVENTION OF DAMAGE TO UNDERGROUND UTILITIES*
* State Law References: Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq.
Sec. 74-21. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed:
Damage includes the substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility, penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective devices of any underground utility, and the partial or complete severance of an underground utility.
Demolish or demolition means any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, rendered, moved or removed by means of any tools, equipment or discharge of explosives.
Excavate or excavation means any operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock or
440
other materials, in or on the ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, and
including auguring, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling, grading, plowing- in, pulling- in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but not including the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes.
Mechanized equipment means equipment operated by means of mechanical power including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augurs, backhoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows and other equipment used for plowing- in or pulling- in cable or pipe.
Operator means any person who owns or operates a utility.
Person means any individual; any corporation, partnership, association, or any corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity organized under the laws of any state, or any county, any subdivision or instrumentality of a state; and any employee, agent or legal representative thereof.
Utility means any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting or distributing communication, electricity, gas, petroleum products, hazardous liquids, water, steam or sewage.
Working day means every day, except Saturday, Sunday and national and legal state holidays. (Code 1988, § 25-21)
Sec. 74-22. Prohibition.
Except as provided in section 74-26, no person may excavate in a street, highway, public space, a private easement of an operator, or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer served by such utility, or demolish a building without having first ascertained, in the manner prescribed in sections 74-24 and 74-25, the location of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition.
(Code 1988, § 25-22)
Sec. 74-23. Filing requirements of utility operators.
(a) Each operator having underground utilities in this city or in areas served by utilities of the city shall file with the city clerk a list containing the name of every city, village, township and section within the township in the county in which it has underground utilities (including those utilities that have been abandoned in place by the operator but not yet physically removed), the name of the operator and the name, title, address and telephone number of its representatives designated to receive the written and or telephonic notice of intent required by section 74-24.
(b) Changes in any of the information contained in the list filed under paragraph (a) above shall be filed by the operator with the city clerk within five working days of the change.
(Code 1988, § 25-23)
Sec. 74-24. Notice of intent to excavate or demolish--Required; time; information; records.
(a) Except as provided in section 74-2 6, before commencing any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 74-22, each person responsible for such excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephonic notice of intent to excavate or demolish at least three, but not more than ten,
441
full working days on each operator which has filed a list required by section 74-2 3 indicating that it has underground utilities located in the proposed area of excavation or demolition.
(b) The written or telephonic notice required by paragraph (a) above must contain the name, address and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent and, if the person responsible for the excavation or demolition, the starting date, anticipated duration, and type of excavation or demolition operation to be conducted, the location of the proposed excavation or demolition, and whether or not explosives are to be used.
(c) If the notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of such notification shall be maintained by the operator notified to document compliance with the requirements of this article.
(Code 1988, § 25-24)
Sec. 74-25. Same--Response to notice.
(a) Each operator or designated representative notified in accordance with section 74-24 shall, not less than two working days in advance of the proposed excavation or demolition (unless a shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or designated representative), supply, by use of maps when appropriate, the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition:
(1) The approximate location and a description of all of its underground utilities which may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition;
(2) The location and description of all utility markers indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities; and
(3) Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities, including providing adequate temporary markings indicating the approximate location of the underground utility in locations where permanent utility markers do not exist.
(b) For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utilities is defined as a strip of land at least three feet wide but not wider than the width of the utility, plus 1.5 feet on either side of the utility.
(Code 1988, § 25-25)
Sec. 74-26. Emergency excavation or demolition.
Compliance with the notice requirements of section 74-24 is not required of persons responsible for emergency excavation or demolition to ameliorate an imminent danger to life, health or property; provided, however, that such persons give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to each operator having underground utilities located in the area where such excavation or demolition is to be performed and requests emergency assistance from each operator so identified in locating and providing
442
immediate protection to its underground utilities. An imminent danger to life, health or property exists whenever there is a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health or property will result before the procedures under sections 74-24 and 74-25 can be fully complied with.
(Code 1988, § 25-26)
Sec. 74-27. Precautions to avoid damage.
In addition to the notification requirements of section 74-24, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition, operation designated in section 74-22 shall:
(1) Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground utilities in and under the construction area;
(2) Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any
mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such utility; and
(3) Provide such support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such utilities. (Code 1988, § 25-27)
Sec. 74-28. Excavation or demolition damage.
(a) Except as provided by paragraph (b) below, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designation in section 74-22 that results in any damage to any underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator of such utility of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of such utility.
(b) Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 74-22 that results in damage to an underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator, the police and fire departments, and take any other action as may be reasonably necessary to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until arrival of the operator's personnel or the police and fire departments. (Code 1988, § 25-28)
Sec. 74-29. Permit not to relieve responsibility for compliance.
A permit issued pursuant to law authorizing excavation or demolition operations shall not be deemed to relieve a person from the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this article.
(Code 1988, § 25-29)
Sec. 74-30. Civil penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty of not to exceed $1,000.00 for each such violation. Actions to recover the penalty provided for in this section shall be brought by the
443
city attorney at the request of any person in the city in which the cause, or some part thereof, arose or in which the defendant has its principal place of business or resides. All penalties recovered in any such actions shall be paid into the general fund of the city. This article does not affect any civil remedies for personal injury or property damage, except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article.
(Code 1988, § 25-30)
Secs. 74-31--74-51. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
GAS UTILITY
Sec. 74-52 Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings:
Homeowner(s) means any natural person who owns a parcel of land, occupies or uses the land for residential purposes, is the recipient of the gas utility bill and makes the payment of said bill. The City shall require proof of ownership in the form of a deed recorded in the records of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
Renter(s) means any natural person, corporation, partnership, company or legal entity that resides in or occupies a property owned by another natural person, corporation, partnership, company or legal entity.
Commercial customer means any property occupied or used by any natural person, corporation, partnership, company, homeowners’ association or legal entity for a non-residential purpose.
Any other words or phrases not specifically defined herein shall have the common, ordinary, dictionary meaning.
Section 74-53. Gas deposit fees.
(a) The minimum schedule of deposit fees for connection to the city’s gas system shall be as follows: Gas Deposit for gas service shall be $150.00.
(b) Homeowners shall be eligible for refund of the required gas deposit after eighteen (18) months of satisfactory payments if during that period:
(1) They do not have more than three (3) delinquent payments;
(2) They do not have more than one (1) payment returned for insufficient (non-sufficient) funds:
(3) They have not been locked off for non-payment.
If the homeowner has failed to comply with (1) or (2) above, the homeowner shall begin another eighteen (18) month period. If the homeowner has failed to comply with (3)
444
above, the homeowner shall not be eligible for refund of the gas deposit until their account is terminated. If the above terms are complied with, the gas deposit refund may be applied to the customer’s utility account or the city may issue and mail a refund check.
(c) Renters shall not be eligible for a gas deposit refund unless they move out of the City. The gas deposit will be applied to the renter’s final billing, and if a credit remains after application of the gas deposit to the final bill, the City will mail a refund check for the credit balance.
(d) Commercial customers shall not be eligible for a gas deposit refund until the service is terminated and all outstanding balances have been paid. The deposit for a commercial customer may be applied toward the final billing statement or any outstanding balances of said customer.
January 17, 2013
Section 74-54. Gas rates.
(a) All customers shall be charged a base rate of $13.00 per month regardless of the amount of natural gas consumed by the customer plus any applicable state and local taxes.
(b) The rate to be charged to the customer per MCF shall be calculated by averaging the amount per MCF shown on the Billing Rate Notice from the Municipal Gas Authority of Georgia to the city for the preceding month with the amount per MCF shown on the Billing Rate Notice from the Municipal Gas Authority of Georgia to the City for the current month and adding $1.00 per MCF to that average rate. Example:
(1) Rate for preceding month from Billing Rate Notice: $8.00 per MCF;
(2) Rate for current month from Billing Rate Notice: $12.00 per MCF;
(3) Rate for current month for customer: $8.00 + $12.00 ?2 = $10.00 per MCF + $1.00 per MCF = $11.00 per MCF plus base rate of $13.00 and any applicable state and local taxes.
(c) Each year the City Council shall set as part of the City’s Annual Budget an anticipated revenue figure for its gas system. This anticipated revenue figure shall be sufficient to cover that year’s anticipated expenses for the gas system and transfers to the general fund. Once revenue from the gas system has reached the anticipated revenue figure, the rate to calculate the monthly gas bill shall be altered for the remainder of that calendar year. The formula shall be altered in the following manner: reduce the $1.00 per MCF charge to $0.50 (fifty cents) per MCF. Example:
(1) Anticipated Revenue: $1,000,000.00;
(2) Revenue reached as of October 1: $1,000,000.00 and actual expenditures have not exceeded the budgeted amount;
(3) New gas formula for the months of November and December:
Preceding month: $8.00 per MCF
Current month: $12.00 per MCF
Rate of current month: $8.00 + $12.00 ?2 = $10.00 per MCF +
$0.50 per MCF = $10.50 per MCF plus base rate of $13.00 and
any applicable state and local taxes.
445
(d) The rate charged to customers residing inside the municipal boundaries of the city and to customers residing outside of the municipal boundaries of the city shall be the same. This section shall not change or have any effect on any other administrative or operational fees presently charged by the City in connection with natural gas consumption including, but not limited to, cut off fees, reconnection fees, deposits or other such charges.
Section 74-55. Delinquent service bills.
(a) Past Due. Any utility account for which payment in full has not been received by the City on or before the due date listed on said account’s billing statement shall be defined as “past due”.
(b) Late fees. All past due accounts shall be assessed a late fee of ten percent (10%) of the account’s total due balance.
(c) Past due/disconnect notice. Any utility account which has a past due status is subject to disconnect as outlined in this article and as printed on utility billing statements. The City may, at its discretion, post a disconnect notice, via a door hanger, at least 24 hours prior to disconnection of any utility services. The City shall not be required to provide any notice to utility customers prior to disconnecting utility service.
(d) Disconnection. Any customer having a past due account shall have their utilities disconnected if alternate arrangements have not been made with the City Clerk or other utility office personnel. If any customer utilizing the payment plan fails to comply with it, their utilities will be disconnected without notice and not reinstated until all due balances are received by the City.
(e) Utility service reinstatement. Any customer, whose utilities have been disconnected, under this section, may have their utility service reinstated after paying a $50.00 reconnection fee and all outstanding account balances. In order to have utility service reinstated, the customer shall arrange an appointment, between 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, excluding City holidays, at which time a person over the age of 18 must be present at the home. If the customer cannot arrange an appointment during the hours stated above, an outside-of-business-hours fee in an additional amount of $35.00 shall be charged to the customer.
Section 74-56. Lighting of pilot lights.
The City shall provide for the lighting of pilot lights, by qualified gas personnel, for all households whose gas service is provided by the City. This service shall be provided at no cost to the gas customer, provided that the applicable appliance has been correctly installed according to the manufacturer’s installation requirements and provided that the appliance, and its installation, meets or exceeds all ordinances and regulations applicable to the household. This service shall not be provided free of charge to customers who voluntarily disconnect their service during seasonal periods, unless said customer is either handicapped, disabled or is over the age of sixty-five (65). In all other cases, normal service reconnect charges will apply.
Section 74-57. Maintenance of metering devices.
Owners and lessees who are customers of the City of Sugar Hill Gas Utility shall keep meters for the gas utility clear from obstruction so that the meter may easily be read by city employees. Shrubs, plants and other landscaping shall be no closer than two (2) feet from a gas utility meter and a clear method of access shall be
446
provided for City employees to read the meter. Any animal maintained on the property shall be kept within a fenced enclosure at least two (2) feet from the gas utility meter or shall be secured so that the animal is not within ten (10) feet of any gas utility meter. If any gas utility meter is obstructed from access to a City employee, the City shall notify the property owner or lessee and demand that the obstruction be removed. The owner or lessee shall within seven (7) days of the date appearing on the notice remove any such obstruction so that the meter may be read. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the obstruction within seven (7) days, the City shall relocate the meter to a location outside of the obstruction. The entire cost of such relocation shall be billed to the owner or lessee as part of their regular utility bill.
Section 74-58. Meter/tampering.
The gas meter and all gas utility lines, pipes or equipment existing or installed, which make up the City’s gas utility system, through the point of the customer’s meter shall be the property of the City and shall be subject to reasonable regulation by the City. All lines, pipes and equipment from the customer’s meter throughout the remainder of their property shall be the responsibility of the customer. Any customer, person, or individual found cutting off, disconnecting or tampering with a gas utility meter, line, pipe or equipment that is the property of the City shall be subject to a tampering fee of $300.00
(Code Amd. 7-14-08)
Secs. 74-59. Identity Theft Prevention Program.
(a) Findings. The Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”) requires every utility, including public gas systems, to implement an Identity Theft Prevention Program (“ITPP”). The FTC requirement and regulation is necessary because of Section 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (“FACT Act”). The FTC has set forth the ITPP requirement in 16 C.F.R. § 681.2. Identify theft is defined as a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. The City of Sugar Hill (“City”) adopts the program set forth in this Section to comply with FTC rules and regulations. In drafting its ITPP, the City has considered: (1) the methods it provides to open its accounts; (2) the methods it provides to access its accounts; and (3) its previous experiences with identity theft. Based on these considerations, the governing authority of the City hereby determines that the City is a low to moderate risk entity and as a result develops and implements the streamlined ITPP set forth in this Section. Further, the City determines that the only covered accounts offered by the City are those under its utilities (gas, stormwater, etc.).
(b) Red Flags. The FTC regulations identify numerous red flags that must be considered in adopting an ITPP. The FTC has defined a red flag as a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. The City identifies the following red flags from the examples provided in the regulations of the FTC:
(1) Notifications from Consumer Reporting Agencies. The City does not request, receive, obtain or maintain information about its utility customers from any Consumer Reporting Agency.
(2) Suspicious documents. Possible red flags include:
i) presentation of documents appearing to be altered or forged;
ii) presentation of photographs or physical descriptions that are not consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer;
iii) presentation of other documentation that is not consistent with the information provided when the account was opened or existing customer information;
447
iv) presentation of information that is not consistent with the account application; or
v) presentation of an application that appears to have been altered, forged, destroyed, or reassembled.
(3) Suspicious personal identifying information. Possible red flags include:
i) personal identifying information is being provided by the customer that is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer or is not consistent with the customer’s account application;
ii) personal identifying information is associated with known fraudulent activity;
iii) the social security number (if required or obtained) is the same as that submitted by another customer;
iv) the telephone number or address is the same as that submitted by another customer;
v) the applicant failed to provide all personal identifying information requested on the application; or
vi) the applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report.
(4) Unusual use of or suspicious activity related to an account. Possible red flags include:
i) a change of address for an account followed by a request to change the account holder’s name;
ii) a change of address for an account followed by a request to add new or additional authorized users or representatives;
iii) an account is not being used in a way that is consistent with prior use (such as late or no payments when the account has been timely in the past);
iv) a new account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraudulent activity (such as customer fails to make the first payment or makes the first payment but no subsequent payments);
v) mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as undeliverable;
vi) the City receives notice that a customer is not receiving his paper statements; or
vii) the City receives notice of unauthorized activity on the account.
(5) Notice regarding possible identity theft. Possible red flags include:
i) notice from a customer, an identity theft victim, law enforcement personnel or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing related to utility accounts.
(c) Proof of Identity. Any person or entity opening a utility account shall provide a complete application and provide satisfactory evidence of their identity and/or address. Said proof may include but not be limited to: a valid driver’s license; passport, state, federal, employer, or school issued identification card, or military identification card. The required application must be completed in its entirety and must be signed in order to establish a utility account.
(d) Confidentiality of Applications and Account Information. All personal information, personal identifying information, account applications and account information collected and maintained by the City shall be a confidential record of the City and shall not be subject to disclosure unless otherwise allowed by this policy or required by State or Federal Law. Additionally, any employee with access to utility customers’ personal identifying information, account applications or account information shall be required to execute and abide by the Confidentiality and Nondisclosure
448
Policy of the City.
(e) Access to utility account and personal identifying information. Access to utility account information shall be limited to employees that provide customer service or technical support to the City’s utilities. Any computer that has access to utility customer account or personal identifying information shall be password protected and all computer screens shall lock after no more than fifteen (15) minutes of inactivity. Personal identifying information shall only be accessed by employees that provide customer service or technical support to the City’s utilities or disclosed to the Clerk of Court for the Municipal Court of the City of Sugar Hill. However, the Clerk of Court shall not have access to social security numbers and a customer’s social security number shall not be disclosed to the Clerk of Court. All paper and non-electronic based utility account or customer personal identifying information shall be stored and maintained in a locked room or cabinet and access shall only be granted by the Compliance Officer or his/her designee.
(f) Credit Card Transactions. All internet or telephone credit card payments shall only be processed through a third party service provider which certifies that it has an identity theft prevention program operating and in place. Credit card payments accepted in person shall require a reasonable connection between the person or entity billed for the utility services and the credit cad owner.
(g) Suspicious Transactions. Suspicious transactions include but are not limited to the presentation of incomplete applications; unsigned applications; payment by someone other than the person named on the utility account; presentation of inconsistent signatures, addresses or identification. Suspicious transactions shall not be processed and shall be immediately referred to the Compliance Officer.
(h) Notification of Law Enforcement. The Compliance Officer shall use his/her discretion on whether to report suspicious transactions to the police department or other appropriate law enforcement.
(i) Third Party Service Providers. All transactions processed through a third party service provider shall be permitted only if the service provider certifies that it has complied with the FTC regulations and has in place a consumer identity theft prevention program.
(j) Compliance Officer and Training. The Compliance Officer for this ITPP and Section shall be the City Clerk or his/her designee. The Compliance Officer shall conduct training of all city employees that transact business with customers of the City’s utilities. The Compliance Officer shall periodically review this program and recommend any necessary updates to the City Council.
(k) Annual Report. An annual report, as required by FTC regulations, shall be provided by the Compliance Officer to the City Manager. The contents of the annual report shall address and/or evaluate at least the following:
(1) the effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the City in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of utility accounts and with respect to access to existing utility accounts:
(2) service provider arrangements;
(3) incidents involving identity theft with utility accounts and the City’s response;
(4) changes in methods of identity theft and the prevention of identity theft;
and
449
(5) recommendations for changes to the City’s ITPP.
Secs. 74-60---74-69. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS Sec. 74-70. Administration and enforcement.
The administration and enforcement of this article shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. ch. 3 1-5. (Code 1988, § 25-70; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 16)
Sec. 74-71. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall have application except in the following cases:
(1) To any facility or system under the jurisdiction of and regulated by the Department of Natural Resources or its successor, under the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the Solid Waste Management Act or their successors.
(2) To any public or community sewage treatment system. (Code 1988, § 25-71; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 1)
Sec. 74-72. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning as indicated beside each listing:
Absorption field means a configuration of absorption trenches installed in a portion of land and used for the absorption and final treatment of sewage.
Absorption line means a pipe line of perforated pipe or open-joint drain pipe laid in an absorption trench to serve as a conduit for sewage effluent.
Absorption trench means an excavation in which an absorption line is laid.
Absorption trench bottom area means the total bottom area of all absorption trenches in an absorption field, expressed in square feet.
Aggregate means washed gravel or washed crushed stone, meeting Georgia Department of Transportation size specifications for numbers 57, 56, or 5 stone, i.e. one-half inch to 1 1/2 inches in diameter, or other material approved by the county board of health, for use in absorption fields.
Alternative on-site sewage management system means any on-site sewage management system which has proven reliability and performance in field use, but which differs in design or operation from the conventional septic tank system or privy.
Approved or Approval means accepted or accepted by the county board of health, in accordance with applicable specifications stated herein, or criteria developed or accepted by the department.
450
Bedroom means any room that could be expected to be used for sleeping purposes, furnished with a closet and accessible to a bathroom without going through another room primarily used for sleeping purposes.
Black water means wastewater generated by water closets, urinals, bidets, kitchen sinks and garbage disposals.
Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of a building drainage system inside the walls of a building, which receives the discharge from soil, waste or other drainage systems and conveys the discharge to the building sewer.
Building sewer means that part of the horizontal piping of a building drainage system beyond the building drain which receives the discharge from the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, on-site sewage management system, or other disposal.
Central on-site sewage management system means an on-site sewage management system serving more than one building, business, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation.
Contractor means any person who shall contract for the installation, construction, repair, alteration, enlargement, emptying or pumping out of any on- site sewage management system.
Conventional septic tank system means and includes any septic tank, absorption field and all associated devices and appurtenances intended to be used for disposal of sewage by soil absorption, but does not include alternative or experimental systems.
County board of health means the Gwinnett County Board of Health established by the Georgia Health Code, (Georgia Law 1964, pages 499, 512 through 518, as amended).
Department means the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia.
Distribution box means a watertight structure which receives sewage effluent from septic tank, dosing tank, or other sewage retention device and distributes it in equal portions to two or more absorption lines.
Dosing tank means a watertight tank, located after a septic tank or other sewage retention device, to
receive and retain sewage effluent, and so equipped as to discharge sewage effluent intermittently to a distribution box or other distribution device, either by pump or by siphon.
Experimental on-site sewage management system means any on-site sewage management system proposed for testing and observation, and approved for such purpose by the county board of health, but which has not been fully proven under field use.
Floodplain means a generally flat plain or depression susceptible to being flooded from any source, including small and intermittent tidal action.
Gray water means wastewater generated by water-using fixtures and appliances, excluding water closets, urinals, bidets, kitchen sinks, and garbage disposals.
Grease trap means a device in which the grease content of sewage is intercepted and congealed, and from which grease may be skimmed or otherwise removed for proper disposal.
451
Individual water supply system means a system of piping, pumps, tanks, or other facilities, utilizing groundwater to supply a single-family dwelling.
Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer or ownership, or for development, or both, and shall not include any part of the right-of-way of a street or road.
Manual for on-site sewage management systems means the technical handbook currently adopted and periodically updated which is used by the department in the implementation of this article as is available or inspection at the appropriate State Office in Atlanta or at local health departments. Such manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems is intended as a guide and its provisions are herein adopted unless inconsistent with other provisions of law or regulation and is hereafter referred to as the "manual" or "Manual for On-Site Sewage Management systems."
Mobile home park means a parcel of land developed for subsequent rental or lease for placement of two or more mobile homes.
On-site sewage management system means a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system, whether serving single or multiple building, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. Included are conventional septic tank systems that may be approved by the county board of health.
Percolation coeficient means the ratio of trench bottom area to percolation time; it is expressed as the allowable rate of sewage application in gallons per square foot per day.
Percolation rate means the time, expressed in minutes per inch, required for water to seep into saturated- soil at a constant rate.
Percolation test means the method used to measure the percolation rate of water into soil, as described on the soil data sheet available at the county health department and as described in the department's current manual.
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, or association and may extend and be applied to bodies, political and corporate.
Physical development means development which included, but is not limited to site preparation, erection of a structure, road construction, well construction, or installation of on-site sewage management systems.
Private Wastewater System means a wastewater system used or designed to be used for the collection and treatment of sewage that is not a Public or community sewage treatment system and is beyond the means of a Conventional septic tank system.
Privy means a structure (and necessary appurtenances) used for the sanitary disposal or storage of human waste without the aid of water carriage; the term does not include chemical, composting, portable, or incinerator toilets.
Public or community sewage treatment systems means any sewage treatment system, including pipe lines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains and all other construction, devices, and appliances appurtenant thereto,
452
designed for treating or conducting sewage for treatment and disposal into lakes, streams or other bodies of surface water.
Public water systems means a system for the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections, or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals, at least 60 days out of the year.
Septage means a waste that is a fluid mixture of partially treated or untreated sewage solids, liquids and sludge of human or domestic waste, present in or pumped from septic tanks, malfunctioning on- site sewage management systems, grease traps or privies.
Septic tank means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to effect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system.
Sewage means and includes human excreta, all water carried wastes, and liquid household waste from residence or commercial and industrial establishments.
Soil scientist means a person who holds at least a Bachelor of Science degree with a Major in Agronomy or related field, has five years or more experience in soil classification and mapping and use of soil genesis, morphology and classification technology and is an expert at identifying soil features and interpreting their influence on its uses.
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into five or more lots, building sites, mobile home sites, or other divisions, resulting in any single lot of less than three acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or legacy, and includes resubdivision and where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition:
(1) The combination or recombination of previously platted lots or portions thereof where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots conform to the standards of these rules.
(2) The division of land into parcels, all of which are three acres or more in size, with a minimum width of 150 feet for a distance sufficient to provide an adequate area for the placement of structures and improvements including walls and approved on-site sewage management systems.
Well means an excavation or opening into the ground by which groundwater is sought or obtained. (Code 1988, § 25-72; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 2)
Sec. 74-73. On-site sewage management system required.
If a public or community sewage treatment system is not available, an approved on-site sewage management system shall be utilized until such system malfunctions, at which time, connection to a public or community sewage treatment system, if then available, is required. Where public or community sewage treatment systems are not available, the owner, lessee or agent thereof of every building, residence or property,
designed, used or intended to be used for human occupancy or congregation, shall provide an approved on-site sewage management system sufficient for persons normally expected to use or frequent the building, residence or
453
other property for two hours or more. Connection shall be made to a public or community sewage treatment system when such system is available within 200 feet of the property line, or available in a public right-of-way abutting the property. Where a public or community sewage treatment system is to be constructed, or an
existing public or community sewer is to be used, the building sewer shall be installed so that it will insure gravity flow at a self-cleaning velocity throughout. Private wastewater systems, as defined herein, are not allowed.
(Code 1988, § 25-73; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3(1))
Sec. 74-74. Construction permit--Required.
No person may begin the physical development of a lot or structure thereon where an on-site sewage management system will be utilized, nor install a new on-site sewage management system without having first applied for and obtained from the county board of health, a construction permit for the installation.
(1) Application for such construction permit shall be made in writing, on forms provided by the county board of health. The application shall include:
a. Name and address of the owner and the applicant, if other than the owner, location of property.
b. Plans and specifications including location and design of the proposed on-site sewage management system.
c. Nature of the facility to be served.
d. Location of all water supplies, on or off the lot, which will bear upon the location of the on-site sewage management system.
e. Number of bedrooms in the dwelling, or the number of persons to be served in other types of establishments, or other sewage flow or water usage data.
f. Soil characteristics, including soil types and capabilities, frequency and evaluation of seasonal high groundwater tables, occurrence or rock, and other impervious strata.
g. Signature of owner or agent applying for permit.
(2) However, part of the information required for the application may be waived, provided the county board of health deems that information is available from previously submitted subdivision or mobile home park data, or from other sources, sufficient to make an adequate appraisal of the acceptability of the proposed lot for on-site sewage management system installation.
(Code 1988, § 25-74; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3(2))
Sec. 74-75. Same--Issuance or denial.
(a) On-site sewage management system construction permits for conventional septic tank systems shall be issued only after a site inspection by the county board of health, shows favorable findings relative to percolation rates, soil characteristics, groundwater, rock, and any other factors which would affect the acceptability of the lot. For construction of conventional septic tank systems, the
454
suitability of the lot must be demonstrated through acceptable soil characteristics and/or percolation rates of less than 90 min/inch; freedom from groundwater interference or other potential for contamination of groundwater by sewage; absence of impervious strata below the level of the absorption field and absence of undesirable topographic characteristics and other factor which singly, or in combination, affect the acceptability of the lot. Lot suitability and approval for other types of on-site sewage management systems is to be determined by criteria established by the department's manual. The county board of health may deny or revoke an on-site sewage management system construction permit upon finding the lot unsuitable or for failure of the applicant to comply with the provision of these rules. Such denial shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Health Code. On-site sewage management construction permits shall remain valid for not more than 12 months from the date of issue.
(b) Issuance of a construction permit for an on-site management system, and subsequent approval of same by representatives of the county board of health shall not be construed as a guarantee that such systems will function satisfactorily for a given period of time; furthermore, said representation does not, by any action taken in effecting compliance with these rules, assume any liability for damages which are caused, or which may be caused, by the malfunction of such system.
(Code 1988, § 25-75; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3(3))
Sec. 74-76. Inspections.
(a) No person may cover or use a new on-site sewage management system until final inspection has been made by the county board of health to determine compliance with the provisions of the construction permit issued under section 290-5-26-03 (3), and written approval has been issued by the county board of health.
(b) A copy of the final inspection of an on- site sewage management system shall be provided to the owner, builder, developer or agent, whichever is appropriate.
(c) Any grading, filling, or other landscaping or construction activities on the lot subsequent to final inspection by the county board of health which may adversely affect the on-site sewage management system shall render the approval void.
(Code 1988, § 25-76; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3(4))
Sec. 74-77. Maintenance.
(a) It is the property owner's responsibility to maintain and operate the on-site sewage management system in a safe and sanitary manner so as not to constitute a public health hazard or nuisance.
(b) Where an on-site sewage management system is proposed to serve facilities under separate ownership, a contract to insure proper operation and maintenance of the system, signed by all owners, shall exist as a precondition to the issuance of a permit for the construction of the on- site sewage management system.
(Code 1988, § 25-77; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3(5))
Sec. 74-78. Prohibited discharge.
No person shall allow the unapproved discharge or spillage of sewage, nor shall an on-site sewage
455
management system be used or maintained in such a manner that will allow the seepage or discharge of effluent from such system to the ground surface, to a water course, drainage ditch, open trench, canal, storm drain or storm groundwater or body of water.
(Code 1988, § 25-78; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3(6))
Sec. 74-79. Design limits on conventional septic tank systems.
To provide for the maintenance of sanitary conditions through the proper functioning of a conventional septic tank system for a reasonable period of time, no such system may be installed, constructed, or used,
having a septic tank design capacity of less than 750 gallons or more than 10,000 gallons, or where the total length of absorption trenches required would exceed 3,000 linear feet, or where the total absorption trench bottom area required would exceed 9,000 square feet.
(Code 1988, § 25-79; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3(7))
Sec. 74-80. Submission of plans, specifications, and soil data.
Plans, specifications, soil data and, if required, percolation test data, submitted to the county board of health for the purpose of obtaining a construction permit to install an on-site sewage management system to serve a commercial, industrial or institutional facility, which will produce a sewage flow in excess of 2,000 gallons per day, a travel trailer and/or mobile home park, or multiple-family dwelling of five or more family units shall bear the registration number and signature of a registered professional engineer, certified and registered under the laws of this state. The county board of health may accept plans, specifications, soil data, and percolation test data for commercial, industrial, or institutional facilities with sewage flows of 2,000 gallons or less per day and for single- family and multiple-family dwellings having not more than four family units, when prepared in accordance with these rules, from any person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the county board of health that they have sufficient knowledge of on-site sewage management system design, soil evaluation, and of conducting percolation tests.
(Code 1988, § 25-80; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3(8))
Sec. 74-81. Soil data acceptability.
Soil data deemed to be acceptable by the county board of health shall include information on soil characteristics obtained from published soil surveys and/or unpublished reports and field data developed by the Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture, or from special investigations conducted by a soil scientist.
(Code 1988, § 25-81; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3(9))
Sec. 74-82. License, bond and certificate required.
All persons shall be required before installing, repairing, altering or pumping septic tanks in the city, to possess a valid business license as issued by the license department, a bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), and a valid certificate of qualifications. Persons engaged in this type of business and qualified as a septic tank contractor shall be registered at the health department.
(Code 1988, § 25-82; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3(10))
Sec. 74-83. Repair or alteration.
(a) Permit required. No person may begin the repair or alteration of an existing on- site sewage management system without having first applied for and obtained from the county board of
456
health, a construction permit for the installation. Application for such construction permit shall be made in writing, on forms provided by the county board of health. The application shall include:
(1) Name and address of the owner and location of the property.
(2) Plans and specifications including location of existing system and design of proposed
repair.
(3) Signature of owner applying for permit.
(4) Alteration for swimming pool installation.
(5) Application, site review, consultation, approval and/or denial of proposed alteration shall be between the owner and the county board of health.
(6) Disruption of an existing on- site sewage management system shall be minimal, and all disrupted line replaced.
(7) An area for replacement of 100 percent of the total field line shall be provided when all alterations for the swimming pool are completed.
(Code 1988, § 25-83; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 3(11))
Sec. 74-84. Sewers.
(a) Size. Sewers connecting component parts of on-site sewage management system shall be of sufficient size to serve anticipated flow conditions.
(b) Materials. All pipe or tile and fittings used in sewers and absorption fields shall meet nationally recognized standards for their designated use, such as standards published by the American Society for Testing and Materials or the National Sanitation Foundation, and approved by the county board of health for use in on-site sewage management systems. Sewers under driveways or similar areas of load or impact shall be of material capable of withstanding anticipated loads or installed so as to provide protection from crushing.
(c) Construction. Sewers, other than perforated pipe or drain tile used in absorption fields, shall be laid with sealed, watertight, root-resistant joints. Such sewers shall be laid on a firm foundation and shall not be subject to settling, and shall be installed on a grade that will insure a self-cleaning velocity. Where on-site sewage management systems are used, and where installation of building drains and building sewers is not covered by duly adopted local plumbing codes, or in the absence of a local plumbing code and/or plumbing inspections, the county board of health shall verify the adequacy and acceptability of all or any portion of the building sewer or the building drain.
(Code 1988, § 25-84; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 4)
Sec. 74-85. Septic tanks.
(a) Minimum design and construction. Septic tanks shall be designed and constructed to equal or exceed minimum design and construction criteria established by the department as published in
457
the current manual for on-site sewage management systems. Any person seeking approval of septic tanks to be used in on-site sewage management system after the effective date of these rules, shall submit detailed plans and specifications for tank manufacture and such other information as may be required by the county board of health. Manufacturers and suppliers shall be subject to periodic inspection, and approved by the county board of health.
(b) Location. No septic tank shall be installed less than 50 feet from existing or proposed wells/springs, or suction water lines, and tanks shall be located downgrade from wells/or springs if physically possible; less than 25 feet from lakes, ponds, streams, watercourses or sinkholes; less than ten feet from pressure water supply lines, or less than ten feet from a property line. No septic tank shall be installed less than 15 feet from a drainage ditch or embankment. Septic tanks shall be installed so as to provide ready access for necessary maintenance. Normally the desired distance a septic tank should be located from a building foundation is at least ten feet but if conditions permit, lesser distances may be allowed by the county board of health. The county board of health, after site inspection, may require greater separation distances than cited herein due to unusual conditions of topography, or other site configuration; subsurface soil characteristics and/or groundwater interference. Where individual water supplies are used, septic tanks shall not be less than 25 feet from a property line.
(c) Capacity. The liquid capacity of septic tanks for single-family dwellings shall not be less than
750 gallons for one or two bedrooms; 900 gallons for three bedrooms; 1,000 gallons for four bedrooms and 250 additional gallons for each bedroom over four. The liquid capacity of septic tanks in on-site sewage management systems for nonresidential usage shall be based on the anticipated daily sewage flow from the facility served, but in no case shall be less than 750 gallons. Septic tank capacity shall be increased by 50 percent where garbage grinders are to be used.
(d) Compartmented tanks. Compartmented tanks are permissible upon approval by the county board of health.
(e) Tanks in series. The county board of health may approve the installation of two septic tanks placed in series provided that the capacity of the first tank is at least 750 gallons and at least equal to the capacity of the second tank. When tanks in series are used, they shall be connected with a sealed sewer line, and all sewage shall initially enter the first tank.
(f) Foundation and backfill. Septic tanks shall be constructed or installed level, on a foundation that will prevent settling; backfill shall be placed so that a stable fill results and undue strain on the tank is avoided. Earth backfill shall be free of voids, large stones, stumps, broken masonry, or other such materials. A minimum earth cover of six inches over the tank is recommended. All openings and manholes shall be constructed so as to prevent the entrance of surface water.
(Code 1988, § 25-85; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 5)
Sec. 74-86. Distribution boxes and dosing tanks.
(a) Minimum design and construction boxes. Distribution boxes shall be designed and constructed in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established in the department's current manual and section 74-87(d)(1). Approval procedures shall follow the requirements as set forth under section 74-85(a).
458
(b) Minimum design and construction of dosing tanks. Where required, dosing tanks shall be designed, constructed, and installed in accordance with the department's current manual. (Code 1988, § 25-86; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 6)
Sec. 74-87. Absorption fields.
(a) Area computation. Absorption trench bottom area shall be based upon the anticipated volume of treated sewage and upon the characteristics of the soil in which absorption fields are to be located as specified in the current On-Site Sewage Management System Manual. Soil characteristics and other related data, including percolation tests, may be required by the county board of health.
(b) Location. No absorption field shall be constructed less than 100 feet from existing or proposed wells or springs; less than ten feet from water supply lines; less than ten feet from building foundations and property lines; less than 15 feet from an embankment nor less than 50 feet from the normal water level of any impoundment, tributary, stream, or other body of water. If it becomes necessary for the absorption field to be crossed by water supply line, the water supply line within ten feet of the absorption field shall be at least 12 inches above the top of the aggregate layer of the absorption line and shall be encased in a single length of water pipe. No absorption field shall be installed in areas where groundwater, soil characteristics or adverse geological formation may interfere with the absorption of sewage effluent. Where individual water supplies are used, absorption fields shall not be less than 50 feet from a property line. No part of the on-site sewage management system other than sealed pipe with water tight joint shall be covered by buildings, pavements, or used for parking automobiles or for vehicular traffic. There shall be available sufficient unobstructed land area, available by gravity flow, meeting all requirements for the installation of an on-site sewage management system to provide for the complete replacement of the absorption field.
(c) Minimum design and construction for conventional septic tank systems. Absorption lines and absorption trench bottoms shall be true to grade and trenches shall not be less than 25 inches in depth, and shall have not less than 12 inches of earth cover. Maximum length of absorption trench laterals for distribution box systems shall be 100 feet; laterals shall be equal in length and spaced not less than eight feet apart, center to center. Absorption trenches shall be 36 inches wide. The minimum length for any on site sewage management system absorption field shall be 200 feet.
(d) Field layout methods for conventional septic tank systems. Absorption fields shall be planned and installed in accordance with one of the following methods:
(1) Distribution box method. On level or sloping topography, the distribution box method may be used, and shall be required when dosing tanks are used. A firm earthen or concrete foundation for distribution boxes extending at least 12 inches beyond the walls of the box shall be provided to ensure against tilting of the distribution box. Extreme care should be exercised in backfilling around and over the distribution box. The top of the distribution box shall have a minimum earth cover of 6 inches, but no more than 24 inches unless provisions are made for ready access to the distribution box. The sewer from the septic tank or dosing tank shall enter the distribution box and terminate inside the distribution box with an elbow turned downward to form a submerged outlet at normal water level, or a baffle may be use, providing the same function is accomplished. Absorption lines of equal lengths shall be connected to distribution box outlets by independent sewers. Absorption trenches may be
459
installed at the same elevation or at different elevations, but all sewers leading from the distribution box outlet to the absorption lines shall be installed at the same elevation and shall be level for two feet and shall be sealed watertight. Beginning two feet from the distribution box, the grade of such sealed lines shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot. Absorption lines shall be laid on a uniform grade of not less than two inches nor more than four inches per 100 feet with the minimum of two inches recommended. An increased number of shorter trenches is recommended rather than the use of fewer, longer trenches.
(2) Level field method. On level or slightly sloping topography, the level field method may be used. When this method is used, the absorption field shall be installed level, with all absorption lines interconnected to form a continuous system. A standard tee fitting shall be used to interconnect the absorption lines.
(3) Serial distribution method. On more severely sloping topography, the serial distribution method may be used. When this method is used, level absorption trenches shall be constructed along land contours. The sewer from the septic tank shall enter the uppermost absorption lines and terminate at any point in the lines so that all sewage from the septic tank is discharged into the first line. Adjacent absorption lines shall be successively connected by means of overflow sewers constructed at any point along the line in such a manner that each trench is filled with effluent to the full depth of aggregate before the effluent flows through the overflow sewer to the next trench. The invert of the first overflow sewer must be at least four inches lower than the invert of the septic tank outlet. At the point where an overflow sewer leaves an absorption trench, the excavation for the overflow sewer shall be dug no deeper than the top of the aggregate in the absorption trench, so that an undisturbed block of earth will remain in place for the full depth of the aggregate. Overflow sewers connecting absorption trenches shall be laid on undisturbed earth.
(Code 1988, § 25-87)
Sec. 74-88. Privies; minimum design and construction.
Privies shall be designed and constructed in accordance with minimum sign and construction criteria established by the current on-site sewage management system manual. (Code 1988, § 25-88)
Sec. 74-89. Alternative and experimental on-site management systems and site modifications.
(a) Generally. The department recognizes that on-site sewage management systems employing solids retention and on-site soil absorption of sewage effluent, if designed properly and installed in a suitable soil are usually ecologically safe and do adequately protect the public health. The department further recognizes that substantial portions of the state's undeveloped land area are marginally suitable or totally unsuitable for conventional septic tank systems, and that continued installation of such systems will have a detrimental effect on the public health. Where appropriate, and after thorough assessment of alternatives, the county board of health will consider alternative on-site sewage management systems and/or modification for area with soils which may have only marginal suitability in their present condition, including community- managed on-site sewage management systems and combinations of public or community sewage treatment systems and on-site sewage management systems. When considering proposals for alternative on-site sewage management systems, priority shall be given to those situations where
460
the alternative system will resolve an existing sewage management problem. Any person or community desiring to install an alternative on-site sewage management system shall submit the following information to the county board of health.
(1) Plans and specifications, along with any engineering, laboratory, or field data required.
(2) Information as required on the application for an individual on-site sewage management system construction permit, and any additional information as may be required by the county board of health. If the proposal for the system is approved, the person making application will be informed by the county board of health of any requirements for maintenance, and any monitoring procedures deemed necessary by the county board of health. Reduction of water usage by the installation of water conserving fixtures and devices should be considered in overall strategy.
(b) Experimental on-site sewage management systems. The department may consider proposals for the use of experimental on-site sewage management systems. Acceptance or denial of such proposals shall depend on many site and system specific-factors, including a primary consideration that the remainder of the site is suitable for a conventional septic tank system in the event of failure of the experimental system.
(c) Site modifications. Approval of certain lots determined to be unsuitable for conventional septic tank systems, may be reconsidered if appropriate site modifications are carried out to eliminate or significantly ameliorate unfavorable site characteristics. Modifications may include surface or subsurface drainage systems, filling, grading, etc. Any person desiring to modify a lot for the purpose of obtaining a construction permit for installation of an on-site sewage management system shall submit for approval, detailed plans showing the type and extent of modification. The county board of health may require any additional information or clarification needed for formulating a proper decision on the proposed modifications. No modifications shall be carried out prior to the approval and issuance of a construction permit.
(Code 1988, § 25-89)
Sec. 74-90. Percolation tests and test borings.
(a) Percolation tests. If conducted, percolation tests shall not be considered presumptive or conclusive evidence as to the suitability of a given lot for the use of on-site sewage management systems. Such test shall be considered and analyzed as one of many criteria in determining soil suitability. Acceptable data on soil characteristics, including the location of rock strata and water table evaluations, will be considered of primary importance. Percolation tests, if conducted will be used to augment or supplement the soils data. It should be further understood that percolation tests conducted during dry weather periods in areas that commonly experience high seasonal water table elevation during wet periods of the year will often exhibit very
good percolation rates, thus inaccurately portraying the absorptive capacity of the soil during wet periods. Percolation tests shall be run in accordance with the modified Taft Engineering Center method published in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems.
461
(b) Location and number. Percolation test holes should be located in the area proposed for the installation of the absorption field. Data from test holes in areas outside of, or clearly uncharacteristic of, the proposed installation site will not be allowed. Percolation tests shall not be conducted in holes created by the deterioration of stumps and roots, or any other area which would render results that inaccurately portray the absorptive capacity of the soil in the absorption field area. The number of tests shall be sufficient to obtain a proper appraisal of the absorptive capacity of the soil in the proposed absorption field area and shall be determined by the county board of health. The number of tests required for preliminary appraisal of subdivisions may be specified in lesser numbers, provided a general overview of the soil characteristics of the total subdivision acreage is provided. Percolation test holes shall be located by number on a topographic map showing lot designation, boundaries, easements, etc., and the results shall be recorded on the map.
(c) Test boring for rock, shale, hardpan. Where surface outcropping or subsurface formations raise reasonable doubt concerning the operational effectiveness of on-site sewage management systems, a sufficient number of test borings to an appropriate depth may be required by the county board of health to determine whether on-site sewage management systems can be expected to give satisfactory service. Such borings and the results shall be located by number and recorded on the topographic map.
(d) Individuals conducting tests. Individuals conducting percolation tests and/or test borings shall notify the county board of health at least 24 hours prior to performing these procedures and, at the option of the county board of health such procedures shall be performed in the presence of a county board of health representative.
(Code 1988, § 25-90; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 10)
Sec. 74-91. Septage removal and disposal.
(a) Generally. No person shall engage in the removal or disposal of the contents of septic tanks, pit privies, or other on-site sewage management or experimental systems without having first applied for and obtained from the county board of health a septage removal permit, renewed annually, for such activities. The application for such septage removal shall be submitted in writing on forms provided by the county board of health at least ten days prior to engaging in such activities. The application shall include but not be limited to: the business name and address, name and address of the applicant, the manner by which such contents are to be removed, transported, and given final disposal and such other documentation as may be required by the county board of health, including evidence that septage removed and transported will be accepted at approved disposal sites. If surface spreading, subsurface land disposal or other method of treatment or disposal is to be used, additional information may be required.
(b) Disposal methods. Approved methods of disposal of septage from on-site sewage management systems shall be: discharged to a public or community sewage treatment system for treatment in a wastewater treatment plant, treatment at separate septage handling facilities, or direct land application. Disposal by any of these methods shall require written permission from both the appropriate governing official, private septage handling facility owner or land owner and a representative of the county board of health.
(c) Vehicle identification. The name and address of the person or firm engaging in the removal of septage from on-site sewage management systems and the permit number shall be lettered on both
462
sides of each vehicle used for septage removal purposes. Letters and numerals shall not be less than two inches in height and shall be readily visible.
(d) Vehicle maintenance. Every vehicle used for removal of septage from on-site sewage
management systems shall be equipped with a watertight tank or body and properly maintained. Liquid wastes shall not be transported in open bodied vehicles. All pumps, hose lines, valves and fittings shall be maintained so as to prevent leakage.
(Code 1988, § 25-91; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 11)
Sec. 74-92. Grease traps.
(a) Required. Grease traps shall be required for commercial or industrial establishments with on- site sewage management systems where it is determined by the county board of health that grease may be introduced into the system in quantities that may adversely affect the operation of the system.
(b) Design. Plans and specifications for grease traps shall be submitted to the county board of health for approval. Grease traps shall be designed to provide a liquid capacity of not less than 125 gallons. Effluent from grease traps shall be disposed of in a septic tank and not directly discharged to the absorption field.
(c) Construction. Grease traps shall be located, installed and constructed so that the temperature of the sewage will be reduced to permit congealing or separation of grease, and easy success for cleaning is provided.
(Code 1988, § 25-92; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 12)
Sec. 74-93. Sewage flow.
Where sizing of the on- site sewage management system is determined by sewage flow, estimates of the daily sewage flow shall not be less than the volume derived from the population to be served. Daily sewage flow shall be determined from the department's current manual; however, the flow for establishments not listed shall be determined by the county board of health after due consideration of data submitted by the owner or his agent on design criteria. Calculations will be made on the basis of peak loads and not on long term averages. (Code 1988, § 25-93; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 13)
Sec. 74-94. Subdivision and mobile home parks--Development requirements.
(a) Plans required. No person may sell, offer for sale, lease, rent, begin construction or otherwise begin the physical development of a subdivision or mobile home park where public or community sewage treatment systems are not available or contemplated to be available to serve the proposed development until proposals and plans for the water supply and sewage disposal method to be provided or installed have been submitted to and written approval has been obtained from the county board of health.
(b) Predevelopment review advised. All developers considering subdivision or mobile home park development where public or community sewage treatment systems will not be available are strongly advised to seek a predevelopment review by the county board of health prior to purchasing property and/or making substantial monetary outlays for developmental improvements. Rejection or tentative approval may be obtained at this time by submitting the following
463
information:
(1) A boundary plat including:
a. Vicinity map.
b. Topographic map.
c. Soil map and soil description.
(2) Complete subdivision analysis record on forms provided by the county board of health.
(3) Additional information as required by the county board of health for complete understanding and clarification.
(c) Proposals and plans. Unless previously provided, subdivision or mobile home park proposals shall be submitted on subdivision analysis forms provided by the county board of health. Subdivisions or mobile home park plans shall be drawn to a reasonable scale, with topography depicted by two - foot contour intervals provided, however, that if ground slope is sufficiently steep for less frequent contour intervals to show the surface configurations, the county board of health may permit the use of lesser contour intervals. Plans shall illustrate the location of all present and proposed wells, watercourses, floodplains, water systems, sewage systems, roads, structures right-of-ways, and easements on the property and within 100 feet outside the perimeter of the property. Subdivision or mobile home park plans shall also include stormwater drainage systems, elevations of seasonal high water table, location and results of test borings and percolation test if applicable, lot identification, dimensions, and building lines. The name and registration number of the preparing surveyor or engineer shall also be on the subdivision or mobile home park plans.
(d) Soil evaluation. Data used to develop soil maps and descriptions shall be obtained from reliable sources as set forth in section 290-5-26-03, paragraph (9), entitled soil data acceptability. Where reliable soil information or the services of a soil scientist are not available, percolation tests, soil borings, and such other tests as the county board of health may require shall be conducted.
(e) Limits on use of on-site sewage management systems in subdivision and mobile home parks. Approval of subdivisions and mobile home parks for on-site sewage management systems shall not be granted when:
(1) An available sewer of a public or community sewage treatment system is within 500 feet of the subdivision or mobile home park.
(2) Soil maps, descriptions, and reports complied by the Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, or a soil scientist indicate that soil conditions prohibit safe development with on-site sewage management systems, or the average percolation rate for the subdivision or mobile home park is more than 90 minutes per inch.
(f) Drainage. Where on-site sewage management systems are proposed for use, an adequate surface water drainage system shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Plans for
464
drainage shall comply with local storm drainage plans and policies in effect in the city and/or county at the time of submission to the county board of health, and approval of drainage plans by the local governing body is a prerequisite to county board of health approval. Additionally, any changes or amendments to approved drainage plans must receive the concurrence of the governing agency, and the county board of health shall be provided with a written approval statement from the governing agency. In the absence of local drainage policies, the county board of health will evaluate drainage plans and render decision on their acceptability. Plans for internal drainage (subsurface drainage), if used, shall be submitted to the county board of health for consideration as to their acceptability.
(Code 1988, § 25-94; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 14)
Sec. 74-95. Same--Water and sewage.
(a) Generally. A public water supply shall be required if available within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision or mobile home park.
(b) Percolation tests. Where required for planning purposes and determination of the general absorption capacity of soils, the number of percolation tests to be made shall be one per lot, in the area where absorption fields are to be located. Preparatory to construction of on-site sewage management systems, individual lots within the proposed development shall comply with section 290-5-26-03 of the Rules for On-Site Sewage Management Systems.
(c) Test borings. Where required for planning purposes, test borings to determine groundwater elevations and subsurface rock formations shall be made at locations, in numbers and at depths to be determined by the county board of health.
(Code 1988, § 25-95; Ord. of 8-13-1990, § 15)
Secs. 74-96----74-104 Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
RAIN SENSOR SHUT-OFF SWITCH
Sec. 74-105. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed:
Rain sensor shut-off switch means an electric device that detects and measures rainfall amounts and overrides the cycle of an irrigation system so as to turn off such system when a predetermined amount of rain has fallen.
Sec. 74-106. Installation of Rain sensor shut-off switch – Required.
465
No person shall install within the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District area created under Article 10 of this chapter any landscape irrigation system equipped with an electronic controller that does not have a rain sensor shut-off switch.
Sec. 74-107. Exemption.
Sec. 741-06 shall not apply to either landscape irrigation systems installed on golf courses or any system dependent upon a nonpublic water source.
Sec. 74-109. Civil penalties.
Any person who fails to install and/or installs a landscape irrigation system equipped with an electronic controller in violation of this Code section shall be liable for a civil penalty not exceeding $100.00 per violation. (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-6 (2006).
ARTICLE VI. STORMWATER UTILITY
Section 74-151. Findings.
The City of Sugar Hill Mayor and City Council make the following findings of fact:
(a) The City of Sugar Hill, Georgia (hereinafter “the City” or “Sugar Hill”) is authorized by the Georgia Constitution of 1983, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I and III thereof and O.C.G.A. § 36-82-62 to provide stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout the corporate boundaries of the City.
(b) In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the governing authority of Sugar Hill hereby exercises its authority to establish a Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund and establish rates for stormwater management services.
(c) In promulgating the regulations contained in this section, Sugar Hill is acting pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and its City Charter to provide for stormwater collection and disposal.
(d) Improper management of stormwater runoff may cause erosion of lands, threaten businesses and residences, and other facilities with water damage and may environmentally impair the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within the City.
(e) A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within the City and surrounding areas.
(f) The City presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities, which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness and operational function of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the City, and the additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the City to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities within the City in concert with the management of other water resources within the City. In order to do so, the City must have both a comprehensive stormwater management program as well as an adequate and stable funding source
466
for its comprehensive program operation and drainage-related capital improvement needs.
(g) Failure to effectively manage stormwater can adversely affect the operations of the sanitary sewer system operated by Gwinnett County thereby increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system.
(h) Failure to effectively manage stormwater contributes to the potential degradation of the surface water quality in area waterbodies.
(i) The City is required under Federal and State regulations (i.e. the Federal Clean Water Act, the City’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter “NPDES”) Phase I Stormwater Permit) to provide enhanced management of stormwater runoff quality to mitigate the impacts of pollutants which may be discharged from the public municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and stormwater conveyance system into State of Georgia or United States’ waters. Therefore, it is appropriate for the City to impose a stormwater user fee charge upon all improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public MS4 and stormwater conveyance system, whether the property is private or public in nature.
(j) Compliance with the regulatory obligations of the NPDES Phase I Stormwater Permit, Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District and along with other City stormwater program activities will affect the cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities above what is currently being spent for water quality management, drainage system maintenance, flood control and other program activities.
(k) The cost of operating and maintaining the City’s stormwater management system and financing necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the system.
(l) The professional engineering and financing analysis and related documents prepared by the City’s consulting stormwater engineer properly assesses and defines the City’s stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities as well as the stormwater management program funding strategy.
(m) Given the stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities and funding strategy identified in the aforementioned professional engineering and financing analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management services, systems and facilities within the City in concert with other water resource management programs.
(n) Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the incorporated areas of the City. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management system and service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the incorporated areas of the City is consistent with the present and future needs of the community.
(o) The stormwater needs in the City include, but are not limited to, protection of the public health,
467
safety, and welfare of the community. Provision of stormwater management services renders and/or results in both a service and a benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of the City in a variety of ways.
(p) The stormwater management services rendered may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management systems and programs, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among the owners of improved properties in proportion to the long term demands the properties impose on the City’s stormwater management services which result in services to such properties and the owners thereof.
(q) A Stormwater Management Program (hereinafter “SWMP”) provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services throughout the City, and the most equitable means to regulate the use of a higher level of stormwater management services within the City through stormwater user fee charges, user fees and other mechanisms.
(r) The area of impervious surfaces on each improved property is the most important factor influencing the cost of the stormwater management services provided by the City or to be provided by the City in the future, and the area of impervious surfaces on each property is therefore the most appropriate parameter for calculating a periodic stormwater user fee charge.
(s) A schedule of Stormwater Utility user fee charges based in part on the area of impervious surface located on each improved property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services throughout the City. Such user fee charges may be complemented by other types of charges which address specific needs, including, but not limited to, special service fees, special assessments, revenue bonds, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes and other forms of revenue, as deemed appropriate by the Mayor and City Council.
(t) The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site or off-site systems, facilities, activities or assets which reduce or otherwise mitigate the impact of a particular property on the City’s SWMP, and the Stormwater Utility’s cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities, should be taken into account to reduce the user fee charge on that property either in the form of a direct reduction or a credit, and such reduction or credit should be conditioned upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the Stormwater Utility Manager. Reductions or credits for privately owned and maintained stormwater management systems, facilities, activities or assets shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the property.
(u) It is imperative that the proceeds from all user fee charges for stormwater management services, systems or facilities, together with any other revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, systems or facilities, be dedicated solely to those purposes, and such proceeds of user fee charges and revenues shall therefore be deposited into the enterprise accounting fund of the City Stormwater Utility and shall remain in that fund and be dispersed only for stormwater management capital, operating and non-operating costs, lease payments and debt service of bonds or other indebtedness for stormwater management purposes.
Section 74-152. Definitions.
468
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Act means and refers to the Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant thereto.
Attached Residential Property shall mean improved property containing individually owned, attached dwelling units such as duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes, townhouses, or other residential structures not listed herein where one or more family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside. Improved property may be classified as an Attached Residential Property despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports and small storage buildings. Improved property may be classified as an Attached Residential Property despite the presence of a commercial use. Attached Residential Property shall not include improved property containing: structures used primarily for non-residential purposes, hotels, motels, retirement centers, nursing homes and assisted living homes.
Credit means a reduction in the amount of a stormwater user fee charge to the owner of a particular property for the existence and use of privately owned, maintained and operated on-site or off-site stormwater systems or facilities, or continuing provision of services or activities that reduce or mitigate the City’s cost of providing stormwater management services for that particular property.
Customers of the Stormwater Utility shall include all persons, properties and entities serviced by and/or benefiting from the services provided by the City’s SWMP and the Stormwater Utility. These services include, but are not necessarily limited to, the Stormwater Utility’s administration, management, maintenance, expansion, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems for the handling of stormwater runoff of private and public properties, and the regulation of the public and private stormwater management systems, controls, facilities, and activities.
Detached single family residential property or DSFR means improved property containing one residential structure which is not attached to another dwelling, and which contains one or more bedrooms, with bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. A detached single family residential property may include a “stick-built,” industrialized, or manufactured home located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Improved property may be classified as a detached single family residential property even if there is present incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, storage buildings, guest houses, servants or caretakers quarters, cottages or barns, or the presence of a commercial use within the residence, as long as such use does not result in additional areas of impervious surfaces. Detached single family residential properties shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes located within manufactured home parks where the land is owned by someone other than the owners of the manufactured homes, or multiple dwelling unit residential properties.
Dwelling Unit shall mean a structure, which contains one (1) or more bedrooms, a bathroom and a kitchen facility.
Hydrologic Response defines the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. Hydrologic Response is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious surface, the parcel’s size, the parcel’s shape, the parcel’s vegetative
469
canopy, the parcel’s groundwater, the parcel’s antecedent moisture and the parcel’s geologic condition.
Impervious area shall mean the area, usually expressed in square feet, that is covered by an impervious surface.
Impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil in the manner in which it entered the soil, in natural conditions, prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings or structures, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development.
Improved property means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of one thousand (1,000) square feet or more of impervious surfaces.
Non-single family residential property or NSFR means improved property containing multiple dwelling unit residential properties, condominiums, apartments, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, tennis courts, swimming pools, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses, water and wastewater treatment plants, and any other form of use not otherwise mentioned which is not a detached single family residential (hereinafter “DSFR”), or attached residential (hereinafter “AR”) property, and which has private parking lots and private drives or roads.
Public Water Influence Zone means those areas lying downstream of a culvert, or other stormwater management conveyance system. On the downstream side of the conveyance system, the public water influence zone will extend for a length of six (6) times the diameter (or width) of the culvert from which runoff is being discharged (Field Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Third Edition, pg. 99), and within the horizontal limits set forth in the aforementioned field manual. For example, if a 48-inch diameter culvert is discharging to a private property, the public water influence zone shall extend 24 feet (6 times 48-inches) from the end of the culvert and for the specified width (i.e. typically the width of the creek). The Sugar Hill Stormwater Utility may perform maintenance and/or capital construction activities only within that portion of the public water influence zone which the City has an ownership interest in, or for which a dedicated easement has been granted to, and accepted by the City for such purpose.
Service area means the entire land area within the corporate limits of the City.
Stormwater management services means all services provided by the City which relate to the:
(1) Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the incorporated portions of the City;
(2) Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing stormwater management systems and facilities;
(3) Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs;
(4) Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems and facilities; and
(5) Compliance with applicable State and Federal stormwater management regulations and
permit requirements.
470
Stormwater management services may address the quality of stormwater runoff as well as the quantity thereof.
Stormwater management systems and facilities mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey, detain, retain, treat or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff.
Stormwater Utility Manager means the person designated by the City Manager to administer the provisions of this article.
Stormwater user fee charge means the periodic user fee charge imposed pursuant to this article by the Sugar Hill Stormwater Utility for providing stormwater management services. This term shall exclude special charges to the owners of particular properties for services, systems or facilities related to stormwater management, including, but not limited to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects, on-site stormwater control systems and other stormwater management services provided by Sugar Hill for which a corresponding fee is collected for the service rendered.
Undeveloped Land means land in its unaltered natural condition or which is modified to such a minimal degree as to have a Hydrologic Response comparable to land in an unaltered natural condition shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped Land shall have minimal Impervious Surface, which impedes the infilitration of stormwater runoff or causes stormwater runoff to collect, concentrate or flow in a manner materially different from what would occur if the land were in an unaltered natural condition. For purposes of this Article, Undeveloped Land includes property altered from its natural condition by the creation or installation of five hundred (500) square feet or less of Impervious Surface.
User is defined as any person who uses property, which maintains connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the City for stormwater management.
Section 74-153. Stormwater Utility and Enterprise Fund Established.
(a) There is hereby established a Stormwater Utility to be known as the Sugar Hill Stormwater Utility, which shall be responsible for stormwater management services throughout the incorporated areas of the City, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of the City’s stormwater management systems and facilities and stormwater management services.
(b) There is hereby established a Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund in the City budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the Sugar Hill SWMP and Stormwater Utility, including, but not limited to, rates, charges, and fees as may be established by the City Council from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the Sugar Hill Stormwater Utility. All revenues and receipts of the Stormwater Utility shall be placed in the Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund and shall be used solely for stormwater management services. All expenses and capital investments of the Stormwater Utility shall be paid from the Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund; provided, however, that other revenues, receipts and resources not accounted for in the Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund may be applied to stormwater management services as deemed appropriate by the City.
471
(c) The City shall place responsibility with the Stormwater Utility Manager for operation, maintenance and regulation of the SWMP and stormwater management services performed, owned and operated or maintained by Sugar Hill, and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties, other than road rights-of-way, upon which such stormwater management systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management.
Section 74-154. Scope of Responsibility for Stormwater Management Systems and Facilities.
(a) The City owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located:
1. Within public road rights-of-way;
2. On private property but within easements granted to and accepted by the City, or are otherwise permitted to be located on such private property by written agreements for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system facilities located thereon;
3. On private property but within a public water influence zone after the City secures a right-of-entry, right-of-access, permanent easement, temporary easement or other form of written consent from the property owner;
4. On land dedicated to, and accepted by, the City solely for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon; or
5. On public land which is owned by the City and/or land of another governmental entity upon which the City has agreements providing for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon.
(b) Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private or public property not owned by the City, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the City for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management and systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the state and federal laws and regulations.
(c) It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the City. The City expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the City, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship.
472
(d) If any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the City as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the City pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the City, or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit, negligent issuance of a permit, negligent plan approval, or negligent maintenance of any permitted stormwater management system or facility not expressly dedicated to and accepted by the City for further maintenance in an action seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the City, its council members, mayor, officers, employees or agents.
Section 74-155. Stormwater User Fee Rate.
(a) In order to adequately fund the cost of providing stormwater services and facilities while
fairly and equitably apportioning the cost of providing stormwater servies and facilities among improved properties throughout the City, the City Council has established the following Stormwater user fee charge rates. A copy of the user fee charge rate schedule shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(b) Stormwater User Fee Charge Rates shall be assigned to all improved properties as follows:
1. Properties shall be treated as containing one billing unit for each 1,000 square feet of impervious area located on the property to establish the total number of billing units for billing. (Ex. a property with 1,990 square feet of impervious area shall contain 1 billing unit.)
2. The stormwater user fee charge rate shall be $18.00 per 1,000 square feet of impervious area per year ($1.50 per month per 1,000 square feet per month if billed monthly).
3. All properties shall be billed periodically for stormwater services on a schedule established by the City Council.
(c) The stormwater user fee rate has been established above and may be amended from time to time by official action of the Mayor and City Council at their discretion.
Section 74-156. Stormwater User Fee Charges.
(a) It shall be the policy of the City that user fee charges for stormwater management services to be provided by the Stormwater Utility in the designated service area shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management services by individual properties and/or the level of service rendered by, or resulting from, the provision of stormwater management services. Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be structured so as to be uniform within the customer class, and the resultant user fee charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services. User fee charge rates shall be in addition to other rates, charges, or fees employed for stormwater management within the incorporated areas of the City, including, but not limited to, plan review and inspection fees, fees for special services, fees in lieu of regulatory requirements, system development charges and special assessments.
473
(b) To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater user fee charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the City’s standards by public and private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities or to private stormwater management systems and facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems and facilities.
Section 74-157. Stormwater User Fee Charge Exemptions.
Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no public or private property located in the incorporated area of Sugar Hill shall be exempt from the stormwater user fee charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater user fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion or other condition unrelated to the Stormwater Utility’s cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities.
Exemptions to the stormwater user fee charges are as follows:
(a) Parcels which contain less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of impervious surfaces shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges.
(b) Railroad rights-of-way (tracks) shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, and/or other improved property used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges.
(c) Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) streets and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction services undertaken by GDOT in association with GDOT rights-of-way and road systems. However, maintenance buildings and/or other improved property used for GDOT purposes shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. All other State, Federal, and County properties are subject to the user fee charges on the same basis as private properties.
(d) Gwinnett County (County) streets and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction services undertaken by the County. However, other improved property used for County purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges.
(e) In consideration for the City allowing the Stormwater Utility to use the City’s existing street, curbs, gutters, drainage ways and ditches, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural and man-made within and owned by the City which controls and diverts surface water for the purposes of collecting, diverting, transporting and controlling surface and storm waters; the utility shall not charge the City a stormwater user fee charge for the City’s impervious surface area resulting from the City’s impervious surfaces which are owned and/or maintained by the City within the public right of ways.
(f) Any property whereby one hundred percent (100%) of the stormwater runoff is contained or
474
infiltrated on the property and no stormwater runoff is discharged, via overland flow or manmade conveyance to adjacent properties or rights-of-way for all storm events up to and including the 100-year 24-hour storm event.
Section 74-158. Stormwater User Fee Charge Credits.
(a) The Stormwater Utility Manager shall grant credits or adjustments based on the technical and procedural criteria set forth in the Stormwater Utility Credit Technical Manual, which shall be adopted and amended by and at the discretion of the Stormwater Utility Manager as an operating policy of the Stormwater Utility. Copies of the Credit Technical Manual shall be maintained by and available from the Stormwater Utility Manager.
1. A stormwater user fee charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements, standards and criteria containted in the Credit Technical Manual. The amount of credit, or reduction of the stormwater user fee charge, shall be in accordance with the criteria contained in the Credit Technical Manual.
2. Any credit allowed against the stormwater user fee charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the City’s design and performance standards as stated in the Credit Technical Manual and/or upon continuing provision of the controls, systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. The Stormwater Utility Manager may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance with applicable standards and criteria as established in the Credit Technical Manual or this article.
3. In order to obtain a credit, the property owner must make application to the City on forms provided by the Stormwater Utility Manager for such purpose, and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the Credit Technical Manual.
4. Property owners may apply for any credits and/or adjustments in accordance with the Credit Technical Manual.
5. The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, and be in the format established by the Stormwater Utility Manager. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for consideration and processing.
(b) When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the Stormwater Utility Manager, he shall have 30 days from the date the complete application is accepted to either grant the credit in whole, grant the credit in part, or deny the credit. If the Stormwater Utility Manager fails to render a decision within 30 days, the credit application shall automatically be deemed denied, but said denial shall be subject to appeal to the City Manager as set forth in this Article. Credits applied for by the property owner and granted in whole or in part, shall apply to all stormwater user fee charges in accordance with the terms defined in the Credit Technical Manual.
Section 74-159. Enforcement Methods and Inspections.
475
(a) All property owners of improved property within the incorporated areas of Sugar Hill shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater runoff in a safe manner consistent with all applicable City development regulations, ordinances, and State and Federal laws. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a violation of this article and be subject to citation and prosecution in the Sugar Hill Municipal Court. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-7 of the Code of the City of Sugar Hill.
(b) Alternately, in the event a public nuisance is deemed to exist by the Stormwater Utility Manager, the City may elect to sue in the Superior Court of Gwinnett County to abate such nuisance. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the property owner fails to abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the Superior Court, the City may enter upon the property and cause work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the property owner in the same manner as a tax levied against the property. From date of filing of such abatement action, the City shall have lien rights which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
(c) The City shall have the right for its designated officers and employees to enter upon public and private property during reasonable hours, and after reasonable notice to the owner thereof, in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this article, and State and Federal law. Such inspections shall generally be limited to the following purposes:
1. Inspecting or conducting engineering analyses on existing stormwater management systems and facilities located on-site; or
2. Determining that stormwater management systems and facilities need to be constructed.
Section 74-160. Stormwater User Fee Charge Billing, Delinquencies, Collections, Adjustments.
(a) Billing.
1. Stormwater user fee charges shall begin to accrue on January 1, 2009, and shall be billed thereafter. A bill for stormwater user fee charges may be sent through the United States Postal Service or by alternative means, notifying the owner of the property being billed of the amount of the stormwater user fee charge, less credits, the date the payment is due and the date when payment is past due.
2. The City Council appoints the Gwinnett County Tax Commissioner (“Tax Commissioner”) as its agent and representative for the billing and collection of stormwater user fee charges. The City Council authorizes the Tax Commissioner to bill and collect the Sugar Hill Stormwater User Fee Charge as part of the property/ad valorem tax bill. The City Council further authorizes the Tax Commissioner to charge and collect penalties and interest as set forth in Subsection (b) of this Section.
In the event the Tax Commissioner is unable or unwilling to serve as the City’s agent or is unable or unwilling to bill or collect taxes or stormwater user fee charges on behalf of the City, the City
476
Council authorizes the City Manager to bill and collect the stormwater user fee charge. The City Manager shall be authorized to bill and collect the stormwater user fee charge as an additional line item on the City’s Gas Utility or through a separate one time yearly statement to be billed on or before October 1 of each year with a due date on or before November 15 of each year. The City Manager may use his discretion in determining the most efficient and economical manner of collection.
3. If a bill for a stormwater user fee charge for a particular parcel is generated, failure of the customer to receive the bill shall not be justification for nonpayment.
4. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of the property, as identified from the public land records of Gwinnett County, shall be obligated to pay the appropriate stormwater user fee charge for that property and any interest and/or penalties that have accrued.
5. If a property is unbilled, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of improved property, the Sugar Hill Stormwater Utility may back bill for a period of up to one (1) year, but shall not be entitled to any interest or any penalty charges during the back billed period.
(b) Delinquencies and collection.
1. A penalty or late charge in the amount of five percent (5%) of the amount due and unpaid on the due date shall be assessed against the customer.
2. In addition to the penalty stated above, interest in the amount of one percent (1%) per calendar month (12% annually) shall accrue on all unpaid amounts beginning on November 16 of the year in which the payment is due.
3. The City shall assess all costs of collection, including attorneys’ fees and court costs, against the property owner.
4. Unpaid stormwater user fee charges shall be collected in any manner permissible by Georgia law, including but not limited to: utilizing the services of a collection agency, by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account, or by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. Unless reduced to a judgment and a Writ of Fieri Facias (FiFa) issued, the unpaid user fee charge shall not constitute a direct lien against the owner and/or the property.
(c) Adjustments.
1. The Stormwater Utility Manager shall administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge.
i. If a customer believes their stormwater user fee is incorrect, the customer may seek an adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge allocated to a property at any time by submitting the request in writing to the Stormwater Utility Manager and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought.
477
ii. Customers requesting the adjustment shall be required, at their own expense, to provide supplemental information to the Stormwater Utility Manager, including, but not limited to, a survey certified by a registered land surveyor or a professional engineer. Submittal of this information will be required if the City staff cannot make a determination based on field inspection and/or review of existing City aerial photography. Failure to provide the required information within the time limits established by the Stormwater Utility Manager, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the adjustment request.
iii. Once a completed adjustment request and all required information are received by the Stormwater Utility Manager, the Stormwater Utility Manager shall have 30 calendar days within which to render a written decision. If the Stormwater Utility Manager fails to render a decision within 30 days, the adjustment request shall automatically be deemed denied, but said denial shall be subject to appeal to the City Manager as set forth in this Article. Concurrent payment of any charges allocated to the property is not required as a condition precedent to this request for review.
iv. In considering an adjustment request, the Stormwater Utility Manager shall consider whether the calculation of the stormwater utility user fee charge for the property is correct.
v. The Stormwater Utility Manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing.
vi. If the result of an adjustment is that a refund is due the applicant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the applicant's next stormwater bill.
Section 74-161. Appeals, Hearings.
(a) Appeals. An appeal to the City Manager may be taken by any property owner or customer aggrieved by any decision of the Stormwater Utility Manager. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the decision of the Stormwater Utility Manager by filing with the City Manager a notice of appeal in writing specifying the grounds thereof. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the Stormwater Utility Manager shall forthwith transmit to the City Manager all documentation constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was taken.
(b) Hearing. The City Manager shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give written notice to the appellant at least ten days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall indicate the place, date and time of the hearing. The City Manager shall affirm, reverse, affirm in part, or reverse in part the decision of the Stormwater Utility Manager after hearing the evidence. If the decision of the Stormwater Utility Manager is reversed in whole or in part, resulting in a refund or credit due to the property owner, then such refund or credit shall be calculated retroactive to the date of the initial appeal.
(c) The decision of the City Manager shall be final, and there shall be no further administrative action. Any person aggrieved or dissatisfied with the decision of the City Manager may appeal that decision to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County by Writ of Certiorari.
Ordinance August, 2008.
478
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1988 CODE
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1988 Code, as amended, which are included herein. Sections of the 1988 Code, as amended, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature.
1988 Code Section
Section this Code
1-1, 1-2
1-1, 1-2
1-3—1-6
1-2—1-5
1-8
1-7
2-1, 2-2
2-1, 2-2
2-4—2-7
2-4—2-7
2-22
2-32
2-25, 2-26
2-33, 2-34
2-41—2-45
2-66-2-70
2-46
2-70
2-50
2-72
2-52—2-54
2-74—2-76
2-81
2-111
2-102
2-146
2-104
2-147
2-113
2-181
2-114
2-183, 2-184
2-121—2-124
2-206—2-209
2-141
2-271
2-151—2-157
62-31—62-37
2-191—2-197
2-296—2-302
3-21
6-21
3-22—3-28
6-41—6-47
3-29(a)—3-29(e)
6-71—6-75
3-30, 3-31
6-76, 6-77
3-41
6-101
3-42—3-48
6-136—6-142
3-49(a)—3-49(e)
6-143—6-147
3-50, 3-51
6-148, 6-149
3-52
6-176
3-59
6-177
3-60
6-180
3-61
6-211
3-62
6-178
3-64
6-179
3-65—3-76
6-212—6-223
3-77—3-88
6-281—6-292
3-89
6-224
479
3-90
6-256, 6-257
3-91, 3-92
6-258, 6-259
3-93
6-225
3-94—3-98
6-293—6-297
3-99—3-101
6-226—6-228
3-103
6-299
3-104
6-229
3-105—3-108
6-300—6-303
3-109
6-230
3-110
6-304
3-115
6-306
3-116
6-231
3-117—3-125
6-331—6-339
3-200
6-361
3-201
6-363
3-202
6-362
3-204
6-364
3-205—3-216
6-386—6-397
3-217—3-227
6-426—6-436
3-229, 3-230
6-437, 6-438
3-23 1, 3-232
6-398, 6-399
3-233
6-486, 6-487
3-234, 3-235
6-488, 6-489
3-236—3-242
6-439—6-445
3-243
6-447
3-244, 3-245
6-400, 6-401
3-246
6-365
3-247
6-402
3-248—3-256
6-448—6-456
3-257
6-403
3-258, 3-259
6-457, 6-458
3-260, 3-261
6-511, 6-512
3-262, 3-264
6-459—6-461
3-266
6-462
4-2, 4-3
10-1, 10-2
5-1, 5-2
14-21, 14-22
5-30—5-36
14-71—14-77
5-51—5-56
14-101—14-106
5-57—5-30
14-141—14-144
5-61
14-107
5-62, 5-63
14-145, 14-146
5-64(1), (2)
14-147
5-64(3)
14-108
5-65
14-148
5-66—5-68
14-109—14-111
5-69, 5-70
14-149, 14-150
5-71
14-112
480
5-72, 5-74
14-151—14-153
5-75, 5-76
14-211, 14-212
5-77
14-113
5-78
14-154
5-81
14-155
5-82(a)—5-82(f)
14-18 1—14-1 86
5-85
14-11
5-87, 5-88
14-115, 14-116
5-101—5-107
14-241—14-247
12-1
66-1
12-21—12-29
66-26—66-34
12-41—12-50
38-21—38-30
12-91—12-97
38-86—38-92
12-151
18-221
12-152—12-155
18-251—18-254
12-156—12-159
18-222—18-225
12-160—12-162
18-255—18-257
12-176—12-181
22-21—22-26
14-3, 14-4
54-2, 54-3
14-5
70-131—70-135
15-1, 152-
56-1, 56-2
15-4—15-10
56-4—56-10
15-21—15-23
56-39—56-41
15-31—15-37
56-71—56-77
16-1—16-12
46-1—46-12
17-1
50-1
17-3—17-6
50-2—50-5
18-1—18-28
70-21—70-48
18-30.1
70-49
18-30.3
70-50
18-30.5
70-51
18-51
18-21
18-52—18-58
18-46—18-52
18-60
18-22
18-71
18-76
18-72—18-74
18-78—18-80
18-91—18-108
38-151—38-168
18-121
18-106
18-122
18-141—18-143
18-123, 18-124
18-144, 18-145
18-128(A)
18-146
18-129, 18-130
18-110, 18-111
18-132, 18-133
18-113, 18-114
18-221—18-223
70-106—70-108
19-1
58-1
19-21—19-25
58-26—58-30
25-1
74-1
481
25-21—25-30
74-21—74-30
25-52
74-52
25-54, 25-55
74-54, 74-55
25-70—25-95
74-70—74-95
O.C.G.A. Section this Code
1-3-1(4)—1-3-1(7)
1-2
1-3-1(a), (b)
1-2
1-3-1(d)(3)
1-2
1-3-3(5)
1-2
1-3-3(8)
1-2
1-3-3(10)—1-3-3(12)
1-2
1-3-3(14)—1-3-3(16)
1-2
1-3-3(23), 1-3-3(24)
1-2
2-4-130 et seq.
6-512
2-10-105
70-38
tit. 3
6-77
6-149
3-1-1 et seq.
Ch. 6
3-1-2
6-41
6-136
3-3-2
Ch. 6
Ch. 6, Art. II, Div. 2
Ch. 6, Art III, Div. 2
Ch. 6, Art IV, Div. 2
3-3-7
Ch. 6
6-303
6-449
3-3-20
6-303
6-449
3-3-21
6-43
6-13 8
6-302
6-448
3-3-23
6-305
3-4-49, 3-4-50
Ch. 6
3-4-80
6-511
3-4-80 et seq.
Ch. 6
3-4-90 et seq.
Ch. 6, Art. V
3-5-1 et seq.
Ch. 6, Art. II
Ch. 6, Art. IV
3-5-40 et seq.
Ch. 6
3-5-80
6-41
3-5-80 et seq.
Ch. 6
3-5-881
6-41
482
3-6-1 et seq.
Ch. 6, Art. III, Ch. 6, Art. IV
3-6-40
Ch. 6
3-6-60
Ch. 6
6-136
3-6-60 et seq.
6-333
3-7-40 et. seq.
Ch. 6
3-101 et seq.
6-149
4-1-1 et seq.
Ch. 10
4-8-20 et seq.
10-32
10-36
8-2-1 et seq.
Ch. 14, Art. III
8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)
14-21
8-2-25(a)
14-21
12-2-8(b)
Ch. 26, Art. II
26-21
12-8-20 et seq.
Ch. 66
12-8-3 1.1
Ch. 66
12-8-39
66-1
14-13-7
70-24
15-6-8
46-12
16-1-3
54-1
16-5-20 et seq.
2-1
16-6-2
54-1
16-6-9
54-1
16-7-40 et seq.
Ch. 66
Ch. 66, Art. II
16-10-6
2-6
16-11-39
54-1
16-12-4
10-31
16-20-24 et seq.
2-1
tit. 21, ch. 2
Char. § 5.10
21-2-1 et seq.
2-31
21-2-216
2-32
2 1-5-1 et seq.
Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5
tit. 22
Char. § 1.12
25-9-1 et seq.
Ch. 74, Art. II
26-3-370 et seq.
38-164
31-1-1 et seq.
Ch. 38
31-3-1
38-151
ch. 31-5
74-70
31-5-1 et seq.
38-168
ch. 31-28
38-151, 38-152
38-154
33-3-5
70-76
33-3-5(1)
70-80
483
33-8-4
70-79, 70-80
33-8-8
70-77
33-8-8 et seq.
70-3 8
33-8-8.1, 33-8-8.2
70-79, 70-80
tit. 36, ch. 64
2-300
36-25-6(a)(2)
1-7
36-30-1 et seq.
Ch. 2
36-32-1 et seq.
Ch. 46
36-35-1 et seq.
Ch. 6
Ch. 10
Ch. 18
Ch. 22
Ch. 26
Ch. 30
Ch. 34
Ch. 38
Ch. 42
Ch. 50
Ch. 58
Ch. 66
Ch. 74
36-35-4
Ch. 74
36-37-6(g)
2-182
ch. 36-64
58-1
36-64-1 et seq.
2-300
58-1
36-64-5
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2
36-70-1 et seq.
Ch. 62
36-71-2(8)
70-22
36-80-19
1-1
3 8-3-1 et seq.
Ch. 22, Art. II
38-3-27
Ch. 22, Art. II
40-6-254
6-306
40-11-1
38-27
40-11-1 et seq.
38-27
41-1-1 et seq.
Ch. 50
41-2-1 et seq.
38-28
42-8-60 et seq.
18-107
tit. 43
70-33
43-1-1 et seq.
Ch. 18
44-12-131
18-109
18-112
44-121-130 et seq.
Ch. 18, Art. IV
44-121-136
Ch. 18, Art. IV
tit. 46, ch. 3
70-38
484
46-3-1 et seq.
70-38
46-7-15
70-38
48-1-1 et seq.
Ch. 70
48-5-40
RL § 1, RL § 2
48-5-50.1
RL § 1, RL § 2
48-5-355, 48-5-356
70-38
48-6-93
70-38
70-106
48-6-93(d)
70-107
48-13-1
70-22
48-13-1 et seq.
Ch. 70, Art. II
48-13-5—48-13-26
70-30
48-13-7
70-21
70-24
48-13-8, 48-13-9
70-23
48-13-9
70-24
48-13-9(c)1—18
70-28
48-13-9(c)(1)
70-28
48-13-9(c)(1)—(18)
70-28
48-13-9(c)(1)
70-28
48-13-9(c)(1)—(18)
70-28
48-13-55
70-38
tit. 50
2-71
50-14-1
2-66
50-14-1(d)
2-67
50-18-70 et seq.
2-3
2-72
50-18-71
2-4
485
ABANDONMENT
Animal control
Abandoned animals .......... 10-29
Junk, storage of
Abandoned motor vehicles ........ 38-27 Nuisances
Declared .......... 50-1
ABATEMENT
Adult entertainment establishments
Abatement as sanitary nuisance .......... 18-350 Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Operational requirements and restrictions
Signs, removal of ......... 6-296
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Operational requirements and restrictions
Signs, removal of ......... 6-442
Animals
Animal control
Dead animals, removal of ........ 10-3 9 Bird sanctuary, city designated as
Trapping, shooting, etc., birds or wild fowl; abatement of nuisance .......... 10-1(b)
Junk, storage of ........... 38-23 et seq.
See: JUNK, STORAGE OF
Nuisances
Abatement by city .......... 50-3
Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement .......... 50-4
ACCESS
Adult entertainment establishments
Enclosed viewing rooms, prohibition of ........... 18-351(1)
ACCIDENTS
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts .......... 54-1(c)
ACCUMULATIONS
Junk, storage of
Accumulation of junk prohibited ......... 3 8-22
ADMINISTRATION. See specific subjects
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Abatement as sanitary nuisance ........... 18-350
Alcohol, sale of, prohibited .......... 18-341
Appeals
City council to receive testimony and evidence .......... 18-439
Council action ............ 18-438
Departments and other agencies of city
486
City council to receive testimony and evidence .......... 18-439
Council action ........... 18-438
Procedure
Clerk to place on council meeting agenda ............ 18-437(c)
Evidence, rules of .......... 18-441
Hearing officer .......... 18-440
Hearing officer report and final decision ........... 18-442
Mayor and council
Action, council .......... 18-438
Procedure
Clerk to place on council meeting agenda ............ 18-437(c)
Testimony and evidence, city council to receive ......... 18-439
Officers and employees
Hearing officer .......... 18-440
Hearing officer report and final decision .......... 18-442
Procedure
Clerk to place on council meeting agenda ............ 18-437(c)
Procedure ............ 18-437
Clerk to place on council meeting agenda ................... 18-437(c)
Notice, contents of .......... 18-437(b)
Notice of appeal ..................... 18-437(a)
Severability ......... 18-444
Superior court, appeal of council decision to .......... 18-443
Time limit for filing ......... 18-436
Applicability of article .......... 18-338
Certain activities prohibited ......... 18-340
City clerk
Appeals
Procedure
Clerk to place on council meeting agenda ............ 18-437(c) Employees
City clerk approval of employees ........... 18-344(c)
License
Application
Submittal to city clerk; application fee .......... 18-406
Cleaning of licensed premises .......... 18-347
Definitions ......... 18-337
Departments and other agencies of city
Appeals. See herein that subject
Employees ......... 18-344
City clerk approval of employees ...................... 18-344(c)
Contractors, independent ................... 18-344(e)
Dancers not to be waiters, waitresses, etc ........... 18-344(b)
Qualifications ........... 18-344(a)
Violations of ordinances or state law ......... 18-344(d)
Enclosed viewing rooms, prohibition of ............ 18-35 1
Access ........... 18-351(1)
Construction ......... 18-351(2)
Occupants ...................... 18-351(3)
Erotic dance establishment regulations ......... 18-339
Findings and Purpose ............ 18-336
Findings ........ 18-336(a)
376
Purpose .......... 18-336(b)
License
Application
Authority to conduct business, application not ........... 18-407
Bond to be filed with application ........... 18-408
Contents ......... 18-410
Fee, applicant to provide proof of payment of ........... 18-411
Investigation of application ............ 18-409
Investigation of application and applicant; grant or denial ........... 18-412
Conditions for granting license ....................... 18-412(b)
Failure to meet character requirements ........... 18-412(c)
Failure to pay license fee ...................... 18-412(e)
Notice, written, of grant or denial ...................... 18-412(d)
Time limit for investigation ............ 18-412(a)
Submittal to city clerk; application fee ........... 18-406
Illegal activity, license does not condone .......... 18-376
Persons prohibited as licensees ........... 18-381
Renewal; fee .......... 18-378
Required ........... 18-377
Suspension or revocation .......... 18-380
Transferability ............ 18-379
Location .......... 18-343
Mayor and council
Appeals. See herein that subject
Minors, admission of and sales to, unlawful .......... 18-342
Notices, notification
Appeals
Procedure
Notice, contents of ......... 18-437(b)
Notice of appeal .......... 18-437(a)
License; application
Investigation of application and applicant; grant or denial
Notice, written, of grant or denial 18-412(d)
Officers and employees
Appeals. See herein that subject
Employees
City clerk approval of employees ............ 18-344(c) License
Application
Submittal to city clerk; application fee ........... 18-406 Records and reports
Appeals
Hearing officer report and final decision .......... 18-442
Time limit for filing ............ 18-436
License
Application
Bond to be filed with application .......... 18-408
Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions ............ 18-349
Self-inspection of licensed premises .......... 18-348
Unlawful operation declared nuisance ............ 18-346
Violations of article; penalty ........... 18-345
488
ADVERTISING
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for Operational requirements and restrictions
Advertisement, exterior, prohibited .......... 6-291 Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption Operational requirements and restrictions
Advertisement, exterior, prohibited .......... 6-437
AFFIRMATION. See: OATH, AFFIRMATION, SWEAR OR SWORN AGENCIES. See: DEPARTMENTS AND OTHER AGENCIES OF CITY AGREEMENTS. See: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
AGRICULTURE
Noise
Exemptions to sound limits .......... 38-89 Wetlands protection district
Permitted uses .......... 26-45
AIR CONDITIONING. See: HEATING AND AIR AIR POLLUTION. See: POLLUTION
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE REVIEW BOARD Provisions re ...................... 6-256 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Adult entertainment establishments
Alcohol, sale of, prohibited .......... 18-341
Location .......... 18-343
Alcoholic beverage review board
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for. See herein that subject Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption. See herein that subject
City clerk
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Alcoholic beverage review board
Hearings
Clerk to notify appellant .......... 6-258(d)
License
City clerk, members of alcoholic beverage review board prohibited from interest
in license ...................... 6-222
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
License
City clerk, members of alcoholic beverage review board prohibited from interest
in license ...................... 6-396
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Alcoholic beverage review board
Composition ........... 6-257
Established; duties .......... 6-256
489
Hearings .......... 6-258
Appeal of findings ..................... 6-258(f)
Clerk to notify appellant ...................... 6-258(d)
Grounds for setting aside findings ......... 6-258(e)
Notice, written, of denial, suspension or revocation of license ……… 6-258(b)
Time frame for hearing .......... 6-258(c)
Notice .......... 6-259
Compliance with article required ......... 6-179
Definitions .......... 6-178
Departments and other agencies of city
Alcoholic beverage review board. See within this subheading that subject License
City clerk, members of alcoholic beverage review board prohibited from interest
in license ....................... 6-222
Golf course, public, sale of malt beverages at; authorization ........... 6-176
Inspections, inspectors
Operational requirements and restrictions
Inspection, premises open for .......... 6-290
Wholesaler licensing and regulations, beer and/or wine
Invoices
Required with every delivery; wholesaler to keep copy and make it available for inspection ................... 6-337(a)
Retailer to keep original and make it available for inspection…..6-337(b)
License
Application
Acceptance and consideration of application after rejection or revocation …..6-225
Application for license permitting sale of alcoholic malt beverages and wine for consumption on premises .......... 6-214
False information in application .......... 6-226
Form of application to be prescribed by city authorities ......... 6-213
Provisions re; data; information; requirement for ........... 6-229
Provisions re; form; content; process; deposit .......... 6-215
Bonds, filing of, by applicants for license ......... 6-216
Change in relationships and/or ownership interest ........... 6-221
City clerk, members of alcoholic beverage review board prohibited from interest in license ......... 6-222
False information in application ............ 6-226
Fees, annual, for sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on premises….6-231
Amount ..................... 6-231(a)
Due date .................... 6-231(b)
Renewal .................... 6-231(c)
Investigation of applicant; report ............ 6-217
New license in existing license location, application for ............ 6-228
Operational requirements and restrictions. See within this subheading that subject Other licenses ......... 6-230
Persons with prior conviction, issuance of license to, prohibited; exception .......... 6-219
Qualifications, general .......... 6-220
Conditions for granting .......... 6-220(a)
Decisions to be in writing 6-220(b)
Hearing, right to 6-220(c)
Renewal, annual ........... 6-223
Required within incorporated areas of city; license a privilege .......... 6-211
490
Separate application and separate license for each location of sale .......... 6-212
Suspension or revocation of license, grounds for ........... 6-224
Taxes and other debts to city, payment of .......... 6-218
Transfers, restriction upon ........... 6-227
Wholesaler licensing and regulations, beer and/or wine. See within this subheading that subject
Misrepresentation
License
False information in application .......... 6-226 Operational requirements and restrictions
Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages .......... 6-287
Persons under 21 years of age, furnishing to, purchase by, or possession by; false
and proper identification; dispensing, serving, selling, or handling in
course of employment ......... 6-305
Officers and employees
Alcoholic beverage review board. See within this subheading that subject License
City clerk, members of alcoholic beverage review board prohibited from interest in license ............. 6-222
Operational requirements and restrictions
Advertisement, exterior, prohibited ........... 6-291
Automatic revocation of city license ......... 6-295
Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent .......... 6-301
Completion of proposed licensed premises .......... 6-294
Copy of this article, licensees to maintain; employees to be familiar with its terms;
responsibility of licensee for violations ........... 6-289
Designated area, issuance of licenses limited to .......... 6-300
Distance from schools, churches, residences ........... 6-302
Employees of licensees, regulations as to .......... 6-298
Entertainment, attire and conduct, types of, prohibited ............ 6-283
Gambling on premises prohibited ........... 6-281
"Happy hour" promotions and sales .......... 6-284
Hours of sale .......... 6-303
Inspection, premises open for .......... 6-290
Inventory, retail consumption dealers to store, only on premises ......... 6-286
Licenses
Automatic revocation of city license ........... 6-295
Designated area, issuance of licenses limited to ........... 6-300
Display of licenses ........... 6-288
Wholesalers, licensed, consumption dealers to buy only from; minimum legal container; sales off-premises prohibited ........... 6-285
Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages .......... 6-287
Persons under 21 years of age, furnishing to, purchase by, or possession by; false and
proper identification; dispensing, serving, selling, or handling in course of
employment ......... 6-305
Persons with prior convictions, employment of, prohibited ......... 6-299
Public places, alcoholic beverages in .......... 6-307
Revocation upon violation of any provision of this article .......... 6-297
Sales restricted to premises only ............ 6-292
491
Signs, removal of .......... 6-296
Solicitation prohibited .......... 6-282
Time limit for commencement of business in licensee's establishment; forfeiture for
non-use .... 6-293
Underage persons, employment of, prohibited; exceptions .......... 6-304
Wholesalers, licensed, consumption dealers to buy only from; minimum legal container; sales off-premises prohibited .......... 6-285
Penalties; continuing violation ........... 6-180
Purpose of article .......... 6-177
Records and reports
License
Bonds, filing of, by applicants for license ............ 6-216
Investigation of applicant; report .......... 6-217
Wholesaler licensing and regulations, beer and/or wine
Records, production of .......... 6-339
Wholesaler licensing and regulations, beer and/or wine
Excise tax: Levied, amount, payment, duties of dealers and wholesalers .......... 6-333
Basis for computation of tax ........... 6-333(b)
Computations, payment, duties of wholesale dealer and distributor ......... 6-333(c)
Noncompliance by wholesale dealer; distributor ......... 6-333(d)
Scope of section .......... 6-333(a)
Unlawful deliveries ............ 6-333(f)
Unlawful retail sales ......... 6-333(e)
Violations and penalties ........... 6-333(g)
Fees, annual, for wholesalers ......... 6-332
Invoices .......... 6-337
Required with every delivery; wholesaler to keep copy and make it available for
inspection .......... 6-337(a)
Retailer to keep original and make it available for inspection ........... 6-337(b)
Penalties and enforcement ........... 6-340
Records, production of ........... 6-339
Requirements of wholesalers ......... 6-334
Delivery to licensed retailers only .......... 6-334(b)
License required ......... 6-334(a)
Retail storage, regulations governing ......... 6-336
Retailers to purchase from licensed wholesalers only .......... 6-335
Revocation or suspension of license ........... 6-33 8
Special provisions applicable to wholesale purchase ......... 6-331
Delivery vehicle to be clearly marked .................... 6-331(d)
Financial interest in license for retail sale of alcoholic beverages, wholesaler not
to have .................... 6-331(b)
Licensed, wholesaler required to be ..................... 6-331(a)
Purchases; sales .......... 6-331(c)
Departments and other agencies of city
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for. See herein that subject
Malt beverages, retail sale of License; application
Factors for council consideration ......... 6-42(e)
Referral to city council ........ 6-42(c)
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption. See herein that subject
Wine, retail sale of
License; application
492
Factors for council consideration ..........6-137(e)
Referral to city council .......... 6-137(c)
Hearings
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for Alcoholic beverage review board .......... 6-258
License; qualifications, general
Hearing, right to .......... 6-220(c)
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption Alcoholic beverage review board .......... 6-488
License
Suspension or revocation; notice hearing; refund .......... 6-398
Hours
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for Operational requirements and restrictions
"Happy hour" promotions and sales .......... 6-284
Hours of sale .......... 6-303
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption Operational requirements and restrictions
"Happy hour" promotions and sales .......... 6-429
Hours of sale .......... 6-449
Housing
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for Operational requirements and restrictions
Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent .......... 6-301
Distance from schools, churches, residences ............ 6-302
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
License
Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent .......... 6-402 Operational requirements and restrictions
Distance from schools, churches, residences ............ 6-448 Inspections, inspectors
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for. See herein that subject Licenses and permits
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for. See herein that subject Malt beverages, retail sale of. See herein that subject Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption. See herein that subject
Wine, retail sale of. See herein that subject
Malt beverages, retail sale of
Consumption, on-premises; consumption in public places ........ 6-21 License
Application .......... 6-42
Contents ........... 6-42(a)
Factors for council consideration ......... 6-42(e)
Notice, publication of .......... 6-42(d)
Recommendation of city manager .......... 6-42(b)
Referral to city council .......... 6-42(c)
Display ........... 6-45
Issuance ......... 6-44
Operational requirements and restrictions. See within this subheading that subject
Required; fee; excise tax ......... 6-41
Restrictions on issuance .......... 6-43
Revocation, suspension, etc .............. 6-47
493
Termination and renewal ........... 6-46
Operational requirements and restrictions
Licenses
Duplicate licenses .......... 6-73
Location, license required for each .......... 6-74
Nontransferable .......... 6-72
Separate license required for each business on premises .......... 6-75
Location, change of .......... 6-71
Penalties ...........6-76
State law, compliance with ...........6-77
Massage or spa establishments
Operating provisions, general .......... 18-283(n)
Mayor and council
Malt beverages, retail sale of License; application
Factors for council consideration .......... 6-42(e)
Referral to city council ......... 6-42(c)
Wine, retail sale of
License; application
Factors for council consideration .......... 6-137(e)
Referral to city council ......... 6-137(c)
Minors
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Operational requirements and restrictions
Persons under 21 years of age, furnishing to, purchase by, or possession by; false and proper identification; dispensing, serving, selling, or handling in course of employment ........... 6-305
Underage persons, employment of, prohibited; exceptions .........6-304
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption. See herein that subject Misrepresentation
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for. See herein that subject Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Operational requirements and restrictions
Minors
Misrepresentation of age by persons under 21 years of age ........... 6-455
Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages ........... 6-434
Notices, notification
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Alcoholic beverage review board
Hearings
Notice, written, of denial, suspension or revocation of license ….6-258(b)
Notice ......... 6-259
Malt beverages, retail sale of License; application
Notice, publication of ........... 6-42(d)
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Alcoholic beverage review board ........... 6-489
License
Suspension or revocation; notice hearing; refund .......... 6-398
Wine, retail sale of
License; application
494
Notice, publication of .......... 6-137(d)
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts .......... 54-1(c)
Officers and employees
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for. See herein that subject Malt beverages, retail sale of
License; application
Recommendation of city manager .......... 6-42(b)
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption. See herein that subject Wine, retail sale of
License; application
Recommendation of city manager .................... 6-137(b)
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Conduct; use regulations .......... 58-28(g)
Prohibited acts ........... 58-29(9)
Records and reports
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for. See herein that subject Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption. See herein that subject
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Alcoholic beverage review board
Composition .......... 6-487
Established; duties .......... 6-486
Hearings ......... 6-488
Notice ......... 6-489
Compliance with article required .......... 6-364
Definitions .......... 6-362
Departments and other agencies of city
Alcoholic beverage review board. See within this subheading that subject License
City clerk, members of alcoholic beverage review board prohibited from interest
in license ....................... 6-396
Excise tax
Levied, amount, payment, duties of dealers and wholesalers .......... 6-511
Computation of tax, basis for .......... 6-511(b)
Scope of section .................... 6-511(a)
Sale of spirituous liquor by drink, excise tax on .......... 6-512
Amount ......... 6-512(a)
Verification ......... 6-512(b)
Golf course, public, sale at ......... 6-365
Incorporated areas of city, sale within; license a privilege ........ 6-363
License
Application .......... 6-389
Contents ............ 6-389(b)
Building, plans of ........... 6-389(b)(1)
State application with required attachments .......... 6-389(b)(3)
Survey ............ 6-389(b)(2)
Fee ......... 6-389(d)
Processing fee ............6-389(c)
Refund upon denial ......... 6-389(e)
Required; form ..........6-389(a)
Application; data; information ......... 6-400
495
Application for license permitting sale of alcoholic spirituous liquor for consumption on premises ............................................ 6-388
Authorities of city to prescribe appropriate form .......... 6-387
Bonds, filing of, by applicants for license ........... 6-390
Change in relationships and/or ownership interest ........... 6-395
Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent .......... 6-402
City clerk, members of alcoholic beverage review board prohibited from interest in license ...................... 6-396
Designated area, issuance of licenses limited to ........... 6-401
Fees, annual, for sale of spirituous liquor for consumption on premises .......... 6-403
Incorporated areas of city, sale within; license a privilege .......... 6-363
Investigation of applicant; report .......... 6-391
Operational requirements and restrictions. See within this subheading that subject Persons with prior conviction, issuance of license to, prohibited; exception ........................ 6-393
Qualifications, general .......... 6-394
Renewal, annual .......... 6-397
Separate application and separate license for each location of sale .......... 6-386
Suspension of license; causes ......... 6-399
Suspension or revocation; notice hearing; refund ......... 6-398
Taxes and other debts to city, payment of ........... 6-392
Minors
Operational requirements and restrictions. See within this subheading that subject Officers and employees
Alcoholic beverage review board. See within this subheading that subject License
City clerk, members of alcoholic beverage review board prohibited from interest
in license ...................... 6-396
Operational requirements and restrictions
Advertisement, exterior, prohibited ........... 6-437
Bring your own bottle ("brown bagging") prohibited ........... 6-430
Completion of proposed licensed premises ........... 6-441
Copy of this article, licensees to maintain; employees to be familiar with its terms; responsibility of licensee for violations .......... 6-436
Distance from schools, churches, residences .......... 6-448
Drunkards, sales to, prohibited ........... 6-452
Employees of licensees, regulations as to ........... 6-446
Employees of licensees to be fingerprinted; procedure ......... 6-445
Entertainment, attire and conduct, types of, prohibited ........ 6-428
Gambling on premises prohibited ......... 6-426
"Happy hour" promotions and sales .......... 6-429
Hours of sale .......... 6-449
Incompetents, sales to, prohibited ......... 6-452
Invoices ........ 6-46 1
Retailer to keep original ........... 6-461(b)
Wholesaler to keep copy .......... 6-461(a)
Licenses
Application, acceptance and consideration of, after rejection or revocation ..6-439
Display of licenses .......... 6-435
New license in existing license location, application for ........... 6-444
Other licenses ........... 6-450
Transfers, restriction upon ......... 6-443
Minors
Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions ........... 6-451
496
Furnishing of alcoholic beverages to underage persons ........... 6-453
Misrepresentation of age by persons under 21 years of age ........... 6-455
Purchase, consumption or possession by or for under aged persons ........... 6-454
Sales to underage persons prohibited ........... 6-452
Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages ........... 6-434
Penalty for violation of article; enforcement ............ 6-463
Persons with prior convictions, employment of, prohibited .......... 6-447
Public places, alcoholic beverages in .......... 6-456
Purchase restricted; requirements of wholesalers generally; minimum legal container;
sales off-premises prohibited ........... 6-432
Records, production of ........... 6-462
Retail storage, regulations governing .......... 6-433
Sales restricted to premises only .......... 6-438
Signs, removal of ........... 6-442
Solicitation prohibited ............ 6-427
Time limit for commencement of business in licensee's establishment; forfeiture for nonuse ........... 6-440
Unlicensed premises, sale or delivery to ........... 6-431
Wholesale purchase, special provisions applicable to ........... 6-457 Wholesalers
Fees, annual, for wholesalers ........... 6-458 Invoices
Wholesaler to keep copy ............ 6-461(a)
Purchase restricted; requirements of wholesalers generally; minimum legal
container; sales off-premises prohibited ............ 6-432
Requirements of wholesalers ........... 6-459
Retailers to purchase from licensed wholesalers only ............ 6-460
Purpose of article ........... 6-361
Records and reports
License
Bonds, filing of, by applicants for license ........... 6-390
Investigation of applicant; report ........... 6-391
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption Operational requirements and restrictions
Records, production of ……. 6-462
Taxation
Excise tax. See within this subheading that subject License
Taxes and other debts to city, payment of ........... 6-392
Streets, sidewalks and other public places
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Golf course, public, sale of malt beverages at; authorization ............. 6-176
Operational requirements and restrictions
Public places, alcoholic beverages in ........... 6-307
Malt beverages, retail sale of
Consumption, on-premises; consumption in public places ….. 6-21
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Golf course, public, sale at ........... 6-365
Operational requirements and restrictions
Public places, alcoholic beverages in ........... 6-456
497
Wine, retail sale of
Consumption, on-premises; consumption in public places ........... 6-101 Taxation
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for License
Taxes and other debts to city, payment of ........... 6-218
Wholesaler licensing and regulations, beer and/or wine
Excise tax: Levied, amount, payment, duties of dealers and wholesalers ….
…………………………………………..6-333
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption. See herein that subject Wine, retail sale of
Consumption, on-premises; consumption in public places ... 6-101 License
Application .......... 6-137
Contents ...................... 6-137(a)
Factors for council consideration ......... 6-137(e)
Notice, publication of ...................... 6-137(d)
Recommendation of city manager ....................... 6-137(b)
Referral to city council .................... 6-137(c)
Display .......... 6-140
Duplicate licenses ......... 6-145
Issuance ........ 6-139
Location, license required for each .......... 6-146
Nontransferable ........... 6-144
Required; fee; excise tax ........... 6-136
Restrictions on issuance .......... 6-138
Revocation, suspension, etc ........... 6-142
State law, compliance with ........... 6-149
Termination and renewal .......... 6-141
Violations ......... 6-148
AMPLIFIERS
Noise
Specific prohibitions ........... 38-90(3)
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Adult entertainment establishments ........ 18-336 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Operational requirements and restrictions
Entertainment, attire and conduct, types of, prohibited ........... 6-283
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Operational requirements and restrictions
Entertainment, attire and conduct, types of, prohibited …… 6-428
ANIMALS
Animal control
Abandoned animals ......... 10-29
Adoption .......... 10-33
Fees .......... 10-33(b)
Rules for adoption .................. 10-33(a)
498
Age for person adopting; humane care .......... 10-33(a)(2)
Breeding or research, use of adopted animal for .......... 10-33(a)(4)
Frequency of adoption .......... 10-33 (a)(5)
Spaying and neutering required .......... 10-33(a)(3)
Voluntarily surrendered animals ......... 10-33(a)(1)
Biting dogs and cats ........... 10-37
Animals which cannot be confined ........... 10-37(b)
Confinement for observation .................... 10-37(a)
Collar and rabies vaccination tag ........... 10-40
Cruelty to animals .......... 10-31
Acts of cruelty .......... 10-31(b)
Animal fighting .................. 10-31(c)
Definitions ......... 10-31(a)
Enclosure, animal, duty of owner to keep, clean ........... 10-31(e)
Impoundment ........... 10-31(d)
Dead animals, removal of ........ 10-3 9
Definitions ......... 10-27
Disposition, humane .......... 10-35
Animals not claimed by owner ......... 10-35(a)
Dangerous animals ..................... 10-35(b)
Sick animals, treatment of .................... 10-35(c)
Disposition of impounded animals ............ 10-34
Notification, owner; redemption .......... 10-34(a)
Sick animals .......... 10-34(b)
Dogs and cats
Biting dogs and cats ........... 10-37
Restraint
Dog, duty to keep, under restraint while off property .................... 10-28(e)
Dogs, duty to keep, under restraint while on owner's property .......... 10-27(c)
Transient dogs and cats .......... 10-30
Vaccination
Dogs and cats, vaccination of ........... 10-41
Vicious animals; dogs and cats ......... 10-36
Impoundment
Cruelty to animals .................. 10-31(d)
Disposition of impounded animals ........... 10-34
Nuisance, public, animal ............ 10-32(b)
Interference with animal control officers ......... 10-46
Liability of county, city, animal control unit, officers and employees .......... 10-45
Nuisance, public, animal ........... 10-32
Defined .................. 10-32(a)
Impoundment ........... 10-32(b)
Rabies control
Vaccination. See within this subheading that subject
Restraint .......... 10-28
Dog, duty to keep, under restraint while off property ........... 10-28(e)
Dogs, duty to keep, under restraint while on owner's property .................. 10-27(c)
Failure to keep animal under restraint .......... 10-28(f)
Guard or watch dogs .................. 10-27(d)
Leash law ........... 10-28(a)
Responsible, duty of all animal owners to be .......... 10-27(b)
Summons ........... 10-44
499
Transient dogs and cats ........... 10-30
Vaccination
Certificate of vaccination ........... 10-43
Collar and rabies vaccination tag ........... 10-40
Dogs and cats, vaccination of .......... 10-4 1
Vaccines used and time of vaccination ........... 10-42
Vicious animals; dogs and cats .......... 10-3 6
Wildlife .......... 10-38
Bird sanctuary, city designated as ........... 10-1
Area embraced .......... 10-1(a)
Destroying birds deemed nuisance .......... 10-1(c)
Penalty for violation .......... 10-1(d)
Trapping, shooting, etc., birds or wild fowl; abatement of nuisance .......... 10-1(b)
Damage caused by animals .......... 10-2
Definitions ......... 10-2(a)
Fecal matter, leaving, on property of another .......... 10-2(c)
Fecal matter, removal of, by person in control ........... 10-2(d)
Penalty for violation of section ............ 10-2(f)
Proof deemed sufficient for conviction .......... 10-2(e)
Unlawful whether under restraint or not ......... 10-2(b)
Dogs and cats
Animal control. See herein that subject
Noise
Specific prohibitions .................... 38-90(4)
Nuisances
Animal control
Nuisance, public, animal ........... 10-32
Bird sanctuary, city designated as
Destroying birds deemed nuisance ............ 10-1(c)
Trapping, shooting, etc., birds or wild fowl; abatement of nuisance ..........10-1(b)
Declared ......... 50-1
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Conduct; use regulations…… 58-28(d)
Prohibited acts……58-29(4)
Rabies control. See herein: Animal Control
Solid waste
Animal control
Dead animals, removal of .......... 10-39
Damage caused by animals
Fecal matter, leaving, on property of another .......... 10-2(c)
Fecal matter, removal of, by person in control .......... 10-2(d)
Wetlands protection district
Permitted uses ......... 26-45
APPEALS
Adult entertainment establishments .......... 18-436 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for Alcoholic beverage review board
Hearings; appeal of findings ........... 6-258(f) Junk, storage of
500
Objection to city action, procedure upon ..........3 8-26(c) Mayor and council
Meetings
Questions of order, appeals ......... 2-75
Municipal courts
Indigent defense program .......... 46-5 1
Provisions re .......... 46-12
Wetlands protection district
Development permits, local .......... 26-83
APPROPRIATIONS. See: FINANCE
AS SOON AS POSSIBLE
Definitions and rules of construction ............ 1-2
ASSAULT AND BATTERY
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts .......... 54-1(c)
ASSEMBLIES
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts .......... 54-1(c)
ATTORNEY
City attorney .......... 2-206 et seq.
See: CITY ATTORNEY
Municipal courts
Indigent defense program
Attorneys eligible for appointment ............ 46-52
Attorneys, panel of ........... 46-48
BARRIERS
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts .......... 54-1(c)
BATTERY. See: ASSAULT AND BATTERY BEER. See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
BILLIARDS AND BILLIARD PARLORS
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines License
Required; fees; additional fees for pool tables .......... 18-46
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES. See also: DEPARTMENTS AND OTHER AGENCIES OF CITY
Conflict of interest policy for members of boards, commissions and authorities .......... 2-271
501
BOATS, DOCKS AND WATERWAYS
Flood damage prevention
Flood hazard reduction
Streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones),
building standards for ........ 34-83
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Prohibited acts
Swimming, wading, etc ............ 58-29(12)
Water pollution .................. 58-29(2)
Wetlands protection district
Permitted uses ........... 26-45
BOND ISSUANCE/ISSUES
Certain ordinances not affected by Code ........... 1-11(2)
BONDS, SURETY OR PERFORMANCE
Adult entertainment establishments
License
Application
Bond to be filed with application……18-408
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for License
Bonds, filing of, by applicants for license ........ 6-216 Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
License
Bonds, filing of, by applicants for license ........ 6-390 Municipal courts
Bond, forfeiture of ..........46-9
Bond required, when ........... 46-8
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Permit for group activities ......... 58-30(c)
Water and sewers
Sewage management systems, on-site
License, bond and certificate required .......... 74-82
BOOKSTORES
Adult entertainment establishments ........ 18-336 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
BOUNDARIES
Wetlands protection district
Boundaries, district ........... 26-44
BUDGET. See: FINANCE
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS Adult entertainment establishments
Enclosed viewing rooms, prohibition of Construction ........................ 18-351(2)
Alcoholic beverages
502
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
License; application; contents
Building, plans of……6-389(b)(1)
Flood damage prevention .......... 34-21 et seq.
See: FLOODS AND FLOODING
Massage or spa establishments
Operating provisions, general
Building and safety codes, compliance with .......... 18-283(k)
Mobile homes, mobile home parks, subdivisions and trailer parks .......... 56-1 et seq.
See: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS Noise
Specific prohibitions
Construction .......... 38-90(5)
Nuisances
Declared .......... 50-1
Swimming pools ......... 14-46 et seq. See: SWIMMING POOLS Technical codes
Amendments ........... 14-22
Regulations ......... 14-21
Tourist courts
Construction, layout and furnishings ............ 38-162
Sewers
Design and construction ........ 38-157(a)
Ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures .......... 14-241 et seq.
See: PLUMBING, PLUMBERS
Utilities……..74-1 et seq.
See: UTILITIES
Water and sewers……74-74 et seq.
See: WATER AND SEWERS
BURNING. See: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
BUSINESSES
Adult entertainment establishments……18-336 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Alcoholic beverages……6-1 et. seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Animal control
Adoption
Rules for adoption
Breeding or research, use of adopted animal for ……10-33(a)(4)
Food sales ……18-171 et. seq.
See: FOOD AND FOOD SERVICES
Food vending vehicles…..18-221 et. seq.
See: FOOD AND FOOD SERVICES
Massage or spa establishments……18-281 et. seq.
See: MASSAGE OR SPA ESTABLISHMENTS
Nuisances
Declared……50-
Pawnbrokers and pawnshops……18-106 et. seq.
See: PAWNBROKERS AND PAWNSHOPS
Taxation……70-21 et. seq.
See: TAXATION
503
Yard sales………18-76 et seq. See: YARD SALES
CAMPING
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Conduct; use regulations ......... 58-28(b)
CANVASSERS. See: PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS CATS. See: ANIMALS
CERTIFICATES, CERTIFICATION
Animal control
Vaccination
Certificate of vaccination ........... 10-43
Plumbing
Ultra- low- flow plumbing fixtures
Certification, product .......... 14-244
Psychic reading, fortune telling and related practices
Occupation tax certificate required ................ 70-131 Water and sewers
Sewage management systems, on-site
License, bond and certificate required .......... 74-82
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS
Code of ethics
Exemptions .......... 2-236
Taxation
Occupation tax
Charitable purpose, exemption on grounds that business operated for ............ 70-32
CHARTER
Certain ordinances not affected by Code ........... 1-11(1)
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
CHECKS
Check signature policy; use of credit cards ......... 2-5
Credit cards .......... 2-5(d)
Guidelines .......... 2-5(c)
CHILD CARE FACILITIES
Adult entertainment establishments Location ......... 18-343
CHILDREN. See: MINORS
CHURCHES. See: RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS
CITIZENSHIP
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for Operational requirements and restrictions
504
Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent ...................... 6-301
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
License
Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent ...................... 6-402
CITY
Definitions and rules of construction ............ 1-2
CITY ATTORNEY
Compensation ............ 2-209
Oath ........... 2-207
Powers and duties ............ 2-208
Qualifications and appointment .......... 2-206
CITY CLERK
Adult entertainment establishments ........... 18-406 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS Alcoholic beverages…...6-222 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Powers and duties ............ 2-147
Taxation
Occupation tax
City clerk; subpoena powers ........ 70-37
Term of office; removal ........... 2-146
CITY COUNCIL. See: MAYOR AND COUNCIL
CITY MANAGER
Alcoholic beverages
Malt beverages, retail sale of
License; application
Recommendation of city manager ........... 6-42(b) Wine, retail sale of
License; application
Recommendation of city manager ........... 6-137(b)
Compensation ............ 2-184
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines License
Issuance, procedure for
City manager's recommendation .......... 18-49(a) Mayor and council
Directions, giving, to employees subject to appointment and removal by city manager……2-34
Powers and duties ............ 2-181
Property, city owned, authority to sell or convey parcel of ............ 2-182
Removal from office .......... 2-183
CLERK. See: CITY CLERK
CLUBHOUSES
Nuisances
Declared ........... 50-1
505
CODE OF ETHICS
Conduct, standards of ...........2-234
Conflict of interest, prohibition of ........... 2-235
Definitions ........... 2-233
Exemptions .......... 2-236
Purpose of division .............2-231
Scope of persons covered ............ 2-232
Violations of division; penalty .......... 2-237
CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Amending Code ............ 1-5
Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, references in Code ........... 1-3
Certain ordinances not affected by Code .......... 1-11
Continuations of existing ordinances, provisions considered as ........... 1-9
Definitions and rules of construction ............ 1-2
How Code designated and cited ............ 1-1
Penalty, general; continuing violations ........... 1-7
Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code ........... 1-10
Repeal or expiration of Code section, effect of ........... 1-4
Severability of Code ...........1-8
Supplementation of Code ............. 1-6
CODES
Buildings and building regulations
Technical codes ......... 14-21 et seq.
See: BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS Massage or spa establishments
Operating provisions, general
Building and safety codes, compliance with .......... 18-283(k)
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
Adult entertainment establishments Location ........... 18-343
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Certain ordinances not affected by Code .......... 1-11(7)
COMPUTATION OF TIME
Definitions and rules of construction ............ 1-2
CONFIDENTIALITY
Taxation
Occupation tax
Returns confidential ............ 70-45
CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
Boards, commissions and authorities
Conflict of interest policy for members of boards, commissions and authorities ............. 2-271 Code of ethics
Conflict of interest, prohibition of ...........2-235
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
506
CONSERVATION
Wetlands protection district
Permitted uses .......... 26-45
CONTRACTORS
Adult entertainment establishments
Employees
Contractors, independent .......... 18-344(e)
CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
Certain ordinances not affected by Code .......... 1-11(3)
Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code .......... 1-10
Prohibited contracts .......... 2-6
Provisions re ......... 2-6(a)
Restrictions for current or former members and/or current or former employees of
governing authority ....... 2-6(b)
Use of property or services ......... 2-6(c)
Recreation board
Staffing, contracts and expenditures .......... 2-302
COUNCIL. See: MAYOR AND COUNCIL
COUNTY
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
COURTS. See: MUNICIPAL COURTS
CREDIT CARDS
Check signature policy; use of credit cards ........... 2-5
DAMAGE, DEFACEMENT, DESTRUCTION, INJURY, ETC. Animals
Damage caused by animals ............ 10-2
Flood damage prevention ......... 34-21 et seq.
See: FLOODS AND FLOODING
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts .......... 54-1(c)
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Prohibited acts
Damage to park property .......... 58-29(1)
DANCES, DANCING
Adult entertainment establishments ........... 18-336 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
DEEDS AND TITLES
Certain ordinances not affected by Code .......... 1-11(3)
DEFACEMENT. See: DAMAGE, DEFACEMENT, DESTRUCTION, INJURY, ETC.
507
DEFECATION IN PUBLIC
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts .......... 54-1(c)
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY
Definitions and rules of construction ............ 1-2
DEPARTMENTS AND OTHER AGENCIES OF CITY
Adult entertainment establishments ........... 18-437 et seq.
Alcoholic beverages ......... 6-42 et seq.
Animal control
Liability of county, city, animal control unit, officers and employees ............ 10-45 Boards, commissions and authorities
Conflict of interest policy for members of boards, commissions and authorities ........... 2-271
Definitions and rules of construction ............ 1-2
Emergency management organization .......... 22-21 et seq.
See: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines License
Issuance, procedure for
City council action .......... 18-49(b)
Mayor and council ......... 2-31 et seq.
Planning commission .......... 62-31 et seq.
Recreation board .......... 2-296 et seq.
DESTRUCTION. See: DAMAGE, DEFACEMENT, DESTRUCTION, INJURY, ETC. DEVELOPMENT. See: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
DISASTERS. See: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
DISORDERLY PERSONS, DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct ........... 54-1
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Prohibited acts
Disturbing the peace .......... 58-29(6)
Interference with peace, enjoyment of park .......... 58-29(11)
DISTRICTS
Wetlands protection district ........... 26-41 et seq. See: WETLANDS
DOCKS. See: BOATS, DOCKS AND WATERWAYS DOGS. See: ANIMALS
DRUGS AND MEDICINES
Animal control
Vaccination ......... 10-40 et seq.
508
See: ANIMALS
EDUCATION
Wetlands protection district
Permitted uses ……26-45
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
Code of ethics
Exemptions ……2-236
ELECTIONS
Mayor and council
Election; terms ……2-31
Meetings ……2-76
ELECTRICITY
Swimming pools
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses
Electrical ……14-109
Private residential pools
Construction and design criteria
Electrical requirements ……14-74(11)
EMERGENCIES
Emergency management and emergency services. See that subject Noise
Exemptions to sound limits ............ 38-89
Specific prohibitions
Emergency signaling devices ............ 38-90(7) Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts ............ 54-1(c)
Utilities
Damage, prevention of, to underground utilities
Emergency excavation or demolition ........... 74-26 Wetlands protection district
Development permits, local
Emergency permit, temporary ......... 26-77
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
Emergency management organization
County emergency management agency ........... 22-23
Annexes to local EOP ............ 22-23(b)
Departments and functions .................... 22-23(a)
County emergency management director, office of ............22-22
Appointment ............ 22-22(a)
Duties ........... 22-22(b)
Definitions ........... 22-21
Penalties for violation of article ........... 22-26
Powers of mayor and/or county during emergency or disaster .......... 22-24
Volunteers ............ 22-25
Compensation……..22-25(a)
509
Immunities…..22-25(b)
EMPLOYEES. See: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ENCLOSURES. See: FENCES, WALLS, HEDGES AND ENCLOSURES ENTERTAINMENTS. See: AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
ENVIRONMENT
Wetlands ......... .26-22 et seq. See: WETLANDS
ESCORT BUREAUS
Adult entertainment establishments .......... 18-336 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
ETHICS
Code of ethics .......... 2-23 1 et seq. See: CODE OF ETHICS
EXCAVATIONS
Utilities ......... 74-24 et seq. See: UTILITIES
FALSE REPRESENTATION. See: MISREPRESENTATION
FENCES, WALLS, HEDGES AND ENCLOSURES
Adult entertainment establishments
Enclosed viewing rooms, prohibition of ........... 18-351
Animal control
Cruelty to animals
Enclosure, animal, duty of owner to keep, clean .......... 10-31(e) Nuisances
Declared .......... 50-1
Swimming pools
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses Fences, barriers and gates .......... 14-108
Private residential pools
Construction and design criteria
Fences .................... 14-74(6)
FIGHTING
Animal control
Cruelty to animals
Animal fighting ............ 10-31(c)
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Prohibited acts…….58-29(8)
FINANCE
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Wholesaler licensing and regulations, beer and/or wine
510
Special provisions applicable to wholesale purchase
Financial interest in license for retail sale of alcoholic beverages, wholesaler not to have .......... 6-331(b)
Certain ordinances not affected by Code .................... 1-11(5)
Municipal courts
Costs, court .......... 46-10
Indigent defense program
Fees and expenses ........... 46-49
Recreation board
Staffing, contracts and expenditures .......... 2-302
Solid waste
Landfill, city, surcharge for solid waste deposited in
Fund ......... 66-1(b)
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS Taxation .. 70-106 et seq. See: TAXATION
FINES, FORFEITURES AND OTHER PENALTIES
Municipal courts
Fines, collection of ......... 46-11
Penalty, general; continuing violations .......... 1-7
Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code .......... 1-10
FINGERPRINTING
Alcoholic beverages
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Operational requirements and restrictions
Employees of licensees to be fingerprinted; procedure .............. 6-445 Pawnbrokers and pawnshops
Records and information to be maintained; display of pawnshop transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage; presentation upon request .......... 18-109
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Open burning .......... 30-1
Enforcement ......... 30-1(b)
Prohibited; exceptions ............ 30-1(a) Parks and recreation facilities, public
Conduct; use regulations .................. 58-28(c)
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Firearms, air guns, etc., discharging .......... 54-2
FLOODS AND FLOODING
Flood damage prevention
Abrogation and greater restrictions ........... 34-29
Administration
Administrator, designation of ........... 34-56
Administrator, duties and responsibilities of .......... 34-58
Permit procedures ........... 34-57
511
Application stage .................... 34-57(1)
Construction stage .................. 34-57(2)
Compliance with article provisions .......... 34-28
Definitions .......... 34-21
Development permit, establishment of ........... 34-27
Flood hazard reduction
General standards .......... 34-81
Shallow flooding, areas of (AO ZONES), standards for .......... 34-84
Specific standards .......... 34-82
Floodway ........... 34-82(4)
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, standards for .......... 34-82(3)
New construction and substantial improvements ......... 34-82(1)
Nonresidential construction .......... 34-82(2)
Streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones), building
standards for ........... 34-83
Subdivisions, standards for ........... 34-85
Variance procedures ........... 34-86
Hazards
Flood hazard reduction. See within this subheading that subject
Special flood hazard, area of, basis for .......... 34-26
Interpretation and application of article .......... 34-30
Lands to which this article applies ........... 34-25
Objectives of article .......... 34-24
Penalty for violation of article .......... 34-32
Purpose, statement of .......... 34-23
Special flood hazard, area of, basis for ........... 34-26
Warning and disclaimer of liability .......... 34-31
FOLLOWING
Definitions and rules of construction ......... 1-2
FOOD AND FOOD SERVICES
Food sales
Definitions .......... 18-171 License
Compliance required for issuance or renewal .......... 18-197
Posted license required ........... 18-196
Food vending vehicles
Definitions .......... 18-221 License
Application ......... 18-252
Exemptions ......... 18-255
Fees and term .......... 18-253
Investigation of facilities and vehicles prerequisite for issuance .......... 18-254
Penalty for violation of article .......... 18-257
Required ......... 18-251
Revocation of license; appeal ........... 18-256
Licenses and permits
License. See within this subheading that subject
Reinspection of facilities and premises; unsatisfactory condition grounds for license revocation .......... 18-222
Periods of operation ............ 18-225
512
Reinspection of facilities and premises; unsatisfactory condition grounds for license
revocation . . . . . 18-222
Report of changes .......... 18-223
Standards .......... 18-224
Tourist courts
Food service ............ 38-164
FORESTRY
Wetlands protection district
Permitted uses ........... 26-45
FORFEITURES. See: FINES, FORFEITURES AND OTHER PENALTIES
FORTUNE TELLING
Psychic reading, fortune telling and related practices .......... 70-131 et seq.
See: PSYCHIC READING, FORTUNE TELLING AND RELATED PRACTICES
FRANCHISES
Certain ordinances not affected by Code .......... 1-11(4)
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS Code of ethics
Exemptions ......... 2-236
FUMES
Nuisances
Declared ............ 50-1
GAMBLING
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for Operational requirements and restrictions
Gambling on premises prohibited……6-281
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Operational requirements and restrictions
Gambling on premises prohibited….. 6-426
GAME MACHINES, VENDING MACHINES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL MACHINES
Item of machinery or equipment defined ................................................. 18-21 License
Application, filing of .......... 18-47
Factors for council consideration ......... 18-50
Character of adjacent neighborhoods ........... 18-50(2)
Citizen reactions ................... 18-50(6)
Illegal use of machinery or equipment in past ........... 18-50(9)
Information on application .................. 18-50(7)
Parking .................... 18-50(4)
Proximity of churches, etc .................... 18-50(3)
Proximity of similar establishments .................... 18-50(1)
Revocation of previous applications .................... 18-50(8)
513
Traffic, affect on ................... 18-50(5)
Issuance, procedure for ........... 18-49
City council action .................... 18-49(b)
City manager's recommendation .................... 18-49(a)
Listing of items of machinery or equipment on application; notification of acquisition of new machinery 18-48
Required; fees; additional fees for pool tables ........... 18-46
Restrictions on issuance .......... 18-51
Termination, renewal, revocation, etc ............ 18-52
Location, change of .................. 18-52(b)
Number of machines, limits on .................. 18-52(c)
Termination .......... 18-52(a)
Penalty for violation of article .......... 18-22
GAMES
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Conduct; use regulations ................... 58-28(a)
GARBAGE. See: SOLID WASTE
GAS
Utilities 74-52 et.seq. See: UTILITIES
GENDER
Definitions and rules of construction ............ 1-2
GEORGIA, STATE OF. See: STATE
GOLF COURSES
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Golf course, public, sale of malt beverages at; authorization…….6-176 Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Golf course, public, sale at…..6-365
GWINNETT COUNTY. See: COUNTY
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Wetlands protection district
Prohibited uses…….26-46
HAZARDS
Flood damage prevention ……34-26 et. Seq.
See: FLOODS AND FLOODING
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Adult entertainment establishments
Cleaning of licensed premises …… 18-347
Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions…… 18-349
Junk, storage of ……38-21 et. Seq.
See: JUNK, STORAGE OF
514
Noise control …… 38-86 et. Seq.
See: NOISE
Nuisances
Declared .......... 50-1
Swimming pools
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses Public pools
Disinfectant feeders .......... 14-151
Disinfection and water quality 14-154
Tourist courts .......... 38-151 et seq.
See: TOURIST COURTS
Vector control ........... 38-191 et seq.
See: VECTOR CONTROL
HEARINGS
Adult entertainment establishments
Appeals
Hearing officer .......... 18-440
Hearing officer report and final decision……18-442
Alcoholic beverages ......... 6-220 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Junk, storage of
Objection to city action, procedure upon . . . . 38-26(b)
Massage or spa establishments
License .......... 18-311
Pawnbrokers and pawnshops
Pawnbrokers and employees, restrictions as to character; hearing …… 18-108
Taxation
Occupation tax
Hearing, public, before tax increase, requirement of ……70-50
HEATING AND AIR
Tourist courts
Heating …….. 38-163
HEDGES. See: FENCES, WALLS, HEDGES AND ENCLOSURES
HORNS
Noise
Specific prohibitions .......... 38-90(a)
HOTELS AND MOTELS
Tourist courts .......... 38-151 et seq.
See: TOURIST COURTS
HOURS
Alcoholic beverages ......... 6-284 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Massage or spa establishments
Operating provisions, general
Hours of business ........... 18-283(g)
Officers and employees
515
Office hours .......... 2-2
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Hours of operation……58-26 Pawnbrokers and pawnshops
Hours of operation .......... 18-111
HOUSING
Alcoholic beverages………6-30 1 et seq. See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES Swimming pools
Private residential pools ............ 14-71 et seq.
See: SWIMMING POOLS
ICEBOXES. See: REFRIGERATORS, ICEBOXES, ETC.
IDENTIFICATION
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Operational requirements and restrictions
Persons under 21 years of age, furnishing to, purchase by, or possession by; false and proper identification; dispensing, serving, selling, or handling in course of employment ........ 6-305
Pawnbrokers and pawnshops
Records and information to be maintained; display of pawnshop transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage; presentation upon request ....................... 18-109
IMPOUNDMENT
Animal control……..10-31 et seq.
See: ANIMALS
IMPROVEMENTS. See: PUBLIC WORKS AND IMPROVEMENTS
INDECENCY AND OBSCENITY
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts ........ 54-1(c)
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Prohibited acts
Dressing, undressing .......... 58-29(13)
INDIGENT PERSONS
Municipal courts
Indigent defense program…....46-46 et seq. See: MUNICIPAL COURTS
INJURY. See: DAMAGE, DEFACEMENT, DESTRUCTION, INJURY, ETC. INSECT CONTROL. See: PEST CONTROL
516
INSPECTIONS, INSPECTORS
Adult entertainment establishments
Self-inspection of licensed premises ........... 18-348
Alcoholic beverages ........ 6-290 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Food vending vehicles
Re-inspection of facilities and premises; unsatisfactory condition grounds for license
Revocation…….18-222
Massage or spa establishments
Operating provisions, general
Inspection, premises subject to…….. 18-283(e)
Records of client information to be maintained and subject to inspection……18-283(b) Swimming pools
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses
Applicability of division
Inspection of swimming pools (public)…….14-103(2)
Private residential pools……. 14-77
Taxation
Occupation tax
Inspections of books and records ........... 70-46
Registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books………70-47
Tourist courts……38-154
Water and sewers
Sewage management systems, on-site…….74-76
INSULTS
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts ............ 54-1(c)
INSURERS
Definitions ...........70-76
Gross premiums tax, all other insurers ........... 70-80
Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers .......... 70-79
License fees
Additional business locations, insurers insuring certain risks at…..70-78
Due date……70-81
Provisions re…….70-77
INTERFERENCE
Animal control
Interference with animal control officers……10-46 Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts ............ 54-1(c)
INTOXICATING BEVERAGES, INTOXICATION. See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
INTRODUCTION SERVICES
Adult entertainment establishments ............ 18-336 et seq.
517
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
INVENTORY
INVESTIGATIONS
Adult entertainment establishments
License
Application
Investigation of application .......... 18-409
Investigation of application and applicant; grant or denial ......... 18-412
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
License
Investigation of applicant; report ........... 6-217
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
License
Investigation of applicant; report…..6-391
Food vending vehicles License
Investigation of facilities and vehicles prerequisite for issuance……18-254
Pawnbrokers and pawnshops
Permit, annual
Background investigation; fee……18-142
JOINT AUTHORITY
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
JUNK, STORAGE OF
Abandoned motor vehicles .......... 38-27
Abatement of nuisance
City, by ......... 38-24
Property owner, by, after notice ........... 38-23
Abatement, summary; liability ......... 38-30
Accumulation of junk prohibited ...........38-22
Definitions .......... 38-21
Disposition of junk after removal by city; notice…….38-25
Nuisances
Abatement of nuisance. See herein that subject
Determination of existence of nuisances……38-28
Objection to city action, procedure upon .......... 38-26
Appeal ........... 38-26(c)
Filing of written objection .........38-26(a)
Hearing ......... 38-26(b)
Penalties .......... 38-29
JUVENILES. See: MINORS
KEEPER AND PROPRIETOR
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
LANDSCAPING. See: VEGETATION
518
LAUNDRY ROOMS
Tourist courts 38-166
LAW ENFORCEMENT
County code, provisions of, which county police department may enforce within city….. 42-1
Authority; terms and conditions ......... 42-1(b)
Incorporated by reference ......... 42-1(a)
Jurisdiction .......... 42-1(c)
LAWN MOWERS
Noise
Exemptions to sound limits .......... 38-89
LEGAL PROCESSES. See: WRITS, WARRANTS AND OTHER PROCESSES
LIABILITY
Animal control
Liability of county, city, animal control unit, officers and
employees …… 10-45
Flood damage prevention
Warning and disclaimer of liability…….34-31
Junk, storage of
Abatement, summary; liability .......... 38-30
Taxation
Occupation tax
Registration
Due and payable, when, registration and tax; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent; liability of officers and agents ...................................................... 70-35
LIBRARIES
Adult entertainment establishments Location ……..18-343
LICENSES AND PERMITS
Alcoholic beverages ............ 6-41 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Flood damage prevention
Administration
Permit procedures .......... 34-57
Development permit, establishment of .......... 34-27
Food sales
License .......... 18-196 et seq.
See: FOOD AND FOOD SERVICES
Food vending vehicles ........... 18-222 et seq.
See: FOOD AND FOOD SERVICES
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines
License .......... 18-46 et seq.
See: GAME MACHINES, VENDING MACHINES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL MACHINES
Insurers .......... 70-77 et seq.
See: INSURERS
519
Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks .......... 56-39 et seq.
See: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
Massage or spa establishments
License …….18-306 et seq.
See: MASSAGE OR SPA ESTABLISHMENTS
Pawnbrokers and pawnshops
Pawnbroker and employee regulations
Permit card 18-107(a)
Penalties for violation of article; suspension or revocation of
license ……18-114
Swimming pools
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses
Applicability of division
Permits (public)…….14-103(1)
Private residential pools
Construction permit .......... 14-73
Tourist courts
Permit ........... 38-152
Utilities
Damage, prevention of, to underground utilities
Permit not to relieve responsibility for compliance ........... 74-29
Water and sewers .......... 74-74 et seq.
See: WATER AND SEWERS
Wetlands protection district
Development permits, local……..26-77 et seq.
See: WETLANDS
Yard sales
Permit
Required ........... 18-77
Term; fee ......... 18-78
LIENS
Taxation
Occupation tax
Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax .......... 70-48
LIGHTING, LIGHTS
Massage or spa establishments
Operating provisions, general
Lighting, minimum ........... 18-283(i)
Swimming pools
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses
Electrical ......... 14-109
LIQUOR. See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
LITTER CONTROL
Collection practices ........... 66-34
Definitions .......... 66-29
520
Enforcement ........... 66-33
Evidence of littering .......... 66-31
Littering prohibited; exceptions ............ 66-30
Penalties .......... 66-32
Purpose and intent ............ 66-26
Statutory authority ............ 66-27
Title ........... 66-28
LOTS
Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks Plans and specifications
Mobile home lots ........... 56-72
LOUD NOISE. See: NOISE
LOUDSPEAKERS
Noise
Specific prohibitions .......... 38-90(3)
MAINTENANCE
Water and sewers
Sewage management systems, on-site…….74-77
MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
Applicability of chapter provisions ........... 56-5
Conflict with other provisions .......... 56-10
Definitions .......... 56-4
Enforcement .......... 56-8
Flood damage prevention
Flood hazard reduction
Specific standards
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, standards for . Interpretation, construction of terms or words ........ 56-3
Licenses and permits
Construction permits .......... 56-40
Individual permits .......... 56-41
Mobile home park and trailer park licenses ........... 56-39
Locations, permitted .......... 56-6
Nonconforming uses, discontinuance of ........... 56-7
Plans and specifications
Area and space requirements ......... 56-71
Automobile parking ........... 56-75
Facilities, additional, minimum
Mobile home parks and subdivisions ......... 56-76
Trailer parks ........... 56-77
Mobile home lots ........... 56-72
Roads and streets ........... 56-74
Trailer and camper spaces ........ 56-73
Purpose and intent ........ 56-1
Title .......... 56-2
Violation; penalties ............ 56-9
Water and sewers
Sewage management systems, on-site
521
Subdivision and mobile home parks
Development requirements ............ 74-94
Water and sewage .......... 74-95
MAPS. See: SURVEYS, MAPS AND PLATS
MASSAGE OR SPA ESTABLISHMENTS
Definitions .......... 18-281
License
Fee, regulatory; expiration and renewal .......... 18-307
Hearings .......... 18-311
Issuance of license .......... 18-309
Required; application ........... 18-306
Revocation and suspension of license, grounds for ........... 18-310
Work permits required .......... 18-308
Operating provisions, general .......... 18-283
Alcoholic beverages ......... 18-283(n)
Beds or mattresses .......... 18-283(j)
Building and safety codes, compliance with ..................... 18-283(k)
Clothing .......... 18-283(f)
Employee information, filing of .......... 18-283(a)
Hours of business ............ 18-283(g)
Inspection, premises subject to ......... 18-283(e)
Lighting, minimum ......... 18-283(i)
Minors .................... 18-283(l)
Owner, manager to be on premises ......................................................... 18-283(c) Records and reports
Employee information, filing of ......... 18-283(a)
Records of client information to be maintained and subject to inspection…….18-283(b)
Records, period of time, to be maintained .......... 18-283(d)
Signage ........... 18-283(h)
Unlawful actions of massage practitioner……..18-283(m)
Records and reports
Operating provisions, general. See herein that subject Scope of regulations ............. 18-282
MAY
Definitions and rules of construction .......... 1-2
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Administrative resolutions .......... 2-33
Adult entertainment establishments ........... 18-437 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Alcoholic beverages ........ 6-42 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Definitions and rules of construction…….1-2
Directions, giving, to employees subject to appointment and removal by city manager……..2-34
Election; terms .......... 2-31
Emergency management organization
522
Powers of mayor and/or county during emergency or disaster ..........22-24
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines
License
Issuance, procedure for
City council action ......... 18-49(b)
Meetings
Agenda .......... 2-71
Duty to attend .......... 2-68
Elections ......... 2-76
Matters for consideration, presentation of .......... 2-73
Number of persons to speak as proponents and opponents;
exception ……..2-73(c)
Rules for getting specific matter considered at meeting…….2-73(b)
Minutes .......... 2-72
Notice of special meetings .......... 2-67
Ordinances, presentation and enactment of .......... 2-74
Presiding officer ......... 2-70
Questions of order, appeals ........ 2-75
Robert's Rules of Order ......... 2-69
Times; open to public .......... 2-66
Qualification for office ......... 2-32
MEASURES. See: WEIGHTS AND MEASURES MEDICINES. See: DRUGS AND MEDICINES
MINORS (Juveniles, children, etc.)
Adult entertainment establishments
Location ......... 18-343
Minors, admission of and sales to, unlawful ........ 18-342
Alcoholic beverages ...........6-304 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Animal control
Adoption
Rules for adoption
Age for person adopting; humane care .......... 10-33(a)(2)
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines
License
Factors for council consideration
Proximity of churches, etc……18-50(3)
Massage or spa establishments
Operating provisions, general……..18-283(l)
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts .......... 54-1(c)
Pawnbrokers and pawnshops
Minors, dealing with .......... 18-113
MISREPRESENTATION
Alcoholic beverages …… 2-226 et seq.
523
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Pawnbrokers and pawnshops
False entries or statements .......... 18-110
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS. See: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
MONTH
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
MOTELS. See: HOTELS AND MOTELS
MOTOR VEHICLES. See: TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
MUNICIPAL COURTS
Adult entertainment establishments
Appeals
Superior court, appeal of council decision to 18-443
Appeals ……..46-12
Bailiff…….46-3
Bond, forfeiture of ……..46-9
Bond required, when……..46-8
Costs, court……46-10
Fines, collection of…….46-11
Indigent defense program
Appeal ......... 46-51
Attorneys eligible for appointment .......... 46-52
Attorneys, panel of .......... 46-48
Chief judge to develop procedures, etc., to effectuate this article……46-53
Definitions .......... 46-47
Fees and expenses ............ 46-49
Internal operating procedures of county judicial circuit's indigent defense program adopted by reference ………….46-46
Right to appointed counsel, determination of ……..46-50
Prosecutor; witnesses…….46-2
Record of cases…….46-4
Session dates and times ….… 46-1
Wetlands protection district
Judicial review …… 26-49
Writs, warrants and other processes
Failure to obey summons or subpoena…….46-7
Subpoenas, issuance, service of……46-6
Summons, service of ………46-5
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS
Noise
Specific prohibitions ......... 8-90(2)
MUST
Definitions and rules of construction ............ 1-2
524
NATURE TRAILS
Wetlands protection district
Permitted uses …… 26-45
NOISE
Definitions …… 38-86
Excessive noise prohibited …… 38-87
Exemptions to sound limits …… 38-89
Maximum permissible sound levels …… 38-88
Nuisances
Declared …… 50-1
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts .......... 54-1(c)
Penalty for violation of article .......... 38-91
Responsibility for enforcement of article .......... 38-92
Specific prohibitions .......... 38-90
Animals .......... 38-90(4)
Construction ........... 38-90(5)
Emergency signaling devices ........... 38-90(7)
Horns, signaling devices .................... 38-90(1)
Loudspeakers and sound amplifiers .......... 38-90(3)
Powered model vehicles .................... 38-90(6)
Radios, televisions, musical instruments and similar
devices……..38-90(2)
Traffic and vehicles
Exemptions to sound limits …… 38-89
Specific prohibitions
Horns, signaling devices .......... 38-90(1)
Powered model vehicles .......... 38-90(6)
NOTICES, NOTIFICATION
Adult entertainment establishments ......... 18-412 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Alcoholic beverages …… 6-42 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Animal control
Disposition of impounded animals
Notification, owner; redemption .......... 10-34(a)
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines
License
Listing of items of machinery or equipment on application; notification of acquisition of new machinery ……18-48
Junk, storage of
Abatement of nuisance
Property owner, by, after notice .......... 38-23
Disposition of junk after removal by city; notice .......... 38-25
Mayor and council
Meetings
Notice of special meetings ........... 2-67
Utilities
Damage, prevention of, to underground utilities
525
Notice of intent to excavate or demolish
Required; time; information; records ........ 74-24
Response to notice ......... 74-25
NUDITY
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Operational requirements and restrictions
Entertainment, attire and conduct, types of, prohibited …… 6-283 Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Operational requirements and restrictions
Entertainment, attire and conduct, types of, prohibited …… 6-428
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts …… 54-1(c)
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Prohibited acts
Dressing, undressing .......... 58-29(13)
NUISANCES
Abatement by city………50-3
Adult entertainment establishments
Abatement as sanitary nuisance ........... 18-350
Unlawful operation declared nuisance .......... 18-346
Animals ......... 10-1 et seq.
See: ANIMALS
Declared .......... 50-1
Junk, storage of …… 38-23 et seq.
See: JUNK, STORAGE OF
Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement .......... 50-4
Offense; penalty ......... 50-5
Vector control
General provisions
Nuisance, maintaining .......... 38-192(a)
NUMBER
Definitions and rules of construction ............ 1-2
OATH, AFFIRMATION, SWEAR OR SWORN City attorney
Oath ......... 2-207
Definitions and rules of construction ................ 1-2
Officers and employees
Oath of office described ......... 2-111
OBSCENITY. See: INDECENCY AND OBSCENITY
OBSTRUCTIONS
Nuisances
Declared ......... 50-1
526
O.C.G.A.
Definitions and rules of construction ............ 1-2
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
County offenses regulations, adoption by reference of .......... 54-4
Disorderly conduct ........ 54-1
Definitions ......... 54-1(b)
Prohibited acts ........... 54-1(c)
Purpose of section ......... 54-1(a)
State code sections, authority for incorporating ......... 54-1(d)
Firearms, air guns, etc., discharging .......... 54-2
Nuisances
Offense; penalty ......... 50-5
Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code .......... 1-10
Throwing of missiles .......... 54-3
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Adult entertainment establishments ........... 18-406 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Alcoholic beverages …… 6-42 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Animal control
Interference with animal control officers ……10-46
Liability of county, city, animal control unit, officers and
employees ……10-45
Certain ordinances not affected by Code ……1-11(6)
City attorney ……2-206 et seq.
See: CITY ATTORNEY
City clerk ......... 2-146 et seq.
See: CITY CLERK
City manager……..2-181 et seq.
See: CITY MANAGER
Code of ethics……2-231 et seq.
See: CODE OF ETHICS
Contracts, prohibited
Restrictions for current or former members and/or current or former employees of governing authority ………..2-6(b)
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
Emergency management organization ...........22-21 et seq.
See: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
Flood damage prevention
Administration
Administrator, designation of ............ 34-56
Administrator, duties and responsibilities of ........... 34-58
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines
License
Issuance, procedure for
City manager's recommendation ........ 18-49(a)
Mayor and council …… 2-31 et seq.
See: MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Municipal courts
Bailiff ...........46-3
527
Indigent defense program
Chief judge to develop procedures, etc., to effectuate this article .......... 46-53
Oath of office described .......... 2-111
Obstructing, abusing, failing to obey officials .......... 2-1
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts ............ 54-1(c)
Office hours ......... 2-2
Planning commission .......... 62-31 et seq.
See: PLANNING COMMISSION
Recreation board…… 2-296 et seq.
See: RECREATION BOARD
Taxation
Occupation tax
City clerk; subpoena powers ……70-37
Registration
Due and payable, when, registration and tax; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent; liability of officers and
agents……………70-35
Training of employees, in-service …… 2-7
OFFICES
Office hours .......... 2-2
OPEN SPACES. See: YARDS AND OPEN SPACES
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ETC.
Code of ordinances .......... 1-1 et seq.
See: CODE OF ORDINANCES
Mayor and council
Administrative resolutions .......... 2-33
Meetings
Ordinances, presentation and enactment of……..2-74
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
County offenses regulations, adoption by reference of ……..54-4 Disorderly conduct
State code sections, authority for incorporating…….54-1(d)
Planning commission
State regulations, adoption of ……..62-31
OWNER
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts ……..54-1(c)
528
PARKING.
See: TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
PARKS AND RECREATION
Adult entertainment establishments
Location……. 18-343
Code of ethics
Exemptions .......... 2-236
Flood damage prevention
Flood hazard reduction
Specific standards
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, standards
for…….34-82(3)
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines ............ 18-21 et seq.
See: GAME MACHINES, VENDING MACHINES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL MACHIN ES
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts ......... 54-1(c)
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Conduct; use regulations .......... 58-28
Alcoholic beverages ………….. 58-28(g)
Animals ............................ 58-28(d)
Automobiles .................... 58-28(e)
Camping ...........58-28(b)
Fires ......... 58-28(c)
Games ......... 58-28(a)
Picnic area .......... 58-28(i)
Sales ............ 58-28(f)
Signs ........... 58-28(h)
Hours of operation ........... 58-26
Permit for group activities .......... 58-30
Bond ............ 58-30(c)
Issuance ...........58-30(b)
Required; application .......... 58-30(a)
Prohibited acts ......... 58-29
Alcoholic beverages ........... 58-29(9)
Animals ............58-29(4)
Damage to park property .................... 58-29(1)
Disturbing the peace ........... 58-29(6)
Dressing, undressing ......... 58-29(13)
Fighting ............58-29(8)
Interference with peace, enjoyment of park . . . . . 58-29(11)
Safety, public .................. 58-29(7)
Swimming, wading, etc ....................... 58-29(12)
Trash, rubbish .......... 58-29(5)
Trees, plants .................... 58-29(3)
Violation of parks rules ...................... 58-29(10)
Water pollution .......... 58-29(2)
Restoration of site by user .......... 58-27
529
Recreation board ........... 2-296 et seq.
See: RECREATION BOARD
Recreation programs, municipal, development of ........... 58-1
Wetlands protection district
Permitted uses ......... 26-45
PAWNBROKERS AND PAWNSHOPS Definitions ……18-106
Enforcement responsibility .......... 18-115
False entries or statements ........... 18-110
Hours of operation .......... 18-111
Licenses and permits
Pawnbroker and employee regulations
Permit card ........... 18-107(a)
Penalties for violation of article; suspension or revocation of license ............ 18-114
Permit, annual. See herein that subject
Minors, dealing with ......... 18-113
Pawnbroker and employee regulations .......... 18-107
Permit card ......... 18-107(a)
Qualifications for employees and managers .......... 18-107(b)
Pawnbrokers and employees, restrictions as to character; hearing .......... 18-108
Penalties for violation of article; suspension or revocation of license…….18-114
Permit, annual
Application ......... 18-144
Contents .......... 18-144(a)
Updated application, annual ...................... 18-144(b)
Background investigation; fee .......... 18-142
Prerequisite to issuance of business license .......... 18-145
Renewal .......... 18-143
Report, daily, to police .......... 18-146
Contents ..................... 18-146(b)
Insufficient reports ......... 18-146(c)
Required ..................... 18-146(a)
Required .......... 18-141
Property not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition; location of property; police holds………18-112
Records and information to be maintained; display of pawnshop transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage; presentation upon request …….18-109
Digital photographs ......... 18-109(5)
Documentation of identity and time of transaction …….18-109(4)
Fingerprints ............ 18-109(6)
Identification .......... 18-109(3)
Information to be maintained; transaction number ....................... 18-109(1)
Record storage; presentation upon request ............ 18-109(7)
Tag .......... 18-109(2)
PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Operational requirements and restrictions
530
Solicitation prohibited .......... 6-282
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption Operational requirements and restrictions
Solicitation prohibited .......... 6-427
Food vending vehicles ........... 18-221 et seq.
See: FOOD AND FOOD SERVICES
PENALTIES. See: FINES, FORFEITURES AND OTHER PENALTIES PERFORMANCE BONDS. See: BONDS, SURETY OR PERFORMANCE PERMITS. See: LICENSES AND PERMITS
PERSON
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
PERSONAL PROPERTY
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
PEST CONTROL
Tourist courts
Insect and rodent control ........... 38-161
Vector control ..........38-191 et seq.
See: VECTOR CONTROL
PICNIC AREAS
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Conduct; use regulations…….58-28(i)
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Certain ordinances not affected by Code .......... 1-11(7), 1-11(8)
Flood damage prevention ......... 34-21 et seq.
See: FLOODS AND FLOODING
Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks
Plans and specifications ........... 56-71 et seq.
See: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS Parks and recreation
Recreation programs, municipal, development of …….58-1
Planning commission………62-31 et seq.
See: PLANNING COMMISSION
Swimming pools
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses
Plans and specifications……. 14-104
Tourist courts
Plan review ......... 38-153
Water and sewers
Sewage management systems, on-site
Plans, specifications, and soil data, submission of .......... 74-80
Subdivision and mobile home parks
Development requirements ........................ 74-94
531
Wetlands protection district
Development permits, local .......... 26-77 et seq.
See: WETLANDS
PLANNING COMMISSION
Compensation .......... 62-35
Composition, appointment and tenure ........... 62-32
Officers and rules of procedure ......... 62-36
Powers and duties ........... 62-37
Removal from office ........... 62-34
State regulations, adoption of .......... 62-31
Vacancies .......... 62-33
PLATS. See: SURVEYS, MAPS AND PLATS
PLUMBING, PLUMBERS
Tourist courts ........... 38-159
Ultra- low- flow plumbing fixtures
Certification, product ........... 14-244
Compliance and enforcement ............ 14-247
Definitions .......... 14-242
Exceptions .......... 14-245
Penalties for violation of article ........... 14-246
Purpose ........ 14-241
Standards ......... 14-243
POLICE DEPARTMENT
County code, provisions of, which county police department may enforce within city……..42-1
Pawnbrokers and pawnshops
Property not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition; location of property; police holds . . . . . 18-112
POLITICAL ACT IVITIES
Code of ethics
Exemptions .......... 2-236
POLLUTION
Nuisances
Declared .......... 50-1
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Prohibited acts
Water pollution .......... 58-29(2)
POOLS. See: SWIMMING POOLS
POWER TOOLS
Noise
Exemptions to sound limits .......... 38-89
PRECEDING
Definitions and rules of construction .......... 1-2
532
PROCESSES. See: WRITS, WARRANTS AND OTHER PROCESSES
PROCESSIONS. See: PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
PROFANITY. See: INDECENCY AND OBSCENITY
PROFESSIONAL SOCIETIES
Code of ethics
Exemptions .......... 2-236
PROPERTY
Certain ordinances not affected by Code ......... 1-11
City manager
Property, city owned, authority to sell or convey parcel of .......... 2-182
Definitions and rules of construction .......... 1-2
Property not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition; location of property; police holds . . . . . 18-112
Junk, storage of
Abatement of nuisance
Property owner, by, after notice .......... 38-23
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Prohibited acts
Damage to park property ......... 58-29(1)
PSYCHIC READING, FORTUNE TELLING AND RELATED PRACTICES
Enforcement……..70-133
Occupation tax certificate required ........... 70-131
Owners and employees, restrictions on ........... 70-134
Penalties ……70-135
Records, maintenance of ……70-132
PUBLIC PLACES. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
PUBLIC SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS
Code of ethics
Exemptions ……2-236
PUBLIC WORKS AND IMPROVEMENTS
Flood damage prevention
Flood hazard reduction
Specific standards
New construction and substantial improvements…….34-82(1)
PUBLICATION
Alcoholic beverages
Malt beverages, retail sale of
License; application
Notice, publication of ……..6-42(d)
Wine, retail sale of
License; application
Notice, publication of ……..6-137(d)
533
RABIES CONTROL
Provisions re………10-40 et seq.
See: ANIMALS
RADIO
Noise
Specific prohibitions …… 38-90(2) Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts …… 54-1(c)
REAL PROPERTY
Definitions and rules of construction .......... 1-2
RECORDS AND REPORTS
Adult entertainment establishments ............ 18-408 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Alcoholic beverages …… 6-216 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
City clerk ..........2-146 et seq.
See: CITY CLERK
Food vending vehicles
Report of changes ......... 18-223
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines
License
Application, filing of …… 18-47
Junk, storage of
Objection to city action, procedure upon
Filing of written objection ........... 38-26(a)
Massage or spa establishments .......... 18-283 et seq.
See: MASSAGE OR SPA ESTABLISHMENTS
Mayor and council
Meetings
Minutes…….. 2-72
Municipal courts
Record of cases…….. 46-4
Pawnbrokers and pawnshops Permit, annual
Report, daily, to police…….18-146
Records and information to be maintained; display of pawnshop transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage; presentation upon request……..18-109
Psychic reading, fortune telling and related practices
Records, maintenance of ........... 70-132
Public records
Availability .......... 2-3
Examination; copies .......... 2-4
Rules for copying; request forms .......... 2-4(a)
Time limit .......... 2-4(b)
Waiver of copying fees ........... 2-4(c)
Taxation ........ 70-40 et seq.
See: TAXATION
Utilities
534
Damage, prevention of, to underground utilities
Filing requirements of utility operators .......... 74-23
Notice of intent to excavate or demolish
Required; time; information; records .......... 74-24
Wetlands protection district
Development permits, local
Filing review fee ........... 26-80
RECREATION. See: PARKS AND RECREATION
RECREATION BOARD
Compensation ........... 2-298
Composition, appointment and tenure ............ 2-296
Officers; rules of procedure ........... 2-299
Powers and duties .......... 2-30 1
Staffing, contracts and expenditures ......... 2-302
State law, incorporation of ......... 2-300
Vacancies .......... 2-297
REFRIGERATORS, ICEBOXES, ETC. Nuisances
Declared ........... 50-1
REFUSE. See: SOLID WASTE
REGISTRATION
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Operational requirements and restrictions
Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent .......... 6-301 Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
License
Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent .......... 6-402
Taxation .......... 70-26 et seq.
See: TAXATION
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS
Adult entertainment establishments
Location .......... 18-343
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine
Operational requirements and restrictions
Distance from schools, churches, residences……..6-302
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Operational requirements and restrictions
Distance from schools, churches, residences ……. 6-448
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines
License
Factors for council consideration
Proximity of churches, etc ............ 18-50(3)
535
Noise
Exemptions to sound limits .......... 38-89
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS Code of ethics
Exemptions ......... 2-236
REPORTS. See: RECORDS AND REPORTS
RESEARCH
Animal control
Adoption
Rules for adoption
Breeding or research, use of adopted animal for ..........10-33(a)(4) Wetlands protection district
Permitted uses ......... 26-45
RESOLUTIONS. See: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ETC.
ROADS. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES RODENT CONTROL. See: PEST CONTROL
SAFETY
Adult entertainment establishments
Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions……..18-349
Massage or spa establishments
Operating provisions, general
Building and safety codes, compliance with…….18-283(k)
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts……… 54-1(c) Parks and recreation facilities, public
Prohibited acts
Safety, public …… 58-29(7)
Swimming pools ........... 14-75 et seq.
See: SWIMMING POOLS
SALES. See also: BUSINESSES
City manager
Property, city owned, authority to sell or convey parcel of …….2-182
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Conduct; use regulations …… 58-28(f)
SANITATION. See: HEALTH AND SANITATION
SCHOOLS
Adult entertainment establishments
Location ............ 18-343
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
536
Operational requirements and restrictions
Distance from schools, churches, residences……..6-302
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Operational requirements and restrictions
Distance from schools, churches, residences …… 6-448
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines
License
Factors for council consideration
Proximity of churches, etc …..18-50(3)
SETBACKS. See: YARDS AND OPEN SPACES SEWERS. See: WATER AND SEWERS
SEXUAL CONDUCT
Adult entertainment establishments
Certain activities prohibited ........... 18-340
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Operational requirements and restrictions
Entertainment, attire and conduct, types of, prohibited ………..6-283
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Operational requirements and restrictions
Entertainment, attire and conduct, types of, prohibited ……….6-428
Massage or spa establishments
Operating provisions, general
Unlawful actions of massage practitioner ........................ 18-283(m)
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts……..54-1(c)
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
SHALL
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
SHRUBBERY. See: VEGETATION
SIDEWALKS. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
SIGNS
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Operational requirements and restrictions
Signs, removal of .......... 6-296
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption Operational requirements and restrictions
Signs, removal of .......... 6-442
537
Food sales
License
Posted license required ............ 18-196 Massage or spa establishments
Operating provisions, general ......... 18-283(h) Parks and recreation facilities, public
Conduct; use regulations .......... 58-28(h)
SMOKE
Nuisances
Declared ........... 50-1
SOLICITORS. See: PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
SOLID WASTE
Animals .......... 10-2 et seq.
See: ANIMALS
Landfill, city, surcharge for solid waste deposited in ........... 66-1
Authority .......... 66-1(a)
Fund ........... 66-1(b)
Litter control .......... 66-26 et seq.
See: LITTER CONTROL
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Prohibited acts
Trash, rubbish ........... 58-29(5)
Solid Waste Collection and Disposal 66-150
Tourist courts
Refuse disposal…….38-160
SOUND. See: NOISE
SPA ESTABLISHMENTS. See: MASSAGE OR SPA ESTABLISHMENTS
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Certain ordinances not affected by Code ........... 1-11(10)
STAGNANT WATER
Nuisances
Declared ........... 50-1
STATE
Definitions and rules of construction ............ 1-2
STORAGE
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for
Wholesaler licensing and regulations, beer and/or wine
Retail storage, regulations governing……..6-336
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Operational requirements and restrictions
Retail storage, regulations governing………6-433
Junk, storage of ……. 38-21 et seq.
538
See: JUNK, STORAGE OF
Pawnbrokers and pawnshops
Records and information to be maintained; display of pawnshop transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage; presentation upon request……18-109
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
Adult entertainment establishments
Location ........... 18-343
Alcoholic beverages ............ 6-21 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Certain ordinances not affected by Code ........... 1-11(11)
Definitions and rules of construction……..1-2
Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks
Plans and specifications
Roads and streets ……..56-74
SUBDIVISIONS
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-11(12)
Flood damage prevention
Flood hazard reduction
Subdivisions, standards for .......... 34-85
Mobile homes, mobile home parks, subdivisions and trailer
parks…….. 56-1 et seq.
See: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS Water and sewers
Sewage management systems, on-site
Subdivision and mobile home parks
Development requirements……..74-94
Water and sewage…….74-95
SUBPOENAS. See: WRITS, WARRANTS AND OTHER PROCESSES SUGAR HILL, CITY OF. See: CITY
SUMMONSES. See: WRITS, WARRANTS AND OTHER PROCESSES
SURETY BONDS. See: BONDS, SURETY OR PERFORMANCE
SURVEYS, MAPS AND PLATS
Alcoholic beverages
Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption License; application; contents
Survey .......... 6-389(b)(2)
Certain ordinances not affected by Code .............1-11(12), 1-11(14)
SWEAR OR SWORN. See: OATH, AFFIRMATION, SWEAR OR SWORN
SWIMMING
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Prohibited acts
Swimming, wading, etc ............ 58-29(12)
539
SWIMMING POOLS
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses Administration and enforcement; variance ............ 14-114
Applicability of division ......... 14-103
Inspection of swimming pools (public) ………14-103(2)
Permits (public)………14-103(1)
Bathhouses
Compliance with technical codes …….14-211(a)
Facilities……. 14-212
Dressing room floors 14-212(a)
Dressing rooms, toilet rooms, shower rooms……14-212(b)
Shower, toilet and lavatory facilities…….14-212(c)
Optional contents…….14-211(d)
Other considerations by governing body…….14-211(c)
Provisions re…….14-211(b)
Requirements when used by both sexes……. 14-211(e)
Conflict with other codes, laws or regulations…….14-115
Definitions……14-102
Electrical…….14-109
Enforcement……..14-116
Fences, barriers and gates…….14-108
Load, user, computation……. 14-113
Piping……..14-112
Plans and specifications……..14-104
Public pools
Deck areas ……14-147
Disinfectant feeders …… 14-151
Disinfection and water quality ……. 14-154
Diving areas and equipment …… 14-148
Filtration equipment …… 14-152
Hair and lint strainer …… 14-149
Hose and connections …… 14-144
Inlets and outlets …… 14-142
Make-up water facilities …… 14-153
Overflow facilities …… 14-143
Gutters, standards for …… 14-143(1)
Skimmers, standards for …… 14-143(2)
Safety precautions …… 14-155
Shape, slope and depth …… 14-141
Spray pools …… 14-146
Suction cleaner …… 14-150
Wading pools …… 14-145
Pumping equipment…….14-111
Recirculation and filtration system……14-110
Spas
Bathhouse facilities ............ 14-185
Definitions ........... 14-181
Recirculation and filtration system .......... 14-184
Safety precautions .......... 14-186
Shape, slope, and depth ......... 14-182
Steps, ladders, and handrails……14-183
Steps, ladders and handrails…….14-107
540
Structure design and materials…….14-106
Title and purpose…….14-101
Water supply……14-105
Weights and measures
Load, user, computation ...........14-113
Public pools
Shape, slope and depth ......... 14-141
Spas
Shape, slope, and dept…….14-182
Structure design and materials…….14-106
Nuisances
Declared …….50-1
Private residential pools
Compliance with division required……14-72
Construction and design criteria…….14-74
Electrical requirements .......... 14-74(11)
Fences ........... 14-74(6)
Inlets and outlets ......... 14-74(9)
Materials ......... 14-74(2)
Recirculation and filtration system and appurtenances ............ 14-74(10)
Recirculation required ........... 14-74(1)
Skimmers .................... 14-74(8)
Slope and depth .......... 14-74(3)
Steps, ladders and handrails ............ 14-74(7)
Structural stress ........... 14-74(4)
Walk areas…….14-74(5)
Construction permit……14-73
Application .......... 14-73(b)
Fee ......... 14-73(c)
Required .................. 14-73(a)
Definitions ......... 14-71
Inspections ......... 14-77
Safety precautions ............ 14-75
Setback requirements …… 14-76
Safety
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses
Public pools
Safety precautions ……14-155
Spas
Safety precautions……14-186
Private residential pools
Safety precautions……14-75
Tourist courts…….38-165
Water and sewers
Sewage management systems, on-site
Repair or alteration
Swimming pool installation, alteration for .............. 74-83(b)
Weights and measures
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses. See herein that subject
Private residential pools
541
Construction and design criteria .......... 14-74
TAXATION
Alcoholic beverages ........... 6-218 et seq.
See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Businesses
Financial institutions
Occupation tax ........... 70-106
Occupation tax. See herein that subject
Certain ordinances not affected by Code ............ 1-11(13)
Financial institutions
Due date ........ 70-108
Occupation tax ........... 70-106
Returns, filing of ........... 70-107
Insurers ......... 70-76 et seq.
See: INSURERS
Occupation tax
Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure ........... 70-2 3
Businesses not covered by this article .......... 70-3 8
Calendar year, occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year ............................................................. 70-40
Charitable purpose, exemption on grounds that business operated for .......... 70-3 2
City clerk; subpoena powers ........... 70-37
Conflicts between specific and general provisions ........... 70-5 1
Definitions .......... 70-22
Due and payable, when; payment options ......... 70-42
Enforcement of article ........... 70-49
Hearing, public, before tax increase, requirement of ............ 70-50
Inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law………70-3 9
Inspections of books and records ............ 70-46
Levied; restrictions .......... 70-24
Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax .......... 70-4 8
Line of business, each, to be identified on business registration ......... 70-26
Location, business with no, in state, paying occupation tax of .......... 70-25
Locations, multiple intra or interstate, allocation of gross receipts of business with…….70-31
More than one place or line of business .......... 70-44
Newly established businesses, payment of occupation tax by .......... 70-43
Number of businesses considered operating in city ........... 70-27
Penalty for article violation ........... 70-36
Practitioners exclusively practicing for government ......... 70-29
Professionals, as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)1--18 .......... 70-28
Purpose and scope of tax ......... 70-30
Qualification, evidence of, required if applicable ...........70-34
Records and reports
Calendar year, occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year…….70-40
Inspections of books and records .......... 70-46
542
Registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books………70-47
Return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year, filing of; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid…….70-41
Returns confidential……70-45
Registration
Due and payable, when, registration and tax; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent; liability of officers and
agents…….70-35
Failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books, registration to be revoked for……..70-47
Line of business, each, to be identified on business registration …………70-26
State registration required if applicable, evidence of; state registration to be displayed…….70-33
Required for business dealings in city 70-21
Return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year, filing of; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid…….70-41
Returns confidential ........... 70-45
Psychic reading, fortune telling and related practices ........... 70-131 et seq.
See: PSYCHIC READING, FORTUNE TELLING AND RELATED PRACTICES
Records and reports
Financial institutions
Returns, filing of ............70-107
Occupation tax. See herein that subject
Registration
Occupation tax. See herein that subject
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions
Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts ............ 54-1(c)
TELEVISION
Noise
Specific prohibitions ............ 38-90(2)
TENANT OR OCCUPANT
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
TENSE
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
Adult entertainment establishments ............ 18-336 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
THROWING OBJECTS
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions ........... 54-3
TITLES. See: DEEDS AND TITLES
543
TOILETS
Swimming pools
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses
Bathhouses; facilities
Dressing rooms, toilet rooms, shower rooms…….14-212(b)
Shower, toilet and lavatory facilities…….14-212(c)
TOURIST COURTS
Construction, layout and furnishings .......... 38-162
Definitions ........... 38-151
Enforcement ........... 38-168
Food service ............. 3 8-164
Grounds ........... 38-167
Heating ............ 38-163
Insect and rodent control ............ 38-161
Inspections ........... 38-154
Laundry rooms ........... 38-166
Permit ........... 38-152
Plan review ............ 38-153
Plumbing ........... 38-159
Refuse disposal .......... 38-160
Sewers. See: Water and Sewers
Swimming pools ........... 38-165
Toilet facilities ........... 38-156
Water and sewers
Sewage disposal ............ 38-158
Sewers ........... 38-157
Connections ..........38-157(b)
Design and construction ........... 38-157(a)
Water supply .......... 38-155
Water supply .......... 38-155
TOXIC WASTE
Wetlands protection district
Prohibited uses ........... 26-46
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Flood damage prevention
Flood hazard reduction
Specific standards
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, standards for…….34-82(3)
Food vending vehicles ........... 18-221 et seq.
See: FOOD AND FOOD SERVICES
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines
License
Factors for council consideration
Parking .................... 18-50(4)
Traffic, affect on .................... 18-50(5)
Junk, storage of
Abandoned motor vehicles .......... 38-27
Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks
544
Plans and specifications
Automobile parking ......... 56-75
Noise .......... 38-89 et seq.
See: NOISE
Nuisances
Declared .......... 50-1
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Conduct; use regulations
Automobiles ............ 58-28(e)
Yard sales
Parking violations, person conducting sale to be responsible for ……18-79
TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS. See: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
TRASH. See: SOLID WASTE
TREES. See: VEGETATION
UNIVERSITIES. See: COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
URINATION IN PUBLIC
Offenses and miscellaneous provisions Disorderly conduct
Prohibited acts .......... 54-1(c)
UTILITIES
Cross-connections and backflow prevention ......... 74-1 Damage, prevention of, to underground utilities
Civil penalties ........ 74-30
Definitions ......... 74-21
Emergency excavation or demolition ............ 74-26
Excavation or demolition damage ............ 74-28
Filing requirements of utility operators …… 74-23
Notice of intent to excavate or demolish
Required; time; information; records .......... 74-24
Response to notice ........... 74-25
Permit not to relieve responsibility for compliance .......... 74-29
Precautions to avoid damage .......... 74-27
Prohibition ......... 74-22
Excavations
Emergency excavation or demolition ............ 74-26
Excavation or demolition damage ............ 74-28
Notice of intent to excavate or demolish.
See herein that subject Fees and charges
Delinquent service bills .......... 74-54
Gas
Deposit fees .......... 74-52
Pilot lights, lighting of .......... 74-55
Rates ............ 74-53
Gas
545
Fees and charges. See herein that subject
Sewage management systems, on-site .......... 74-70 et seq.
See: WATER AND SEWERS
VACCINATIONS. See: DRUGS AND MEDICINES
VARIANCES
Flood damage prevention
Flood hazard reduction
Variance procedures .......... 34-86
Swimming pools
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses Administration and enforcement; variance……14-114
VECTOR CONTROL
Definitions .......... 38-191
Enforcement ........... 38-193
General provisions ......... 38-192
Compliance with article .................... 38-192(c)
Nuisance, maintaining ................... 38-192(a)
Occupant requirements ..................... 38-192(e)
Owner and occupant requirements ........ 38-192(f)
Rat harborage, elimination of ...................... 38-192(d)
Ratproofed, buildings to be ........ 38-192(b)
Ratproofing, removal of ................... 38-192(g)
VEGETATION
Certain ordinances not affected by Code ................... 1-11(9)
Nuisances
Declared ......... 50-1
Parks and recreation facilities, public
Prohibited acts
Trees, plants .......... 58-29(3)
Wetlands protection district Permitted uses .......... 26-45
VEHICLES. See: TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
VENDING MACHINES
Game machines, vending machines and other recreational machines ........... 18-21 et seq.
See: GAME MACHINES, VENDING MACHINES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL MACHINES
VIDEO STORES
Adult entertainment establishments 18-336 et seq.
See: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
VULGARITY. See: INDECENCY AND OBSCENITY
WALLS. See: FENCES, WALLS, HEDGES AND
546
ENCLOSURES WARRANTS. See: WRITS, WARRANTS AND OTHER PROCESSES
WATER AND SEWERS
Buildings and building regulations
Sewage management systems, on-site. See herein that subject
Licenses and permits
Sewage management systems, on-site. See herein that subject
Sewage management systems, on-site
Absorption fields .......... 74-87
Area computation ......... 74-87(a)
Design and construction, minimum, for conventional septic tank
systems…….74-87(c)
Field layout methods for conventional septic tank systems……74-87(d)
Distribution box method……74-87(d)(1)
Level field method…….74-87(d)(2)
Serial distribution method….. 74-87(d)(3)
Location .......... 74-87(b)
Administration and enforcement ............ 74-70
Alternative and experimental on-site management systems and site modifications…….74-89
Applicability .......... 74-71
Buildings and building regulations
Absorption fields
Design and construction, minimum, for conventional septic tank systems…….74-87(c)
Construction permit
Issuance or denial ........... 74-75
Required ........... 74-74
Privies; minimum design and construction .......... 74-88
Construction permit
Issuance or denial ......... 74-75
Required ............ 74-74
Definitions ......... 74-72
Design limits on conventional septic tank systems .......... 74-79
Distribution boxes and dosing tanks ........... 74-86
Grease traps ........... 74-92
Inspections ......... 74-76
License, bond and certificate required …….74-82
Licenses and permits
Construction permit
Issuance or denial ........... 74-75
Required ........... 74-74
License, bond and certificate required .......... 74-82
Repair or alteration
Permit required .......... 74-83(a)
Maintenance ........... 74-77
Percolation tests and test borings ............ 74-90
Plans, specifications, and soil data, submission of .......... 74-80
Privies; minimum design and construction ........... 74-88
Prohibited discharge .......... 74-7 8
547
Repair or alteration .......... 74-83
Permit required .......... 74-83(a)
Swimming pool installation, alteration for .......... 74-83(b)
Required .......... 74-73
Septage removal and disposal .......... 74-9 1
Septic tanks ........... 74-85
Sewage flow ........... 74-93
Sewers .......... 74-84
Soil data acceptability ........... 74-8 1 Subdivision and mobile home parks
Development requirements ............ 74-94
Water and sewage .......... 74-95 Weights and measures
Absorption fields ........... 74-87
Design limits on conventional septic tank systems .......... 74-79
Privies; minimum design and construction ......... 74-88
Swimming pools
Minimum standards for swimming pools, public spa pools and bathhouses Water supply .......... 14-105
Tourist courts ........ 3 8-155 et seq.
See: TOURIST COURTS
Weights and measures
Sewage management systems, on-site. See herein that subject
WATER POLLUTION. See: POLLUTION
WATERWAYS. See: BOATS, DOCKS AND WATERWAYS WEAPONS. See: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
WEEK
Definitions and rules of construction ......... 1-2
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Adult entertainment establishments
Location .......... 18-343
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption on premises, sale of malt beverages and wine for Operational requirements and restrictions
Distance from schools, churches, residences .......... 6-302 Spirituous liquor, sale of, for on-premises consumption
Operational requirements and restrictions
Distance from schools, churches, residences .......... 6-448 Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks
Plans and specifications
Area and space requirements ......... 56-71
Noise
Maximum permissible sound levels .......... 38-88
Swimming pools ......... 14-74 et seq.
See: SWIMMING POOLS Water and sewers .... 74-79 et seq.
548
See: WATER AND SEWERS
WETLANDS
Wetlands protection district
Amendments .......... 26-50
Application of article .......... 2 6-43
Assessment relief .......... 26-51
Boundaries, district ..........26-44
Definitions ........ 26-42 Development permits, local
Activities to comply with development plans ..........26-79
Appeals ......... 26-83
Duration and permit validity ........... 26-84
Emergency permit, temporary ..........26-77
Enforcement authority ......... 26-8 1
Filing review fee .......... 26-80
Review procedures .......... 26-82
Judicial review .......... 26-49
Alternative actions ................... 26-49(b)
Jurisdiction ................... 26-49(a)
Monitoring and enforcement ........... 26-47
Penalties for violation of article ........... 26-48
Permitted uses ........... 26-45
Prohibited uses .......... 26-46
Title and purpose .......... 26-41
WILL
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
WINE. See: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
WRITING
Definitions and rules of construction ........... 1-2
WRITS, WARRANTS AND OTHER PROCESSES Animal control
Summons .......... 10-44
Municipal courts ........... 46-5 et seq.
See: MUNICIPAL COURTS
Taxation
Occupation tax
City clerk; subpoena powers ........... 70-37
YARD SALES
Defined ......... 18-76
Parking violations, person conducting sale to be responsible for ......... 18-79
Penalty for violation of article ........... 18-80
Permit
Required ............ 18-77
Term; fee ........... 18-78
549
YARDS AND OPEN SPACES
Swimming pools
Private residential pools
Setback requirements ………...14-76
Yard Sales………18-76 et seq.
See: YARD SALES
YEAR
Definitions and rules of construction…….1-2
ZONING
Certain ordinances not affected by
Code…………..1-11(14), 1-11(15)
Flood damage prevention
Flood hazard reduction
Shallow flooding, areas of (AO zones), standards for ………….34-84
Streams without established base flood elevations and/or
floodway (A-zones), building standards for………….34-83

ZONING ORDINANCE 



The City of Sugar Hill, Georgia 

Adopted August 1, 2000 

Article 	Page 
TITLE   ........................................................................................................................... 1.1 

1. 
PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE ............................................................. 1.1 


2. 	
SHORT TITLE .............................................................................................................. 1.1 


3. 	
DEFINITIONS .............................................................................................................. 3.1 


4. 	
ZONING DISTRICTS.................................................................................................... 4.1 
Section 400. District Designations ........................................................................... 4.1 
Section 401. Location and Boundaries of Zoning Districts...................................... 4.3 
Section 402. Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries....................................... 4.4 
Section 403. Uses Not Listed ................................................................................... 4.4 
Section 404. Uses in Each Zoning District .............................................................. 4.5 
Section 405. Requirements for approval of a Temporary Use Permit ..................... 4.6 
Section 406. Restrictions on Principal Uses ............................................................. 4.6 
Section 407. Restrictions on Accessory Uses ........................................................... 4.17 


Table 4.1 Permitted Uses ..................................................................................... 4.21 
Table 4.2 Accessory Uses .................................................................................... 4.22 
Table 4.3 Customary Residential Accessory Uses and Structures ...................... 4.23 


5. 	
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS........................................................................... 5.1 
Section 500. Use, Occupancy and Erection .............................................................. 5.1 
Section 501. Height and Density............................................................................... 5.1 
Section 502. Reduction in Lot Size........................................................................... 5.1 
Section 503. Yards and Other Spaces ....................................................................... 5.1 
Section 504. Minimum Lot Size for Residential Septic Tank Use ......................... 5.1 
Section 505. Only One Principal Building or Use On a Lot..................................... 5.2 
Section 505. Street Frontage Requirement ............................................................... 5.2 
Section 506. Classification of Streets........................................................................ 5.2 


6. 	
GENERAL PROVISIONS............................................................................................. 6.1 Section 600. Reserved ............................................................................................... 6.1 Section 601. Vision Clearance at Intersections......................................................... 6.1 Section 602. Approvals for Business and Industrial Developments 


on State Highways.............................................................................. 6.1 
Section 603. City Approvals that are Required......................................................... 6.1 
Section 604. Erosion and Sedimentation Control..................................................... 6.1 
Section 605. Outdoor Storage .................................................................................. 6.1 
Section 606. Annexation .......................................................................................... 6.1 
Section 607. Requirements for Customary Home Occupations............................... 6.2 
Section 608. Architectural and Design Standards .................................................... 6.4 
Section 609. Minimum Floor Area Requirements ................................................... 6.11 

i 
Article Page 
Section 610. Area, Yard and Height Requirements ................................................. 6.11 
Section 611. Flood Hazard ........................................................................................ 6.11 
Section 612 Frontage on Corner Lots ..................................................................... 6.11 
Section 613. Junked Automobiles ............................................................................ 6.12 
Section 614. Prohibited Uses ................................................................................... 6.13 

7. 	EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS ..................................................................... 7.1 
Section 700. Fences and Walls.................................................................................. 7.1 
Section 701. Structures Excluded from Height Limitations..................................... 7.3 
Section 702. Substandard Lots of Record................................................................. 7.3 
Section 703. Reduction of Front Yard Requirements for Dwellings ...................... 7.4 
Section 704. Temporary Buildings............................................................................ 7.4 
Section 705. Permitted Encroachments Upon Required Setbacks........................... 7.4 

8. 	NON-CONFORMING USES ........................................................................................ 8.1 
Section 800. Continuance of Non-Conforming Uses ............................................... 8.1 
Section 801. Continuance of a Non-Conforming Building or Use ......................... 8.1 
Section 802. Amortization and Discontinuance ...................................................... 8.2 
Section 803 Validity of Previously Issued Permits and Approvals......................... 8.2 

9. LOT AND BUILDING DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS............................................ 9.1 
Section 900. Purpose ................................................................................................ 9.1 
Section 901. Lot area and residential density ........................................................... 9.1 
Section 902. Lot area and non-residential density .................................................... 9.1 
Section 903. Floor area provisions ........................................................................... 9.1 
Section 904. Minimum lot width .............................................................................. 9.1 
Section 905. Minimum setbacks, principal buildings............................................... 9.1 
Section 906. Minimum setbacks, accessory buildings ............................................. 9.1 
Section 907. Building and structure heights ............................................................. 9.1 
Section 908. Maximum Lot Coverage ...................................................................... 9.1 
Table 9.1 Lot and Building Dimensional Standards ........................................... 9.2 

10. 	OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS .............................................................................. 10.1 
Section 1000. Purpose of Planned Unit Developments.............................................. 10.1 

A. 	Types of Planned Unit Developments ................................................ 10.1 

B. 	Ownership Control .............................................................................. 10.1 

C. 	Standards Applying to All Planned Unit Developments .................... 10.2 

D. 	Standards Applying to Planned Residential Developments ............... 10.2 

E. 	Standards Applying to Senior Residential Developments ................. 10.4 

F. 	Standards Applying to Planned Shopping Centers ............................. 10.6 

G. 	Standards Applying to Planned Industrial Parks ................................ 10.7 

H. 	Standards Applying to Planned Office and Institutional .................... 10.7 

ii 

Article 	Page 
I. 	Justification of Planned Unit Development…………………..............10.7 

J. 	Site Plan Specific and substantial Compliance with Approved Site Plan……………………………………………………………… 10.7 
K. Covenants and Restrictions……………………………………………10.8 Section 1001 Town Center Overlay District..............................................................….10.8 
A. 	Purpose and Intent................................................................................….10.8 

B. 	Exceptions ...........................................................................................….10.9 

C. 	Severability ..........................................................................................….10.9 

D. 	Use Provisions .....................................................................................….10.9 

E. 	Design Criteria and Standards..............................................................….10.10 

F. Design Review and Approval Required .............................................….10.13 
TOWN CENTER OVERLAY BOUNDARY MAP ..........................….10.16 
Section 1002 Central Business District Overlay........................................................….10.17 

A. Purpose and Intent................................................................................….10.17 

B. 	Exceptions ...........................................................................................….10.17 

C. 	Severability ..........................................................................................….10.17 

D. 	Use Provisions .....................................................................................….10.17 

E. 	Design Criteria and Standards..............................................................….10.20 

F. Design Review and Approval Required .............................................….10.24 
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT BOUNDARY MAP..................….10.27 
Section 1003 Mixed Use Developments....................................................................….10.27 

A. 	Intent and Purpose................................................................................….10.28 

B. 	General Conditions...............................................................................….10.28 

C. 	Uses within a Mixed use Development ..............................................….10.29 

D. 	Required Report and Plan ...................................................................….10.29 

E. 	Types of Mixed Use Developments.....................................................….10.31 

F. General Provisions ..............................................................................….10.33 
Section 1004 Conservation Subdivision District (CSD) ...........................................….10.34 

A. Purpose .................................................................................................….10.34 

B. 	Applicability ........................................................................................….10.34 

C. 	Permitted Uses .....................................................................................….10.34 

D. 	Existing Features Site Analysis Plan ..................................................….10.35 

E. 	Concept Plan ........................................................................................….10.35 

F. 	Open Space Requirements ..................................................................….10.36 

G. 	Density .................................................................................................….10.38 

H. 	Development Requirements.................................................................….10.38 

I. 	Administrative Variance .....................................................................….10.39 

11. 	OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND LOADING 
AND UNLOADING SPACES..................................................................................... 11.1 
Section 1100. Off-Street Automobile Parking and Loading 
and Unloading Spaces Required ........................................................ 11.1 
Section 1101. Plan and Design Standards .................................................................. 11.1 

iii 

Article 	Page 
Section 1102. Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces ................................. 11.4 
Section 1103. Off-Street Loading and Unloading Spaces ......................................... 11.4 
Section 1104. Commercial Vehicle Parking .............................................................. 11.4 
Section 1105. Administrative Variance ...................................................................... 11.5 
Section 1106. Parking Single Family Residential....................................................... 11.5 
Table 11.1 Required Number of Off-Street parking Spaces.................................. 11.7 

12. 	BUFFERS AND SCREENING .................................................................................... 12.1 
Section 1200. Buffer between Dissimilar Districts and Construction Buffers ......... 12.1 
Section 1201. Plan Requirements .............................................................................. 12.1 
Section 1202. Buffer and Screening Standards .......................................................... 12.1 
Section 1203. Other Screening Requirements .......................................................... 12.2 
Section 1204. Administrative Variances to Buffer and Screening Requirements .... 12.2 
Section 12050. Minimum Buffer Requirements CHART.......................................... 12.3 

13. 	SIGNS .............................................................................................................. 13.1 
Section 1300. Purpose and Intent................................................................................ 13.1 
Section 1301. General Provisions .............................................................................. 13.1 
Section 1302. Permit Application .............................................................................. 13.1 
Section 1303. Expiration Date ................................................................................... 13.2 
Section 1304. Sign Permit Fees .................................................................................. 13.3 
Section 1305. Non Conforming Signs ....................................................................... 13.3 
Section 1306. Signs and Sign Devices Prohibited ..................................................... 13.3 
Section 1307. Special Permit for Temporary Signs or Devices ................................ 13.4 
Section 1308. Signs Exempt from Specified Provisions of this Ordinance .............. 13.4 
Section 1309. Maintenance and Appearance of Signs ............................................... 13.4 
Section 1310. Illumination of Signs ........................................................................... 13.5 
Section 1311. Signs Permitted and Regulated in Zoning District .............................. 13.5 
Section 1312. Administration and Enforcement ........................................................ 13.11 

13.5 	STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAE 
AND TOWERS .............................................................................................................. 13.5.1 
Section 1351 Purpose ................................................................................................. 13.5.1 
Section 1352 Definitions............................................................................................ 13.5.1 
Section 1353 Exclusions ............................................................................................ 13.5.1 
Section 1354 Placement of Telecommunications 
Facilities by Zoning District................................................................. 13.5.2 
Section 1355 Preferred Locations .............................................................................. 13.5.3 
Section 1356 Requirements for Telecommunications Facilities............................... 13.5.4 
Section 1357 Application Procedures ........................................................................ 13.5.8 
Section 1358 Co-Location.......................................................................................... 13.5.10 
Section 1359 Appeals................................................................................................. 13.5.11 
Section 1360 Nuisances.............................................................................................. 13.5.11 

iv 

Article 	Page 
Section 1361 Removal of Antennae and Towers....................................................... 13.5.11 
Section 1362 Abandoned Towers .............................................................................. 13.5.11 
Section 1363 Pre-Existing Towers/Non Conforming Use ........................................ 13.5.12 
Section 1364 Coordination with Federal Law ........................................................... 13.5.12 
Section 1365 Severability........................................................................................... 13.5.13 

14. 	ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES .............. 14.1 
Section 1400. Zoning Enforcement Officer................................................................ 14.1 
Section 1401. Building Permit Required .................................................................... 14.3 
Section 1402. Certificate of Occupancy Required...................................................... 14.3 
Section 1403. Fees ...................................................................................................... 14.3 
Section 1404. Construction Progress ......................................................................... 14.4 
Section 1405. Penalties for Violation.......................................................................... 14.5 
Section 1406. Alternative Sentences or Penalties ...................................................... 14.5 
Section 1407. Remedies ............................................................................................. 14.5 

15. 	VARIANCES AND APPEALS..................................................................................... 15.1 
Section 1501. Power to hear Appeals and Grant Variances ....................................... 15.1 
Section 1502. Appeals................................................................................................. 15.2 
Section 1503. Required Public Hearings .................................................................... 15.2 
Section 1504. Reapplication........................................................................................ 15.2 
Section 1505. Appeals from Decision......................................................................... 15.2 

16. 	LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS .................................................................................. 16.1 
Section 1600. Conflict with Other Laws..................................................................... 16.1 
Section 1601. Severability........................................................................................... 16.1 
Section 1602. Repeal of Conflicting Resolutions....................................................... 16.1 
Section 1603. No Prejudice to Pending Applications................................................. 16.1 
Section 1604. No Legality to Nonconforming Uses .................................................. 16.1 
Section 1605. Zoning Map of the City of Sugar Hill ................................................. 16.1 
Section 1606. Effective Date ...................................................................................... 16.2 

17. 	AMENDMENTS............................................................................................................ 17.1 
Section 1700. Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendment Procedure .......................... 17.1 
Section 1701. Initiation of Amendments .................................................................... 17.2 
Section 1702. Standards Governing Exercise of the Zoning Power .......................... 17.5 
Section 1703. Impact Analysis ................................................................................... 17.5 
Section 1704. Action by City Council ....................................................................... 17.6 
Section 1705. Conditional Zoning ............................................................................. 17.6 
Section 1706. Special Use Permits ............................................................................. 17.7 
Section 1707. Special Use Permit Procedure ............................................................. 17.7 
Section 1708 Policies and Procedures........................................................................ 17.10 
Section 1709. Withdrawal of Application for Amendment, Variance or 

v 

Article Page 
Special Use Permit ............................................................................. 17.10 

Section 1710. Lapse of Time Requirement for an Amendment, Variance 
or Special Use Permit Reapplication ................................................. 17.11 

Section 1711. Actions to be Taken if Plans of Property Owner 
are Not Implemented Within Specified Time Limits........................ 17.11 

18. Listing of Zoning Ordinance Amendments since adopted August 1, 2002................... 18.1 


Appendicies Page 
Appendix A Downtown Preferred Development Guide .......................................... 20.1 
Appendix B Excerpts from Designing Downtown .................................................. 20.2 

vi 
TITLE 
An Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, Regulating the Location and Use of Buildings, Structures, and Land for Residence, Trade, Industry, and other Purposes: the Height and Size of Buildings, and Other Structures: The Size of Yards: and the Density of Population:  Creating Districts for said Purposes and Establishing the Boundaries Thereof: Defining certain Terms Used Herein: Providing for the Method of Administration and Amendment: Providing for a Zoning Board of Appeals and Defining its Powers and Duties: Providing for the Imposition of Penalties for the Violation of Provisions of this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE 1. 
PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
In pursuance of authority conferred by the State of Georgia, and for the purposes of Promoting the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the municipality; lessening congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; conserving the value of buildings; and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and buildings throughout the municipality; the City Council of the City of Sugar Hill does ordain and enact into law the following Articles and Sections. 
ARTICLE 2. 
SHORT TITLE 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The 2000 Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia." 
1.1 

ARTICLE 3. 
DEFINITIONS 

Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this Ordinance shall be as defined in The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (1981, Rutgers).  Words not defined herein or in the above book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence, Section and Article in which they occur. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
The word "erected" includes the words "constructed", "moved", "located" or "relocated". 
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel". 
The word "map" or "zoning map" means the Zoning Map of Sugar Hill, Georgia. 
The word "person" includes the words "individuals", "firms", "partnerships", "corporations", "associations", "governmental bodies" and all other legal entities. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary. 
The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
Accessory Structure. A structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. 
Accessory Use. A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
Adult Entertainment Establishment: An adult book store, an adult business, an adult dancing establishment, an adult mini motion picture theater, an adult motion picture theater, an adult motion picture arcade, an adult video store, an erotic dance establishment, or an escort bureau or introduction service as defined in Section 18-152 of the Sugar Hill Code which definitions are specifically incorporated hereby by reference. 
3.1 

Amenity: Aesthetic or other characteristics that increase a development’s desirability to a community or its marketability to the public.  Amenities may differ from development to development but may include such things as recreational facilities, pedestrian plazas, views, streetscape improvements, special landscaping, or attractive site design. 
Animal Hospital.  Facility for the treatment and temporary boarding of domestic animals operated under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian.  This facility may include the boarding of animals in outside runs or kennels.  
Animal Quarters. Any structure which surrounds or is used to shelter, care for, house, feed, exercise, train, exhibit, display or show any animals, other than fenced pasture land for grazing. 
Appearance: The outward aspect that is visible to the public. 
Automobile Graveyard: Any establishment which is maintained or used for storing, buying, or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms used as a dwelling for (1) family which does its cooking therein. 
Apartment house. A residential structure containing three (3) or more apartments. 
Appropriate:  Fitting to the context of a site, neighborhood or community. 
Architectural concept:  The basic aesthetic idea of a structure, or group of structures, including the site, signs, buildings and landscape development that produces the architectural character. 
Architectural features: Functional, ornamental or decorative features integral or attached to the exterior of a structure, including but not limited to roof elements, cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, windows, doors, transoms, fan lights, side lights, chimneys, and elements of exterior embellishment. 
Architectural recesses: Portions of a building wall at street level which are set back from the street line so as to create articulation of the building wall and/or to provide space for windows or doors. 
Architecture: The art and science of designing and constructing buildings adapted to their purposes, one of which is beauty. 
Attractive: Having qualities that arouse satisfaction and pleasure in numerous, but not necessarily all, observers. 
Awning:  A hood or cover that forms a roof-like structure, often of fabric, metal, or glass, designed and intended for the protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and which projects from the wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk, door, or the like. Awnings may be retractable but are most often fixed with a rigid frame. 
3.2 

Awning, internally illuminated: A fixed awning covered with a translucent membrane that is, in whole or part, illuminated by light passing through the membrane from within the structure. 
Balustrade:  A railing consisting of a handrail or balusters. 
Basement. That portion of any building for which the finished surface of its floor meets any of the following conditions: 
A. 	More than six feet below grade. 
B. 	More than six feet below the finished ground level for more than 50 percent of the total building perimeter; or 
C. 	More than 12 feet below the finished ground level at any point. 
Billboard. A sign larger than 300 square feet which is wholly independent of a building for support. 
Boarding or Rooming House. A dwelling in which meals or lodging or both are furnished for compensation to more than two, but not more than ten, non-transient persons. 
Body Piercing: The perforation of human tissue, other than ear, for a nonmedical purpose and other than perforation of human tissue by a licensed medical practitioner. 
Buffer. Land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance; to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other conditions; to block physical passage to non-similar areas; or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter. 
Buffer, Construction. A type of buffer which is temporary and remains in effect during the construction of a project. 
Build-to line: An alignment established a certain distance from the curb or right-of-way line to a line along which a building or buildings shall be built. 
Buildable area. The portion of a lot remainig after required yards have been provided. 
Building. Any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building bulk:  The visual and physical mass of a building. 
Building line. A line established in general, parallel to the front street line, side property line, or rear property line between which line and the property line no part of a building shall project. 
Buildings, Metal. A structure which has a roof, and which is designed for the shelter, storage, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind and is constructed of exterior metal panels or pieces.  This shall not include residential structures intended for occupancy with an exterior finish of aluminum siding where such siding is commonly used for residential structures. 
3.3 

Built environment: The elements of the environment that are generally built or made by people as contrasted with natural processes.  
Canopy: A roof-like structure, supported by a building and/or columns, poles, or braces extending from the ground, including an awning, that projects from the wall of a building over a sidewalk, driveway, entry, window, or similar area, or which may be freestanding. 
Cattery. Any place that regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells, or trades any cat.  
Certificate of Occupancy. A compliance approval or certificate authorized and issued by the City building inspector indicating that the use of the building or land in question is in conformity with this Ordinance, or that a legal variance there from has been approved. 
Character: The nature of a building or site. 
City Manager. The City of Sugar Hill City Manager or his designee. 
Cluster homes. A group of single-family or multi-family housing units sharing common open space in an approved planned unit residential development. 
Cohesiveness:  Unity of composition among elements of a structure or among structures, and their landscape development. 
Common area: Land within a development, not individually owned or dedicated to the public, and designed for the common usage of the development.  These areas include green open spaces and yards and may include pedestrian walkways and complimentary structures and improvements for the enjoyment of residents of the development.  Maintenance of such areas is the responsibility of a private association, not the public. 
Community Shelter. A non-profit, institutional use comprised of a building, institutional in nature, which provides overnight shelter, sleeping accommodations and services, and not otherwise mandated by the State government, for related or non-related individuals for a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) hours every twenty-four (24) hours.  
Compatibility:  With regard to development, the characteristics of different land uses or activities that permit them to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict; with regard to buildings, harmony in appearance of architectural features in the same vicinity. 
Composting Facility, Municipal Solid Waste . An establishment converting municipal solid waste to humus through a controlled process of degrading organic matter by microorganisms. 
Composting Facility, Yard Trimmings. An establishment converting yard trimmings to humus through a controlled process of degrading organic matter by microorganisms. This definition does not include composting conducted on a residential lot for home gardening purposes. 
3.4 

Comprehensive Plan. A comprehensive plan, which may consist of several maps, data, and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the City or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions or additions thereto recommended by the Sugar Hill Planning Commission, indicating the general location for major streets, parks or other similar information.  The Comprehensive Plan shall be based upon and include appropriate studies of the location and extent of present and anticipated population, social and economic resources and problems, and other useful data.  The term "Comprehensive Plan" includes component or functional plans for the City, including but not limited to a plan for land use or a plan for transportation facilities. 
Conditional Use. A use which is not automatically permitted by right, but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions contained in this Ordinance or required by the governing body.  
Conditional Zoning. The granting or adoption of zoning for a property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, project design or timing of development, stipulated by the City Council of the City of Sugar Hill to mitigate adverse impacts that could be expected without the imposition of such conditions. 
Condominium. A condominium is a multiple dwelling in which each dwelling unit is owned or financed by the occupant, but in which halls, entrance ways and underlying lands are owned jointly. 
Congregate Personal Care Home. A home for individuals which offers care to sixteen (16) or more persons (See Personal Care Home). 
Continuity:  The flow of elements or ideas in a non-interrupted manner. 
Cornice: A horizontal element member, structural or nonstructural (i.e., molding), at the top of the exterior wall or projecting outward from an exterior wall at the roofline, including eaves and other roof overhang. 
Council. The City Council of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia. 
Customary Home Occupation. An occupation customarily carried on within a dwelling unit for gain or support involving the sale of only those articles, products or services produced on the premise, conducted entirely within the dwelling by members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit with equipment customarily used for household purposes and involving no display of articles or products and no outdoor advertising. 
Day Care Facility. A structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of persons away from their place of residence for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day on a regular basis for compensation.  For the purposes of this Ordinance the term "day care" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre­kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," "pre-school," "Group Day Care Home," and "Family Day Care Home." 
3.5 

Density. The number of families, individuals, dwelling units or housing structures per unit of land. Gross density includes all the land within the boundaries of the particular area excluding nothing. Net density excludes street right-of-way dedications, land identified as a flood hazard area, or within any electricity or gas transmission easement or right-of-way. 
Design criteria: A description of appropriate activity that will establish, preserve, or enhance the architectural character and site design and function of a building, structure, or development. Includes standards or requirements to satisfy the purpose of each criteria. 
Detail: A small feature or element that gives character to a building. 
Development: Redevelopment, rehabilitation and the conversion of raw or vacant land into a different use. 
Director. The City of Sugar Hill City Manager or his designee.  
Dormer:  A window projecting from a roof. 
Drive-in restaurant. Any place or premises used for the sale, dispensing, or service of food, refreshments, or beverages to automobiles, including those establishments where customers may eat or drink on the premises. 
Duplex.  A dwelling containing two and only two dwelling units. 
Dwelling. A building which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family, duplex and multiple family residential buildings, rooming and boarding houses, fraternities, sororities, dormitories, manufactured homes, and industrialized homes but not including hotels and motels.  
Dwelling, Attached. A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units which are joined only by common vertical walls. 
Dwelling, Multiple.  A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units or designed for occupancy by a fraternity or sorority or by three or more boarders or roomers. 
Dwelling, One-Family.  See "Dwelling, Single Family." 
Dwelling, Single Family. A dwelling containing one and only one dwelling unit, other than a manufactured home. 
Dwelling, Two-Family. See "Duplex." 
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms designed for the occupancy, cooking, and sleeping of one or more persons living as a family.  
Dwelling Unit, Efficiency. A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities. 
3.6 

Eave:  The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
Eave line: The extension of a roofline beyond the vertical wall of a building. 
Entablature is a major element of classical architecture, the superstructure of moldings and bands which lies horizontally above the columns, resting on their capitals. 
External design feature: The general arrangement of any portion of structures or landscaping, including the type, and texture of the materials, the type of roof, windows, doors, lights, signs, and fixtures of portions which are open to the public view. 
Façade:  Typically the front of a building; however, any building square on view is considered a façade (see definitions below). 
Façade, front: Any façade with a main public entrance that faces one of the primary streets. 
Façade, rear: Any façade without a public entry that does not face a public road. 
Façade, side: Any façade without a public entry but facing a public street. 
Family. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than four unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit; provided however that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families.  The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
Family Day Care Home. A customary home occupation which provides for no more than six persons who are not residents of the premises, care and supervision by a state of Georgia registered resident adult for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day on a regular basis for compensation.  
Family Personal Care Home. A customary home occupation which provides a home for individuals in a family-type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons (See Personal Care Home).  
Fence.  A structural barrier for enclosure, screening or demarcation, presenting a solid face or having openings amongst or between its constituent members; also, a wall separate from or extending from a building. 
Fenestration:  The organization of windows on a building wall. 
Floor Area. The gross heated, finished horizontal area of the several floors of a dwelling unit exclusive of basement, attic, carport, or garage. 
3.7 

Floor Area, Gross.  (GFA) The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all enclosed floors of a building, including cellars, basements, mezzanines, penthouses, corridors and lobbies from the exterior face of exterior walls or from the centerline of a common wall separating two buildings, but excluding any space with a floor-to-ceiling height of less than 6 feet 6 inches. 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): Representing the gross floor area of all buildings or structures on a lot divided by the total lot area. 
Fur Farm. Any place that regularly breeds and raises rabbits, mink, foxes or other fur or hide-bearing animals for the harvesting of their skins. 
Gable:  The triangular upper portion of an end wall, underneath a peaked roof. 
Garage. An accessory building or portion of a principal building used primarily for vehicle storage. 
Gas Recovery/Gas Cogeneration Plant.  A facility operating as an accessory use to a landfill which extracts and utilizes landfill gases for the production of energy. 
Grade, natural: The existing grade or elevation of the ground surface that exists or existed prior to man-made alterations, such as grading, grubbing, filling, or excavating. 
Ground coverage. The area of a zoning lot occupied by a building, but not including paved areas, expressed as a percentage of gross area of the lot. 
Group Day Care Home. An occupied dwelling in which the owner-occupant is licensed by the State of Georgia to provide care and supervision for more than six (6), but less than nineteen (19), persons who are not residents of the dwelling.  Such care shall be provided for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day on a regular basis for compensation.  
Group Personal Care Home. A home for individual persons in a residence or other type building, non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven (7) through fifteen (15) persons (See Personal Care Home). 
Habitat:  The physical location or type of environment, in which an organism or biological population lives or occurs. 
Hard-Surfaced Area or All-Weather Surface. An area which has been packed and covered with gravel and confined by landscaping timbers, railroad cross-ties, brick or rock wall. 
Harmony: A quality that represents an attractive arrangement and agreement of parts of a composition, as in architectural elements. 
Hazardous Waste. Solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludges; and other waste material that may be a hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials as defined by the State of Georgia. 
3.8 

Hedge:  A row of closely planted shrubs, bushes, or any kind of plant forming a boundary. 
Height of Building. The vertical distance measured from the mean finished ground level at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof or parapet.  
Hobby Breeder. An individual who owns any horse, purebred dog or pedigreed cat, any of which is registered with a national registry for the breed, who may intentionally breed the animal to preserve and further the respective breed with regard to physical and temperamental soundness and in conformance with official breed standards.  Hobby Breeding shall be deemed to be a Customary Home Occupation only when the animals and/or their offspring are sold directly to retail purchasers and are not bred or sold for commercial resale, research or other purposes. 
Home occupation. See "customary home occupation." 
Hotel. A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided for more than twenty 
(20) persons and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to the from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours.  As such, it is open to the public in contradistinction to a boarding house, a lodging house, or an apartment. 
Industrialized Home. A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a structure to be used for residential purposes.  An industrialized home or modular home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the approval of the State Building Administration Board (SBAB) to meet the same requirements as an on site-built home within The City of Sugar Hill. 
Junk. Any old or scrapped copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris to waste; junked dismantled to wrecked automobiles, or parts therefrom; or iron, steel, and other scrapped ferrous or non-ferrous materials. 
Junkyard. Property used for indoor or outdoor storage, keeping or abandonment, whether or not for sale or resale, of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment or automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Kennel. Any place that regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells, trades or lets for hire any dog. 
Lakes, Existing and Proposed. An inland body of water fed by springs, creeks and surrounding runoff which has a surface area in excess of two acres of water measured at outflow structure elevation.  An existing lake is a body of water, formed by a natural or man-made dam, which is not increased as a result of development by more than 25%.  A proposed lake is a body of water which is created by a developer or is an existing lake which realizes an increase of 25% or more as a result of development. 
Any body of water which has a surface area of two acres or less measured at outflow structure elevation shall be considered floodplain for the purpose of calculating required open space. 
3.9 

Land Disturbance Permit.  Any permit other than a Building Permit issued by City of Sugar Hill that authorizes clearing or grading activities on a site or portion of a site.  Said permit may be a Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, Grading, or Development Permit as defined in the City of Sugar Hill Development Regulations. 
Landfill. A method a disposing of waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon.  The term "landfill" shall include Construction and Demolition Debris Landfill, Hazardous Waste Landfill, Industrial Waste Landfill, Inert Waste Landfill, Monofill, Municipal Solid Waste Landfill and Private Industry Landfill. The term "landfill" shall not include approved on-site disposal of inert waste at a building, land disturbing, or development site. 
Landfill, Construction and Demolition Waste.  A landfill in which construction/demolition waste is disposed.  Construction/ demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures.  Such wastes include, but are not limited to, asbestos containing waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material and other non-putrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Landfill, Hazardous Waste. A landfill in which hazardous waste is disposed.  Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by U.S. EPA pursuant to the federal act codified as 40 C.F.R. Section 261.3 or by the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act. 
Landfill, Industrial Waste.  A commercially-operated landfill for the disposal of solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste regulated by the 
U.S. EPA or the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act.  Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes; electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food and related products and by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment.  This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Landfill, Inert Waste.  A landfill accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern.  Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trash, stumps, limbs and leaves.  This definition excludes other types of industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed above. 
Landfill, Municipal Solid Waste. A disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges, or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon.  Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multi-family residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas.  The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agriculture, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
3.10 

Landfill, Private Industry. A landfill which is operated exclusively by and for a private solid waste generator for the purpose of accepting solid waste generated exclusively by said private solid waste generator. 
Landscape Strip. Land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
Landscaping:  The area within the boundaries of a given lot that consists of planting materials, including but not limited to, trees, shrubs, ground covers, grass, flowers, decorative rock, bark, mulch, and other similar materials. 
Lane: A public or private street designed for primary access to no more than 25 residential dwelling units, where the residential environment is dominant and traffic is completely subservient. 
Livestock. The term "livestock" as used herein shall mean and include cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine and other hoofed animals; poultry, ducks, geese and other live fowl; and rabbits, mink, foxes and other fur or hide-bearing animals customarily bred or raised in captivity for the harvesting of their skins; whether owned or kept for pleasure, utility or sale. 
Loading space. Off-street vehicle parking space reserved for bulk pickups and deliveries. 
Lot. A developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership legally transferable as a single unit of land.  
Lot, Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured generally perpendicular to the front lot line. 
Lot, Developed. A lot which has erected upon it a building or structure. 
Lot, Frontage. See Road Frontage. 
Lot, Through.  A lot having frontage on two streets that are approximately parallel. 
Lot, Undeveloped. A lot which does not have erected upon it a building or structure. 
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at the minimum required front yard (building setback) line. 
Lot Width (Cul-de-sac). For a lot having the majority of its frontage on a cul-de-sac, the lot width shall be the horizontal distance between the side lines of the lot, measured at the minimum required front yard (building setback) line or at a line parallel to said setback line, which is no more than twice the minimum front yard setback distance from the street. 
3.11 

Manufactured Home. A dwelling which does not meet the standards of an “industrialized home”, but is built to conform to national standards embodied in the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq., administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is 8 feet or more in width  and 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is more than 320 square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, and electrical systems contained therein. 
Manufactured Home Lot. A parcel of land for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single manufactured home. 
Manufactured Home Park. A manufactured home park is a parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes for non-transient use under single or corporate ownership. 
Massing the overall visual impact of a structure’s volume; a combination of height and width, and the relationship of the heights and widths of the building’s components.  
Material change in exterior appearance: A change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a building, structure, land use activity, or development site. A material change in exterior appearance shall at minimum include the following: the construction of a new building or structure; the reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or façade of an existing building or structure, including any of its architectural elements or details; commencement of excavation for construction purposes; and installation of freestanding walls, fences, steps, and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Mobile Home.  See "Manufactured Home." 
Modular Home. See "Industrialized Home." 
Modularity:  Design composition comprised of a rhythmic organization of parts. 
Modulation:  A measured setback or offset. 
Monofill. A method of solid waste disposal that involves the landfilling of one waste type or wastes having very similar characteristics in a segregated trench or area which is physically separated from dissimilar or incompatible waste.  Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by­product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
3.12 

Monopole Tower. A communications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors.  
Motel. A building or group of buildings where lodging is provided for more than ten (10) persons and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress or egress to and from all rooms are made through private entrances. 
Natural drainage: Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes. 
Natural features: Components and processes present or produced by nature, including soil types, geology, slopes, vegetation, surface water, drainage patterns, aquifers, climate, floodplains, aquatic life, and wildlife. 
Non-Conforming Use and Non-Conforming Structure.  See Article 8. 
Office Park. A development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses and open space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis. 
Open Space A parcel or area of land set aside, designated, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners, occupants and their guests of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.  Creditable open space shall not include any portion of an overhead power line easement or a stormwater retention/detention pond which is not part of an existing or proposed permanent lake or recreation area required by the City of Sugar Hill Development Regulations. 
Parapet:  A low retaining wall at the edge of or along a roof. 
Pedestrian-oriented development: Development designed with an emphasis primarily on the street sidewalk and on pedestrian access to the site and building, rather than auto access and parking areas. The building is generally placed close to the street and the main entrance is oriented to the street sidewalk.  There are generally windows or display cases along building facades that face the street. 
Personal Care Home. A residence or building composed of related or non-related individuals with one or more surrogate parents that function as a single housekeeping unit.  All personal care homes shall be approved and licensed by Georgia Department of Human Resources.  
Petroleum Products Recycling Center, Accessory.  A facility storing, reclaiming or containing used petroleum products which is accessory to an automotive service establishment, industrial establishment or similar use. 
Pet (Household Pet). Any animal owned or kept for pleasure rather than sale, which is an animal of a species customarily bred and raised to live in the habitat of humans and is dependent upon them for food and shelter; except that livestock and wild animals shall not be deemed pets. 
Portico:  An exterior appendage to a building, normally at the entry, usually roofed. 
3.13 

Principal Use. The primary or predominant purpose for which a lot is occupied and/or used. 
Private Deed Restrictions or Covenants. Private deed restrictions or covenants are imposed on land by private land owners.  They bind and restrict the land in the hands of present owners and subsequent purchasers.  They are enforced only by the land owners involved and not by any city or other public agency. 
Proportion: Balanced relationship of parts of a building, signs and other structures, and landscape to each other and to the whole in terms of size, shape, mass and scale. 
Putrescible Wastes. Wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms.  Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to, kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes and garbage.  
Recovered Materials Processing Facility, Accessory.  Any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting household and commercial materials to be recycled including, but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper, and aluminum materials whenever such use is customarily incidental to a shopping center, church, school, multi-family residential development, waste disposal facility or similar use. 
Recovered Materials Processing Facility, Principal. Any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting, sorting, processing, and shipping materials to be recycled including, but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper and aluminum whenever such use is principal to the site. 
Redevelopment: The reuse of existing developed property.  Redevelopment typically requires demolition or rehabilitation of existing buildings or structures on the site or changes to the site itself to accommodate reuse. Redevelopment of former commercial site for office or residential uses is an example, although redevelopment does not always imply a change in use. 
Rehabilitation: The improvement of an existing building or structure, which may or may not involve a change in use. 
Residential Shelter. A non-profit institutional use comprised of a residential building, which provides two or more beds and other facilities or services, including room and food service facilities and not otherwise mandated by State government for related or non-related individuals.  Length of stay of the individuals is presumed to be of a temporary nature.  A Shelter must meet the provisions of the Rules for Shelters in Gwinnett County. 
Ridge: The peak of a roof.  Also, the horizontal member at the peak into which the rafters join.  
Road Frontage. The distance on which a parcel of land adjoins a public street or public road right-of­way dedicated to and accepted by the City of Sugar Hill or Gwinnett County  for vehicular traffic or over which the City of Sugar Hill or Gwinnett County may hold a prescriptive easement for public access, and including designated and numbered U.S. and State highways. 
Roof:  The cover of a building, including the eaves and similar projections. 
3.14 

Roof line:  The contour, shape or outline of a roof. 
Roof, flat: A roof having no pitch or a pitch of not more than 2:12. 
Roof, pitched: A shed, gabled, or hipped roof having a slope or pitch of at least two foot rise for each 12 feet of horizontal distance. 
Salvage Operation and/or Junk Yard. Property used for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, tires, batteries, salvage building wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Scale:  Proportional relationships of the size of parts to one another and to humans. 
Scenic vista: A visual panorama with particular scenic value. 
Scrap Tire Processing Plant. A facility which grinds, shreds, chops or otherwise processes scrap tires for secondary use. 
Screening. A method of shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, or the like.  
Sign. Any surface, fabric, device or display which bears letters, numbers, symbols, pictures or sculptured matter, whether illuminated or non-illuminated, designed to identify, announce, direct or inform and that is visible from a public right of way or adjacent property. 
Sign Face Area. (SFA) The area as measured by the largest horizontal and vertical dimension of each sign including the lettering, graphics, or background including any extensions and open spaces.  If the sign contains no frame or background then the largest vertical and horizontal dimensions of the lettering and graphics shall be used to calculate the SFA. 
Sign, Ground. A permanently affixed sign that is anchored to the ground wholly independent of a building for support. 
Sign, Ground; Height.  The distance in vertical feet from the elevation of the adjacent dedicated public street, edge of pavement, to the highest point of the sign structure.  For property with an elevation higher than the adjacent public street, the height shall be measured from ground level at base of sign to the highest point of the sign structure.  The ground shall not be altered for the sole purpose of providing additional sign height. 
Sign, Multi-Message. Wall or ground signs that are designed to change the message or copy on the sign face mechanically or electronically. 
Sign, Portable. Signs which are attached to vehicles, trailers, movable structures, or attached to sign structures which are not securely anchored into the ground, or any sign which may be transported or is designed to be transported.  Except signs painted or permanently affixed to a single motor vehicle or trailer with an aggregate total of less than 12 square feet of sign face area. 
3.15 

Sign Structure. The structure to which a sign is mounted.  Includes, footings, supporting base, frame and finish materials. 
Sign, Temporary. A sign of a non-permanent nature. 
Sign, Wall. A sign applied to or mounted to any wall or exterior surface of a building or structure visible from the street or adjacent property.  The total lettering on one side of a building or structure shall constitute one wall sign.  
Solid Waste. Putrescible and non-putrescible wastes, except water-carried body waste, and shall include garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes, abandoned automobiles, dredging wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in these regulations.  
Solid Waste Transfer Station. Any facility which collects, consolidates, and ships solid waste to a disposal facility or processing operation. 
Special Exception.  A "Special Exception" is a use listed in the Zoning Ordinance as permitted if it meets stated conditions and is approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals after a public hearing. 
Special Use. A "Special Use" is a use listed in the Zoning Ordinance as being permitted if it meets stated conditions and is approved by the City Council of The City of Sugar Hill. 
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.  A basement of a building shall not count as a story if the upper surface of the first floor above such basement complies with all of the following: 1) Is less than seven (7) feet above grade;  2) Is less than seven (7) feet above finished ground level for more than fifty 
(50) per cent of the perimeter of the building; and 3) Is less than twelve (12) feet above the ground level around the entire building perimeter. 
Street. A thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, Collector. A street shown as such in the Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan or the City of Sugar Hill Comprehensive Plan, which is on file in the office of the City of Sugar Hill Planning and Development Department.  The primary purpose of a Collector Street is to collect and distribute traffic between the Local Streets and the Major and Minor Arterial Streets and to provide access to adjacent properties. 
Street furniture: Those features associated with a street that are intended to enhance the street’s physical character and use by pedestrians, such as benches, trash receptacles, planting containers, pedestrian lighting, kiosks, etc. 
Street hardware: Objects other than buildings or street furniture that are part of the streetscape. Examples are: non-pedestrian street light fixtures, utility poles, traffic lights and their fixtures, fire hydrants, etc. 
3.16 

Street, Local Nonresidential. A surface street intended primarily to provide local access to adjacent, existing, or planned commercial or industrial development and not through traffic. 
Street, Local Residential.  A surface street intended primarily to provide local access to adjacent residential development and not for through traffic. 
Street, Major Arterial. A street shown as such in the Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan or the City of Sugar Hill Comprehensive Plan, which is on file in the office of the City of Sugar Hill Planning and Development Department.  The primary purpose of a Major Arterial Street is to carry longer trip length segments and larger volumes of traffic to, from and through the City. 
Street, Major Thoroughfare. Any public street, existing or proposed, which is shown in the Comprehensive Plan as an arterial or major collector. 
Street, Minor Arterial. A street shown as such in the Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan or the City of Sugar Hill Comprehensive Plan, which is on file in the office of the City of Sugar Hill Planning and Development Department.  The primary purpose of a Minor Arterial Street is to carry medium length trip segments and moderate volumes of traffic to, from and through the City. 
Street, Principal Arterial. A street shown as such in the Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan or the City of Sugar Hill Comprehensive Plan, which is on file in the office of the City of Sugar Hill Planning and Development Department.  The primary purpose of a Principal Arterial Street is to carry very long trip length segments and very large volumes of traffic to, from and through the City. 
Streetscape:  The appearance and organization along a street of buildings, paving, plantings, street hardware, street furniture, and miscellaneous structures. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground. 
Subdivision. A tract of land which has been divided into two (2) or more lots, all fronting on a public street, and offered for sale as individual lots. 
Surface Treated Area.  An area which has been covered with asphalt or concrete. 
Telecommunications Facilities. Refers to antenna and towers, either individually or together.  
Tattoo: An indelible mark, figure, or decorative design introduced by insertions of dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of the skin or by the production of scars upon the body of a live human. 
Tattooing: The practice of applying a tattoo(s) upon the body of a live human. 
Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment: A facility where tattooing and body piercing is practiced or where the business of tattooing is conducted or any part thereof. 
3.17 

Through-street: A public or private street within a large-parcel redevelopment that connects a transit corridor to: (a) another public or private street within the large-parcel redevelopment; (b) a public or private street abutting the site; or (c) another property with through-access to another public or private street. 
Tower. Means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication.  The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
Town House.  See "Dwelling, Attached." 
Variance. A relaxation of the terms of the Sugar Hill Zoning Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property, and not as a result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Veterinary Clinic.  Facility for the treatment of domestic animals, operated under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian.  The boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the clinic use and does not take place in outside runs or kennels.  
View corridor: The line of signed identified as to height, width, and distance of an observer looking toward an object. 
Viewshed:  The area within view from a defined observation point. 
Waste Incineration Facility. Any facility which reduces waste volume by burning at a high temperature for a specified period of time. This term excludes air curtain destructors used for the on-site burning of yard trimmings and wood wastes at a building, land disturbing, or development site. 
Wild Animal. Any living member of the animal kingdom, including those born or raised in captivity; but excluding human beings, livestock, dogs and cats, rodents, hybrid animals that are part wild, captive-bred species of common cage birds and aquarium-kept fish, amphibians and reptiles. 
Yard. An open space on a lot situated between the principal building or use on the lot and a lot line, and unoccupied by any structure except as otherwise provided herein. 
Yard, Front:  An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected parallel to the street to the side lines of the lot.  Corner lots shall be considered to have two front yards.  No other lot may have two front yards.  Through lots shall have a front and rear yard to be determined by the Director of Planning and Development.  
3.18 

Yard, Rear. An open space on the same lot with a principal building or use, unoccupied except by an accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building or use projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, Side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, located between the building or use and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
3.19 

ARTICLE 4. ZONING DISTRICTS & USE PROVISIONS 
Section 400.  District Designations. 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia is divided into zoning 
districts designated as follows: 

AF  Agricultural-Forest District provides for agriculture, forestry, very low density residential development, and limited other uses under specific conditions.  
RS-200  Low Density Single-Family Residential District provides for twenty thousand (20,000) square foot minimum lot sizes.  
RS-175  Low Density Single-Family Residential District provides for seventeen thousand five hundred (17,500) square foot minimum lot sizes.  
RS-150  Low Density Single-Family Residential District thousand (15,000) square foot minimum lot sizes.  provides for  fifteen  
The three (3) Low Density Single-Family Residential Districts include existing low density residential areas and vacant or open areas where similar residential development is appropriate.  The regulations for these districts are designed to encourage low density one-family residential development, protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density.  
RS-100  Medium Density Single-Family Residential District provides for ten thousand (10,000) square foot minimum lot sizes.  This district includes areas of medium density residential development.  The regulations for this district are designed to take advantage of the greater economy and convenience afforded by more intensive development but still retain some of the open aspects of a detached dwelling unit district.  
CSD  Conservation Subdivision District encourages development of residential communities that are density neutral, designed to preserve and protect environmental resources, scenic vistas as well as natural and cultivated landscapes. Maintaining underlying density of 3 units/acre with 40% open space and 4 units/acre with 50% open space with one story  structure minimum 1,600 square feet and two or more story with minimum 1,800 square feet of heated space.  
RM  Residential Multi-Family District provides for multi-unit structures which are attached housing at a net density not to exceed eight (8) units per acre,  
4.1  Updated 7-10-17 kbl  

and high density single family residential, providing eight thousand (8,000) square foot minimum lot sizes.  Includes areas where higher density and/or multifamily development is appropriate.  The regulations for this district are designed to provide an area where individuals and families may establish homes in an environment which satisfies their needs for convenience and economy. 
This zoning district is to be located where public water supply and waste water treatment facilities are available or can be obtained and where there is convenient access to collector streets, major thoroughfares or state or interstate highways.  The purpose of this district is to promote better utilization of land and freedom of architectural and engineering design without maximizing density. 
MH 	Mobile Home Park District provides for the transient and permanent uses of residential mobile home units within the City in mobile home parks located on un-subdivided parcels which have single ownership control. Mobile home subdivisions are not permitted. 
OI 	Office-Institutional District provides for limited commercial and institutional land uses where traffic, noise and congestion are minimized. This district is established to provide a location for offices, institutions and limited related retail business and service activities in buildings of high character in attractive surroundings. Distributive functions such as loading, unloading, storage, packaging and un-packaging shall be limited to ten (10) percent of the total building area and five (5) percent of the total lot area. 
HSB 	Highway Service Business District provides for limited uses of commercial land adjacent to major traffic arteries. Established to provide locations for retail trade establishments compatible with surrounding residential and office-institutional areas, and for business activities which primarily cater to the traveling public.  The HSB District requires individual free-standing structures, larger yard areas, greater setbacks, and lower building densities than are permitted in the General Business District. 
BG 	General Business District provides for a wide range of retail land service establishments in a central business environment.  Intended to provide adequate space in appropriate locations along major streets, thoroughfares and at intersections for various types of business use. These uses should include the retailing of major goods and services, general office facilities and public functions that would serve a community area of several neighborhoods. Development of uses in the district characteristically occupies a larger area than in the HSB district because it is intended to 
4.2 
serve a greater population and to offer a wider range of services. Orientation and expansion of this district should occur as an increase in depth at major intersections rather than as a strip-like extension along the street or thoroughfare. 
LM 	Light Manufacturing District provides for most heavy commercial and light industrial uses which can meet rigid standards for control of noise, odor, and other off-site disturbance. Comprised of lands that are located on or have ready access to a major street or state highway and are well adapted to industrial development but whose proximity to residential makes it desirable to limit industrial operations and processes to those that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions.  This district limits industrial, manufacturing and warehousing uses to those which are wholly conducted indoors.  The LM district is established to provide a location for those heavy commercial and light industrial operations which demonstrate characteristics that are able to meet comparatively rigid specifications for nuisance-free operation. 
HM-1 	Heavy Manufacturing District limits industrial, manufacturing and warehousing uses to those which are wholly conducted indoors, with the exception of outdoor storage which is screened and situated in a required side or rear yard. Comprised of lands that are located on or have ready access to a major street, as defined herein, and are well adapted to industrial development, but whose proximity to residential or commercial zoning district makes it desirable to limit industrial operations and processes to those that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. This district limits industrial, manufacturing and warehousing uses to those which are wholly conducted indoors, with the exception of outdoor storage which is screened and situated in a required side or rear yard. 
HM-2 	Heavy Industry District provides a location for those industrial operations and processes that are not public nuisances and are not dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare, but should be located adjoining major streets and rail lines. 
4.3 
Section 401.  Location and Boundaries of Zoning Districts. 
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the map entitled, "Zoning Map of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia," which is hereby made a part of this Ordinance, which may be amended from time to time, and which shall be kept on file in the Sugar Hill City Hall where it shall be available for public inspection.  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time to time be published, the Official Zoning Map located in City Hall shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of the city. 
Section 402.  Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of the boundaries of any zoning district shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, the following rules shall apply: 
(1) 
Where a Zoning District boundary is shown on the zoning map as approximately following a corporate limits line, a lot line or the centerline of a street, highway, railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the district boundary line. 

(2) 
Where a Zoning District boundary line is shown on the zoning map as being set back from a street, highway or railroad right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such district boundary line, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of such street, highway or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto. 

(3) 
Where a Zoning District boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the lot lines.  In this situation, the requirements of the Zoning District in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall apply to the balance of the lot, except that such extension shall not include any part of a lot that lies more than fifty 

(50) 
feet beyond the Zoning District boundary line. 

(4) 
In the case of a through lot fronting on two approximately parallel streets, that is divided by a Zoning District boundary line paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the Zoning District in which each frontage of the through lot lies shall apply to that portion of the through lot. 


Section 403. Uses Not Listed. 
For any use not listed in this Ordinance, the City Manager shall determine the proper requirements by classifying the proposed use among the uses which are listed and assigning the use or appropriate zoning districts. Such decision may be appealed under Article 15, Section 1505. 
4.4 
Section 404. Uses in Each Zoning District. 
This section identifies the specific uses to which land and structures may be put in the various zoning districts, including uses allowed by right, uses allowed by right subject to certain restrictions, uses for which special use approval is required, uses for which special use approval is required and subject to certain restrictions as well as Temporary Uses. 
A principle use is the specific, primary purpose for which land or a building is used. Principle uses are shown in Table 4.1.  
An accessory use is permitted on a property in conjunction with a principle use and is incidental to the principal use and shall not exist independent of the principle use. Accessory uses are shown in Table 4.2.  
A customary residential accessory use is a use or structure commonly associated with a principal residential use. Customary residential accessory uses and structures are shown in Table 4.3. 
404(a)	  Allowed uses. 
Principal and accessory uses allowed by right are identified on Tables 4.1, 4.2 and 
4.3 by the letter code “A”. 
404(b) Allowed uses with restrictions. 
Principal and accessory uses allowed only if certain restrictions and conditions 
are met are identified on Tables 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 by the two letter code “A-R”. 
404(c) Special uses. 
Principal and accessory uses allowed only by special use approval are identified on Tables 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 by the two letter code “SU”.  Special uses may be allowed subject to special use approval procedures as set forth in the Special Use Permits and Special Use Permit Procedure sections of this ordinance. 
404(d)  	Special uses with restrictions. Principal and accessory uses allowed only by special use approval and only if certain restrictions and conditions are met are identified on Tables 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 by the three letter code “SU-R”.  Special uses with restrictions may be allowed subject to special use approval procedures as set forth in the Special Use Permits and Special Use Permit Procedure sections of this ordinance. 
404(e) Temporary uses. 
A use allowed for a limited duration which shall discontinue upon expiration of the 
specified time period. Temporary uses are only allowed subject to restrictions and are 
identified on Table 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 by the two letter code “T-R”. 

4.5 
Section 405. Requirements for approval of a temporary use permit. 
a. 	
Written permission of the property owner is provided. 

b. 	
Shall not be located within 50 feet of any public right-of-way. 

c. 	
Adequate parking, ingress and egress are provided on site or written permission is obtained if provided on an adjoining property. 

d. 	
A temporary use permit is applied for and approved by the City Manager. 

e. 	
All other requirements for licenses and regulations of the City of Sugar Hill shall be met. 

f. 	
Unless otherwise specified, no such temporary use permit shall be issued within six (6) months of approval for a prior temporary use permit on the same property. 

g. 	
Unless otherwise specified, a temporary use permit shall expire after 20 days; however, a ten (10) day extension may be granted by the City Manager. 


Section 406. Restrictions on principal uses. 
Any use shown on Table 4.1 with the codes “A-R”, “SU-R” or “T-R” shall be subject to the restrictions contained in this section, unless otherwise noted or specifically waived as a condition of zoning.  These restrictions shall apply in any zoning district where each particular use is shown as an allowed use with restrictions (A-R), a special use with restrictions (SU-R) or temporary use with restrictions (T-R). 
Use 	Restrictions 
Adult entertainment establishment. 	1. An adult entertainment establishment shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet from another parcel of land with an adult entertainment establishment. 
2. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall be located on property which is no closer than 1,000 feet from any parcel of land which is zoned for residential use. 

3. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet from any parcel of land upon which any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages in the City of Sugar Hill. 

4. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall be located on a parcel of land having at least one hundred (100) feet of road frontage. 


4.6 
Updated 7-10-17 kbl 
The 2000 Zoning Ordinance  Article 4  
of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia  Zoning Districts & Use Provisions  
5. For the purposes of these standards, distance shall be  
by airline measurement from property line, using the  
closest property lines of the parcels of land involved.  The  
term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of  
being described by location and boundary that is designed  
and used or to be used as a unit.  
Agricultural building, Customary.  Includes commercial greenhouses and one and two-family  
tenant houses, subject to all of the yard requirements of the  
zoning district.  
Agricultural use, Customary.  Includes farm ponds, fishing lakes, forestry, plant  
nurseries, except the raising of livestock or poultry.  
Brew Pub  Subject to all local, state and federal regulations and  
licensing requirements. No outdoor storage. Shall be  
limited to restaurants that brew and sell 25% or more of  
their own beer for on-premise consumption.  
Bulk storage tanks (argon, carbon dioxide,  Up to 12,000 gallons per tank with no more than two (2)  
helium and nitrogen).  tanks on the property. No above ground tanks shall be  
allowed if the tank is within 500’ of any residential use.  
All facilities shall be permitted and constructed in  
accordance with all other applicable regulatory  
requirements.  
Bulk storage tanks (including natural gas or  No above ground tanks shall be allowed if the tank is  
fuel).  within 500’ of any residential use.  All facilities shall be  
permitted and constructed in accordance with all other  
applicable regulatory requirements.  
Bulk storage tanks (oxidizer gases).  Up to 3,000 gallons per tank with no more than one (1)  
tank on the property. No above ground tanks shall be  
allowed if the tank is within 500’ of any residential use.  
All facilities shall be permitted and constructed in  
accordance with all other applicable regulatory  
requirements.  
Cattery.  Provided than no animal quarters are located closer than  
200 feet to any property line.  
Car Wash  Commercial conveyor car washes where the car moves on a  
conveyor belt during the wash.  The driver of the vehicle  
can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. A  
minimum of 50% of the water utilized must be recycled.  
Cemetery.  1. Shall front only on a collector street, major street  
or state highway.  The entrance and exits shall be  
only from the street on which it fronts.  
4.7  
Updated 7-10-17 kbl  

2. 
Shall be bordered by a ten (10) feet wide buffer strip along all of its exterior property lines not bordering the frontage street and not extending into the required front yard.  The buffer strip shall be planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight (8) feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 

3. 
The cemetery is included in a preliminary subdivision plat approved by the City Manager. 


Charitable or non-profit event, Not to exceed six (6) events in 12 months.  Each Temporary. separate event shall not exceed four (4) days. 
Childcare facility. 	Must comply with all state day care and health department requirements. At least one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play area shall be available for each child occupying the play area at any one time. Groups of children may be rotated if necessary so that one hundred 
(100) square feet per child is provided at all times. Play area shall be surrounded by a permanent wall or fence having a height of at least four (4) feet. 
Includes daycare, nursery school and kindergarten facilities. 
Christmas tree sales, Temporary. 	Shall be allowed between November 15 and December 31. 
Church, temple and synagogue, restricted. 	1. Shall be located on a site of not less than five (5) acres with 250 feet of road frontage. 
2. 
The buildings shall be located not less than 50 feet from any street and not less than 30 feet from any side or rear property line. 

3. 
If adjacent to residentially-zoned property, a buffer of at least 50 feet wide shall be provided along the property lines adjacent to said zoning, provided, however, that this buffer may be reduced to no less than 20 feet in width adjacent to the sanctuary building or "Sunday School" educational building and parking related to these buildings. 

4. 
A church, temple or synagogue located in a manufactured building may be erected on the property for a period not to exceed three (3) years. 


4.8 
Composting facility, wood chipping and 	1. Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, 
shredding and yard trimmings. 	branches, leaves, and grass clippings or similar putrescent vegetative materials, not including animal products, inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics, metals, or similar materials. 
2. 
The facility shall not be located within 1,000’ of any property used or zoned for residential. 

3. 
Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), provide a three-foot high landscaped earthen berm with a maximum slope of 3 to 1 and/or a minimum six-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The landscaped berm shall consist of a staggered double row of evergreen and semi-evergreen trees and shrubs; must not contain more than 30% of a single species and shall provide an effective visual screen of at least 20’ at maturity. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 


Crematorium. 	The facility shall not be located within 1,000’ of any property used or zoned for residential use. 
Equipment rental, sales and service 1. Equipment or rental vehicles shall not be parked or (Commercial & Industrial). stored in the required front yard. 
2. 
The storage area for the vehicles or equipment to be rented shall be screened by an opaque fence at least six (6) feet high. 

3. 
The storage areas shall be located no closer than 100 feet from any side or rear property lines zoned residential and shall be appropriately landscaped and maintained. 


Farmer's market or fruit and vegetable stand. 	For the sale of products and commodities produced on the premises provided that any structure for such sales shall be located no closer than 35 feet to any property line. 
Fruit and vegetable stand, Temporary. 	Shall not exceed 3 months. 
Fuel pumps. 	No closer than 15 feet to the right of way and not closer than the existing setback of any residential structure on abutting lots on either the frontage or a side street. 
4.9 
Fur farm. 	Provided than no animal quarters are located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
Growler Shop 	Subject to all local, state and federal regulations and licensing requirements.  Shall be limited to a business establishment for the sale or refilling of malt beverages, craft beers or hard cider for consumption at a location other than the licensed premises. 
Kennel. 	Provided than no animal quarters are located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
Landfill. 	1. A minimum 200-foot natural, undisturbed buffer shall be provided between all active waste burial areas and exterior property lines except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 
2.
 The facility shall not be located within 1,000’ of any property used or zoned for residential use. 

3. 
A minimum 75-foot natural, undisturbed buffer shall be provided between non-waste disposal operations and exterior property lines except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 

4. 
The limits of any 100-year floodplain or a stream buffer of 200 feet, whichever is greater, shall be preserved as natural, undisturbed area except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 

5. 
The entire site shall be fenced with a minimum six-foot high chain link security fence. 

6. 
The landfill shall be located on or have direct private access to a road designated on the Long Range Road Classification Map as a major collector, minor arterial, major arterial or principal arterial. 

7. 
The applicant shall include with the special use permit application a report detailing the phasing of the landfill and plans for closure and reclamation. 

8. 
The following waste disposal/recycling facilities shall be permitted as accessory uses to landfills meeting the above standards: Composting, Municipal Solid Waste, Composting, Yard Trimmings, Gas Recovery/Gas Cogeneration Plant, Recovered Materials Processing Facility and Solid Waste Transfer Stations. 


Lodge, dormitory, fraternal and social 1. Shall be located on a major or collector street; 
organization with housing. 

4.10 
2. 
Buildings shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 

3. 
A buffer strip at least ten (10) feet wide shall be provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that provide an effective visual screen. 


Microbrewery 	Subject to all local, state and federal regulations and licensing requirements. No outdoor storage. Shall be limited to a brewery that produces less than 15,000 barrels of beer annually with 75% or more of its beer sold off-premise. 
Mobile building. 	Temporary while permitted or special uses are under construction.  Not to exceed six months. 
Mobile home park. 	1. Location. A mobile home park shall front for a sufficient distance to provide safe access upon a State Highway, a Major Thoroughfare, a Collector Street or a local access road paralleling an expressway and shall have access and egress only on such road. 
2. 
Street Access Requirements. The entrance road to a Mobile Home District development shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet with a minimum pavement width of 28 feet.  The entrance road shall have a turning radius from the highway of at least 30 feet and the entrance road shall extend at least 100 feet into the Mobile Home District development. 

3. 
Size. A Mobile Home District development shall have a minimum buildable area of at least 20 contiguous acres. 

4. 
Density.  A Mobile Home District development shall have a density of not more than six (6) mobile home lots per buildable acre. 

5. 
Mobile Home Lots.  Each mobile home shall be located on a separate mobile home lot as shown on a development plan for the Mobile Home Park meeting the following: 


a. 
Each mobile home lot or space shall be directly accessible from an approved internal paved park driveway not less than twenty (20) feet in width.  No direct access to mobile home lots or spaces from public streets shall be permitted. 

b. 
Mobile homes shall be separated from each other by not less than twenty (20) feet end to end and twenty-five 


4.11 
(25) feet side to side. No portion of any mobile home shall be within fifteen (15) feet of the park boundary. 
6. 
Recreation and Other Community Facilities.  Not less than eight (8) percent of the gross area of the Mobile Home District development shall be devoted to recreation and other community use facilities.  Each recreation space shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet. 

7. 
HUD Mobile Home Court Development Guide.  The Mobile Home District development shall meet the standards of the "Mobile Home Court Development Guide", as set forth in the above-titled pamphlet, FHA G4200.7, published January, 1970, which is hereby made a part of this Ordinance, as well as the requirements of the City of Sugar Hill Zoning Ordinance and the Standard Building Code.  If there are any differences in the above two sets of requirements, the most stringent shall apply. 

8. 
No site construction shall be undertaken and no permits shall be issued until a site development plan that meets the requirements of the Development Regulations of City of Sugar Hill and the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance has been approved. 

9. 
Certificates of Occupancy. No Certificate of Occupancy for the placing of a mobile home in a Mobile Home Park development shall be issued until at least 50 mobile home lots have been developed in accordance with an officially approved site development plan and are ready for occupancy. 

10. 
Skirting or Underpinning. All mobile homes shall be skirted or similar measures must be provided for on the mobile home. 

11. 
Addresses. All mobile homes shall be clearly marked with an address visible from the access roadway. 

12. 
Pedestrian Access.  Each unit shall have an all-weather surface providing access to the main entrance. 


4.12 
Mobile home, manufactured home industrialized home. 
1. 
Shall be located in an approved mobile home park or lawfully existing mobile home subdivision. 

2.
 All mobile homes or manufactured homes installed within the corporate boundaries of the City of Sugar Hill must bear an approval seal of H.U.D., and shall be built on a permanent foundation with proper connections to the required utilities including the plumbing, heating, and electrical systems contained therein. 


2. 
All mobile homes or manufactured homes must be installed by a state licensed mobile home installation contractor in compliance with the rules and regulations for manufactured housing of the State Commissioner of Insurance. 

3. 
Each mobile home or manufactured home shall be inspected and approved by the City building official for compliance with applicable ICC building codes as well as ordinances and regulations of the City of Sugar Hill. 


Outdoor storage yard, except junk yard or salvage operation. 
1. 
Set back from the property line(s) at least five (5) feet 

2. 
Screened by an opaque fence with a height of at least six (6) feet where adjacent to developed property on which outdoor storage is prohibited. 

3. 
Set back from the screening fence, where required, at least five (5) feet. 

4. 
Screened by an additional landscape strip at least five 


(5) feet wide along the length of the property line where the outdoor storage area is adjacent to developed properties on which outdoor storage is prohibited or adjacent to public right-of-way. Said landscape strip shall consist of at least a staggered double row of evergreen and semi-evergreen trees and shrubs native or adapted to the area. Trees shall be 6’ tall at time of planting.  Plantings shall be arranged to provide an effective visual screen of at least 20’ in height at maturity. Buffer must not contain more than 30% of a single species and must be shown on a landscape plan approved by the City Manager prior to receiving any permit or certificate of occupancy. 
4.13 
Quarry. 	1. A quarry for the removal of minerals and other natural materials, together with necessary buildings, machinery and appurtenances thereto. 
2. 
Quarry areas being excavated shall be entirely enclosed within a fence located at least ten (10) feet back from the edge of any excavation and of such constructions and height as to be demonstrably able to exclude children and animals from the quarry area. 

3. 
The operators and owners of the quarry present to the Mayor and Council an acceptable comprehensive plan for the reuse of the property at the cessation of the quarry operations. 

4. 
In the case of an existing quarry, an extension of the quarry operations beyond the areas being quarried or approved for quarrying at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, shall be permitted and shall not be considered a new operation provided that said extension does not extend to within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residential or commercial Zoning District boundary line. 


Recovered materials processing facility, recycling station. 
1. 
Activities shall be limited to collection, sorting, compacting and shipping. 

2. 
Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), provide a three-foot high landscaped earthen berm with a maximum slope of 3 to 1 and/or a minimum six-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The landscaped berm shall consist of a staggered double row of evergreen and semi-evergreen trees and shrubs; must not contain more than 30% of a single species and shall provide an effective visual screen of at least 20’ at maturity. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 

3. 
The facility shall not be located within 1,000' of any property used for or zoned for single family residential use. 

4. 
Lighting for such facilities shall be placed in such a fashion as to be directed away from any nearby residential areas. 

5. 
Materials collected shall not be visible and shall be deposited in a bin or bunker.  All sorting and collection bins shall either be enclosed and have chutes available to the public or be located inside a fully-enclosed building. 

6. 
No outdoor storage of un-containerized materials shall be allowed. 


4.14 
Rental, moving trucks and vans. 	1. Equipment or rental vehicles shall not be parked or stored in the required front yard. 
2. 
The storage area for the vehicles or equipment to be rented shall be screened by an opaque fence at least six (6) feet high. 

3. 
The storage area shall not be located closer than 100 feet to any side or rear property lines zoned residential and shall be appropriately landscaped and maintained. 


Salvage operation or junk yard. 	1. The junkyard shall not be located closer than three hundred (300) feet to a commercial zoning district boundary line or 1000’ to any property used or zoned for residential. 
2. 
The junkyard is completely enclosed with an opaque fence not projecting into the right-of-way of any roadway adjoining said junkyard, not less than eight (8) feet high and in no case less than such height as will effectively screen all storage and other operations from view. 

3. 
The junkyard shall not be located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet to the nearest edge of the right-of­way of any major arterial roadway. Within this subpart "major arterial roadway" is defined as any roadway, street or thoroughfare within the City limits of Sugar Hill, Georgia, having a right-of-way of one hundred (100) feet or greater. 

4. 
Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), provide a three-foot high landscaped earthen berm with a maximum slope of 3 to 1 and/or a minimum six-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The landscaped berm shall consist of a staggered double row of evergreen and semi-evergreen trees and shrubs; must not contain more than 30% of a single species and shall provide an effective visual screen of at least 20’ at maturity. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 


4.15 
Shelter, commercial. 	Shall contain a minimum of three (3) acres of land and at least one hundred (100) feet of road frontage measured by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term “parcel of land” means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
Tattoo and body piercing establishment. 	1. A tattoo and body piercing establishment shall not be located closer than 500 feet to any tract or parcel of land which has a residential use or zoning.  In addition, no tattoo and body piercing establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet from the center line of the right-of-way along West Broad Street. 
2. 
No tattoo and body piercing establishment shall be licensed to sell alcoholic beverages within the City of Sugar Hill.  A tattoo and body piercing establishment shall not be located closer than 100 feet to any tract or parcel of land upon which is located an establishment which is licensed and authorized to sell alcoholic beverages within the City of Sugar Hill. 

3. 
No tattoo and body piercing establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any other tattoo and body piercing establishment. 

4. 
No minors shall be allowed on the premises of a tattoo and body piercing establishment at any times. 

5. 
Required parking and all public entrances shall be limited to the front yard and front of the entrance. 

6. 
Product advertisement, display, or other promotional material shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the structure, including the interior of windows. 

7. 
A tattoo and body piercing establishment shall be subject to the rules and requirements of all other current and future pertinent Federal, State, and Local Ordinances. 


4.16 
Utility structure. 	1. Such as electric transformer stations, telephone exchanges, gas regulator stations, water and wastewater pumping stations, and water tanks may be located in any zone as necessary to serve the public interest. 
2. 
Any building or structure, except a surrounding fence, shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from any property line. 

3. 
The facility shall be completely surrounded by a woven wire fence at least eight (8) feet high. 

4. 
When located in any residential zoning, the facility shall be furnished with a planted buffer not less than ten 


(10) feet wide to create an effective visual screen on all sides bordering residential or office-institutional property. 
5. The facility may not be used for office space, storage space, or for the storage of vehicles or equipment. 
Veterinary Clinic, restricted. 	Facilities contained entirely indoors except fenced areas for no more than 3 animals to be supervised by staff at all times. 
Veterinary clinic or hospital, agricultural. 	No portion of a building, structure, outdoor run/pen, used to house or exercise animals shall be located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
Wild animals, raising and keeping. 	The owner or custodian of such wild animals shall obtain an appropriate permit and meet all the requirements of the State of Georgia and other applicable regulatory requirements.  No animal quarters shall be located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
Wine Bar 	Subject to all local, state and federal regulations and licensing requirements. No outdoor storage.  A bar or restaurant where wine sales comprise 50% or more of the alcohol sales for on-premise consumption. 
4.17 
Section 407.  Restrictions on accessory uses. 
No accessory use or structure shall be taller than or erected on a lot prior to the construction of the principal building(s) or use(s) to which it is accessory. Except driveways, mailboxes or landscaping, no accessory use or structure shall be located within a public right-of-way. All accessory uses and structures except driveways shall be set back at least five (5) from any lot line. 
Any use shown on Tables 4.2 or 4.3 with the codes “A-R”, “SU-R” or “T-R” shall be subject to the restrictions contained in this section, unless otherwise noted or specifically waived as a condition of zoning.  These restrictions shall apply in any zoning district where each particular use is shown as an allowed use with restrictions (A-R), a special use with restrictions (SU-R) or temporary use with restrictions (T-R). 
Accessory building, minor. 	Shall be less than 240 square feet of floor area and shall be finished to match the exterior of the principal building(s). Buildings allowed within the front or side yard by special use approval shall be constructed of wood, fiber-cement, brick or stone siding; finished to match the exterior of the principal building(s); shall meet the minimum setback from right-of-way and side yard requirements for the underlying zoning district; and shall be maintained in accordance with all other applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
Accessory building, major. 	All accessory buildings 240 square feet of floor area or more shall be constructed of wood, fiber-cement, brick or stone siding; finished to match the principal building’s exterior; shall meet the minimum setback from right-of-way and side yard requirements for the underlying zoning district; shall be setback at least ten 
(10) feet from the rear property line; and shall be maintained in accordance with all other applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
Basketball goal. 	Adjacent to driveway. 
Bulk storage tanks, Accessory (Diesel or Bio-	No above ground tanks shall be allowed if the tank is 
diesel). 	within 500’ of any residential use.  All facilities shall be permitted and constructed in accordance with all other applicable regulatory requirements. Restricted to 1,000 gallons for use by the principal business, No retail sales or distribution allowed. 
4.18 
Bulk storage tank, Accessory (Propane). 	Dispensers for transferring fuel to a secondary tank shall not be allowed within 75’ of any residential use. Total tank capacity shall not exceed 1,000 gallons. Use shall be limited to the principal residence or business, No retail sales or distribution. All tanks and appurtenances shall be screened from view with fencing or landscaping to be approved by the City Manager. Installation shall be permitted and constructed in accordance with all other applicable regulatory requirements. 
Café, accessory. 	Shall not occupy more than 50% of the principal use or structure. 
Child care facility, located within a church. 	Must comply with all state day care and health department requirements. At least one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play area shall be available for each child occupying the play area at any one time. Groups of children may be rotated if necessary so that one hundred 
(100) square feet per child is provided at all times. Play area shall be surrounded by a permanent wall or fence having a height of at least four (4) feet. 
Child care facility. 	Must comply with all state day care and health department requirements. At least one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play area shall be available for each child occupying the play area at any one time. Groups of children may be rotated if necessary so that one hundred 
(100) square feet per child is provided at all times. Play area shall be surrounded by a permanent wall or fence having a height of at least four (4) feet. 
Compressed Natural Gas Refueling 	Slow fill type only. Use shall be limited to the 
Appliance 	principal residence or business. No retail sales or distribution allowed. Dispenser and appurtenances shall be screened from view with fencing or landscaping to be approved by the City Manager. Installation shall be permitted and constructed in accordance with all other applicable regulatory requirements. 
Convenience retail business. 	Shall not occupy more than 50% of the principal use or structure. 
Driveway, single family residential parking Not to exceed 30% of the front yard or 20% of the rear area. yard. 
4.19 
Home occupation, customary. 	Refer to Section 607. 
Recreational facility, residential 	1. Public and semipublic playgrounds, parks, lakes, and 
neighborhood. 	buildings, operated on a non-profit basis for recreational and public community purposes only.  
2. Special use permit shall not be required for such facilities if they are to be located on an area reserved or dedicated for such use on a final recorded subdivision plat. 
Recreational vehicle, boat or trailer. 	No more than a total of two (2) may be stored outdoors on the property in compliance with all other applicable sections of this Ordinance. 
Sales event, temporary outdoor. 	Only allowed as an accessory activity in association with a principal use that is an existing lawfully permitted business located on the premises.  Shall not exceed 20 days.  For example, sidewalk, parking lot or tent sales. 
Vegetable garden. 	Not to exceed 30% of front yard. 
4.20 
A = Allowed by right. A-R = Allowed with restrictions.  SU = Special use permit required. SU-R = Special use permit required and subject to restrictions.  T-R = Temporary Use and subject to restrictions. 
Principal Uses  AF  RS150, RS175, RS200  RS100  CSD  RM  MH  OI  HSB  BG  LM  HM1  HM2  
Adult entertainment establishment.  A-R  A-R  
Agricultural building, customary.  A-R  
Agricultural use, customary.  A-R  
Agriculture and horticulture except the raising of livestock.  A  A  A  
Aircraft factory.  A  
Alcoholic beverage plant or distillery.  A  
Appliance repair shop.  A  A  A  A  
Art gallery.  A  A  A  A  
Asphalt plant.  SU  
Assembly plant (durable goods).  A  
Assembly plant (non-durable goods).  A  A  A  
Automatic teller machine (freestanding).  SU  A  A  A  
Automotive body repair shops.  A  A  
Automotive repair shops or tire stores.  A  A  
Automotive sales lots (new or used).  SU  SU  
Automotive service station.  A  A  
Baking plants.  A  A  A  
Banks and other financial institutions.  A  A  A  A  A  A  
Barber and beauty shops.  SU  SU  A  A  A  
Boarding and rooming houses.  SU  A  
Book or stationery stores.  A  A  
Brew Pub  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  
Building material sales with outdoor storage.  SU-R  A  A  A  
Building material yard including milling operations.  A  A  
Building supply, indoor retail store.  A  
Bulk storage tanks (argon, carbon dioxide, helium and nitrogen).  SU-R  SU-R  
Bulk storage tanks (including natural gas or fuel storage).  SU-R  
Bulk storage tanks (oxidizer gases).  SU-R  SU-R  
Cabinet shops and furniture manufacturing.  A  A  A  
Car wash.  A-R  A-R  
Cattery.  A-R  
Cemetery.  SU-R  A  
Charitable or non-profit event, Temporary  T-R  T-R  T-R  T-R  T-R  T-R  T-R  
Chemical plant.  A  
Child care facility.  A-R  SU-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  
Christmas tree sales, Temporary  T-R  T-R  T-R  
Church, temple and synagogue, restricted.  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  
Church, temple and synagogue, unrestricted.  SU  SU  SU  SU  SU  SU  A  A  A  A  A  A  
Cold Storage Plant or commercial cold storage.  SU  A  A  
Composting facility, wood chipping and shredding and yard trimmings.  SU-R  A-R  
Concrete or masonry plant.  A  
Contractor office (e.g. building, construction, HVAC, electrical, etc).  A  A  A  A  
Convenience store.  A  A  
Crematorium.  A-R  
Cultural facility.  A  
Dance studio.  A  A  
Department store.  A  
Depot or passenger terminal (bus, rail).  A  A  A  
Distribution center.  A  A  A  
Drug store.  A  A  
Dye casting works.  A  
Electronic sales and service.  A  
Equipment rental, indoor sales and service (Home and Garden).  A  A  A  
Equipment rental, sales and service (Commercial & Industrial).  A-R  A-R  
Explosives, plant or storage.  SU  
Farmers' market or fruit and vegetable stand.  A-R  
Feed processing facility.  A  

Table 4.1 - Permitted Uses Updated 5/9/16 KL 
A = Allowed by right. A-R = Allowed with restrictions.  SU = Special use permit required. SU-R = Special use permit required and subject to restrictions.  T-R = Temporary Use and subject to restrictions. 
Principal Uses  AF  RS150, RS175, RS200  RS100  CSD  RM  MH  OI  HSB  BG  LM  HM1  HM2  
Fertilizer plant.  A  
Fishing club.  A  
Fireworks sales.  SU-R  
Fitness center, health club, spa.  A  A  A  A  
Florist.  A  A  
Foster home.  A  
Fruit and vegetable stand, Temporary  T-R  T-R  
Funeral home.  A  
Fur farm.  A-R  
Furniture rental or sales establishments.  A  
Garden supply center and greenhouse.  A  A  A  A  A  
Gasoline station.  A  A  
Gift shop.  A  A  
Golf course & golf driving range (except mini golf).  A  
Grocery store, food store.  SU  A  
Group and congregate personal care home.  SU  A  A  
Group day care home.  SU  SU  
Growler Shop  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  
Half-way house.  A  
Hardware store.  A  A  
Hobby shop.  A  A  
Hospital, clinic, convalescent home.  A  A  A  
Hotel, motel.  SU  A  A  A  A  A  
HVAC equipment dealer.  A  A  A  
Ice cream shop.  A  A  
Ice manufacturing or packing plant.  A  A  A  
Industrialized home. (Refer to "Mobile home" in Section 405.)  A-R  
Institutional house for the handicapped.  A  
Interior decorating shop.  A  A  
Jewelry store.  A  A  
Kennel, dog.  A  A  A  
Kennel.  A-R  
Laboratory, medical or dental.  A  A  A  
Laboratory, research and testing.  A  A  A  
Landfill.  SU-R  
Lodge, dormitory, fraternal and social organization with housing.  A-R  
Lodge, fraternal and social organization, no housing.  A  A  A  A  A  A  
Machine shop.  A  A  A  
Manufactured home. (Refer to "Mobile home" in Section 405.)  A-R  
Manufacturing, outdoor.  A  
Mausoleum.  A  
Meat processing or packaging except slaughtering, poultry killing, packing and dressing.  A  A  
Metal smelting, forging works.  A  
Microbrewery  A-R  A-R  A-R  
Mini-warehouse, personal storage warehouse.  A  A  A  
Mobile building.  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  
Mobile home.  A-R  
Mobile home park.  A-R  
Mobile home or mobile building leasing or sales (new and used).  A  A  
Mortuary.  A  
Movie studio.  A  A  A  
Multi-family dwelling (E.g. Duplex, apartment, condominium and town house).  A  
Museum.  A  A  A  
Music store.  A  A  
Music studio.  A  A  
Newspaper and printing facility.  A  A  A  
Nursing and convalescent home.  A  A  

Table 4.1 - Permitted Uses Updated 5/9/16 KL 
A = Allowed by right. A-R = Allowed with restrictions.  SU = Special use permit required. SU-R = Special use permit required and subject to restrictions.  T-R = Temporary Use and subject to restrictions. 
Principal Uses  AF  RS150, RS175, RS200  RS100  CSD  RM  MH  OI  HSB  BG  LM  HM1  HM2  
Office, professional or business.  A  A  A  A  A  A  
Orphanage.  A  
Outdoor storage yard, except junkyard or salvage operation.  A-R  A-R  
Paper or pulp mill.  SU  
Park and other similar public and semi-public building and land use.  A  
Parking lot and garage.  A  A  A  A  A  A  
Pawn Shop  SU  
Pest control or extermination business.  A  A  A  
Petroleum refinery or processing plant.  SU  
Pharmacy.  A  A  A  A  A  
Photo processing plant.  A  A  A  
Photography shop and studio.  A  A  A  A  A  
Plant nursery (wholesale or retail).  A  A  A  
Plant nursery providing lawn and garden supplies and plants.  A  A  
Plastics extrusion plant.  A  A  A  
Plumbing equipment dealer.  A  A  A  
Plumbing, electrical, pool and home building supply showroom and sales center (provided there is no outdoor storage associated with the use).  A  
Printing, bookbinding, publishing plant.  A  A  A  
Psychic reading, fortune telling, astrology, phrenology, palmistry, clairvoyance or related commercial practice.  A  
Public building, office, land use and facility.  A  A  A  A  A  A  
Quarry.  SU-R  
Radio and television repair shop.  A  A  
Radio or television station and transmitter.  A  A  A  
Radio, recording or television studio, broadcasting station and facility.  A  
Railroad repair and storage yard.  A  
Railroad sidings, maintenance and terminal facility.  SU  SU  A  
Recording or rehearsal studio.  A  A  A  
Recovered material processing, recycling station.  A-R  A-R  
Recreation facility (indoor, such as bowling alleys, skating rinks, shooting ranges and movie theaters).  A  
Recreation facility, Indoor training center (E.g. gymnastics schools, baseball academies).  A  A  A  
Recreation facility, outdoor (e.g. miniature golf, driving range, water slides, drive in theater).  SU  SU  
Recreational facility, public and semipublic such as parks, country clubs and community centers.  A  
Rental, moving trucks and vans (E.g. Ryder and U-Haul).  A-R  A-R  
Rental, passenger vehicles (Cars, trucks and vans).  A  A  
Research and testing facility.  A  A  A  
Restaurant.  A  A  
Retail business and service stores except food store.  A  A  
Retail sales showroom and warehouse store.  A  A  A  
Retail shopping center over 50,000 square feet gross floor area.  A  A  A  
Retirement community (To include nursing home, cafeteria, care facilities and accessory uses).  A  SU  
Rubber tire retreading plant.  A  
Salvage operation or junk yard.  SU-R  
School, Business college or business school operated as a business enterprise.  A  
School, Educational facility, trade or vocational school.  A  A  A  
School, Educational institution offering general education courses, private.  SU  SU  SU  A  A  SU  SU  
Scrap tire processing plant.  SU  
Shelter, commercial.  SU-R  
Shelter, residential and community.  SU  SU  SU  A  A  A  
Shoe store and shoe repair shop.  A  A  
Shopping center, including food store.  SU  A  
Single family dwelling.  A  A  A  A  A  
Single family residential subdivision.  A  A  A  A  

Table 4.1 - Permitted Uses Updated 5/9/16 KL 
A = Allowed by right. A-R = Allowed with restrictions.  SU = Special use permit required. SU-R = Special use permit required and subject to restrictions.  T-R = Temporary Use and subject to restrictions. 
Principal Uses  AF  RS150, RS175, RS200  RS100  CSD  RM  MH  OI  HSB  BG  LM  HM1  HM2  
Small appliance repair shop.  A  A  
Soft drink bottling and distribution plant.  A  A  
Solid waste transfer station.  SU  
Stadium, concert hall, amphitheater. (County Board of Education Schools excepted)  SU  A  
Sugar refinery.  A  
Tannery, leather processing.  A  
Tattoo and body piercing establishment.  SU-R  
Taxi or limousine service.  A  A  A  A  
Telephone exchange building.  A  A  A  
Theater and other place of entertainment and amusement enclosed in a building.  A  A  
Title Pawn Sales  SU  
Transportation terminal for freight.  SU  
Transportation terminal for passengers.  A  
Truck and bus sales, leasing, repair (heavy truck/tractor trailer).  A  A  
Truck terminal.  A  A  
Upholstery shop.  A  A  A  
Utility office.  A  A  
Utility station including water and wastewater treatment facility, building and grounds for storage of vehicles, equipment, and materials.  A  A  A  
Utility structure.  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  
Veterinary clinic, restricted.  A-R  
Veterinary clinic, unrestricted.  SU  A  A  A  
Veterinary office, hospital, and laboratory.  A  A  A  
Vetrinary clinic or hospital, agricultural.  SU-R  
Waste incineration facility.  SU  
Weather service station.  A  A  A  
Wholesaling and warehousing.  A  A  A  
Wild animals, raising and keeping.  A-R  
Wine Bar  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  























Table 4.1 - Permitted Uses Updated 5/9/16 KL 
A = Allowed by right.          A-R = Allowed with restrictions.          SU = Special use permit required.          SU-R = Special use permit required and subject to restrictions.          T-R = Temporary Use and subject to restrictions. 
Accessory Uses  AF  RS150, RS175, RS200  RS100  CSD  RM  MH  OI  HSB  BG  LM  HM1  HM2  
Accessory building / use, customary residential.  A-R(1)  A-R(1)  A-R(1)  A-R(1)  A-R(1)  A-R(1)  
Beauty parlor or barber shop.  SU  SU  SU  SU  SU  
Bulk storage tanks, Accessory (Diesel or Bio-diesel).  A-R  A-R  A-R  
Bulk storage tanks, Accessory (Liquefied Petroleum Gas)  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  
Café, Accessory  A-R  A  A  A  A  A  
Caretaker or watchman quarters.  SU  A  A  A  
Convenience retail business.  A-R  A  A  A  
Child care facility located in  a church.  SU-R  SU-R  SU-R  
Child care facility.  SU-R  A-R  A-R  
Compressed Natural Gas Refueling Appliance  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  
Fireworks sales event, Temporary Outdoor.  A-R  
Fuel pumps.  A-R  A-R  
Home occupations, customary.  A-R(2)  A-R(2)  A-R(2)  A-R(2)  A-R(2)  A-R(2)  
Household pets, raising and keeping.  A  A  A  A  A  
Laundrette.  A  
Maintenance shop (fleet vehicles).  A  A  A  
Office associated with wholesaling and warehousing.  A  A  A  
Outdoor storage associated with  garden supply center, plant nusery and greenhouse.  SU-R  A-R  
Parking lot.  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  
Parking structure.  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  
Pharmacy associated with a medical use.  A  A  A  A  A  A  
Recreational facility, residential neighborhood.  A-R  A-R  A-R  A-R  
Residential or community shelter associated with a church.  SU  SU  SU  SU  
Retail shop associated with a bakery.  A  A  A  
Sales event, Temporary Outdoor  T-R  T-R  
Service facilities associated with automotive sales lots (new or used).  SU  A  A  

Notes:  
(1) Refer to Table 4.3 for restrictions.  
(2) Refer to Section 607 for restrictions.  

Table 4.2 - Accessory Uses Updated 7-13-15 kbl 
Table 4.3 -Customary Residential Accessory 
Uses and Structures 

(Unless otherwise noted, refer to Section 406 for restrictions.) 
Table 4.3 includes a list of customary residential accessory uses indicating whether each use is allowed by right; allowed with restrictions; allowed as a special use or allowed as a special use with restrictions within the front, side and rear yard for all property zoned AF, RS-200, RS-175, RS-150, RS-100, CSD, RM and MH: 

Use/Structure  Front  Side Yard  Rear Yard  
Wall, Fence  A-R(1)  A-R(1)  A-R(1)  
Mail Box  A  A  
Lamp Post  A  A  A  
Landscaping  A  A  A  
Basketball Goal  A-R  A  A  
Driveway, Single Family Residential Parking Area  A-R  A  A-R  
Vegetable Garden  A-R  A  A  
Terrace, Patio  A  A  A  
Arbor  A  A  A  
Swimming Pool  A  
Dog Run/Pen/House  A  
Tennis Court  A  
Playground Equipment  A  A  
Recreational vehicle, boat, trailer  A-R  A-R  
Accessory building, minor. (Less than 240 sq. ft.)  SUP-R  SUP-R.².  A-R.².  
Accessory building, major. (240 sq. ft. or more.)  SUP-R  SUP-R.².  A-R.².  



Note: 
(1) Refer to section 700 for restrictions. 
(2) For the purposed of this section, on corner lots and/or lots with multiple frontages, the city Manager shall have the authority to determine which of the side yards may be considered a rear yard for the placement of a customary residential accessory use. 
A = Allowed by right. 
A-R = Allowed with restrictions. 
SU = Special use permit required. 
SU-R = Special use permit required and subject to restrictions.                                      Updated: 7-10-17 kbl 

ARTICLE 5. 
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 
Section 500. Use, Occupancy and Construction. 
No building or structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations of this Ordinance. 
Section 501. Height and Density. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered to: 
1. 	
Exceed the height limits. 

2. 	
House a greater number of families per acre or occupy a smaller lot area per family than are herein required. 

3. 	
Have narrower or smaller front, rear or side yards than are herein required. 


Section 502. Reduction in Lot Size. 
No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, size of yards, lot area per family or any other requirement of this Ordinance is not maintained. This limitation shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose or for unbuildable lots used exclusively for subdivision identification signage or subdivision entrance landscape features. 
Section 503. Yards and Other Spaces. 
No part of a yard or the off-street parking or loading spaces that are required in connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this Ordinance shall be included as part of the yard or off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building, except as specifically provided herein. No part of a lot which is flooded by a 100-year recurrence interval storm event may be counted as part of the required minimum lot area. 
Section 504. Minimum Lot Size for Residential Septic Tank Use. 
No single-family residence which is to be served by a septic tank shall be permitted on a lot containing less square footage than the square footage required by the Gwinnett County Board of Health in order for the property to be effectively served by septic tank. This restriction on lot size does not apply to residential developments served by a properly approved and permitted community sewer system. In no event shall any single family residence to be served by a septic tank be allowed on a lot of less square footage than required in the Zoning District Classification. 
5.1 

Section 505. Only One Principal Building or Use on a Lot. 
Within residential districts, only excepting group developments, not more than one (1) principal building or structure or use and its customary accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted on any lot. 
In non-residential districts, more than one (1) structure housing a principal permitted use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements of this Ordinance shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. 
Section 506. Street Frontage Requirement. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on a lot that does not abut for at least thirty (30) feet upon an open street which shall be a publicly dedicated and maintained street except that this restriction will not apply in the BG, General Business District. 
Section 507. Classification of Streets. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, all of the streets, roads and highways in the City of Sugar Hill and Gwinnett County are classified as local streets, minor or major collector streets, minor, major, residential or principal arterial streets and freeways.  These same streets and roads will also be known as interstate routes, U.S. or State routes, county roads and local street or roads. 
The classification of each street in Sugar Hill is shown on the Official Road Classification Map of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia which shall be kept on file in the City Hall. 
5.2 


The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 6 
of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia  General Provisions 

ARTICLE 6. 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Section 600.  Reserved. 
Section 601.  Vision Clearance at Intersections. 
All street intersections shall be maintained in accordance with the City of Sugar Hill Development Regulations Section 9.6.8 Obstructing Visibility at Intersections. 
Section 602.  Approvals for Residential Subdivision, Business, and Industrial Developments on State Highways. 
For all residential subdivision, business and industrial developments fronting on a State Highway, no building or development permits shall be issued until the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation has been obtained by the applicant on entrances and exits, curb radial, drainage and other matters that are the appropriate concern of the Department. 
Section 603.  City Approvals that are Required. 
All City approvals that are required for the use of the land and structures and for the location and operation of businesses and industries shall be obtained by the applicant and transmitted by him with his request for a development permit, building permit, or an occupancy certificate. 
Section 604.  Erosion and Sedimentation Control. 
All developments within the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia shall comply with current erosion and sedimentation control regulations of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, and with the rules and regulations of the Environmental Protection Division, Department of Natural Resources, State of Georgia. 
Section 605.  Outdoor Storage. 
The outdoor storage of inoperative automobiles, machinery, equipment, used building materials, trash, solid waste, appliances and similar items and materials shall be limited to junk yards and to those commercial enterprises requiring short-term storage of items being repaired. 
Outdoor Storage of materials or equipment, sold or used in conjunction with an approved permitted use.  The permitted use which has outdoor storage must be located in a Zoning District which permits outdoor storage. 
Section 606.  Annexation. 
Any land subsequently annexed to the City of Sugar Hill shall be classified as to zoning district or districts at the time of annexation.  The Planning Commission shall review the proposed annexation and shall report its recommendations for zoning of the properties involved to the City Council within sixty (60) days of a request 
-6.1 ­

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 6 of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia  General Provisions 
for recommendation.  The City Council shall advertise for the conduct of at least one (1) public hearing in connection with any annexation. 
Section 607.  Requirements for Customary Home Occupations. 
In addition to the limitations imposed on "Customary Home Occupation" under "Article 3, Definitions", the following requirements shall be met: 
1. 	
The home occupation shall be carried on only by a member or members of the family residing in the residence. 

2. 	
To the extent that there is any sale of any item or service related to the home occupation, no sale of that item or service may occur on or adjacent to the premises unless this use has been granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from Planning Commission and following a public hearing. 

3. 	
The home occupation shall not involve group instruction or group assembly of people on the premises. 

4. 	
There shall be no exterior evidence of the conduct of a home occupation and shall be conducted only within the enclosed living area of the home (including basement, if any).  There shall be no display or storage of products, materials, or machinery where they may be visible from the exterior of the residence. 

5. 	
The conduct of the home occupation shall neither increase the normal flow of traffic nor shall it increase either on-street or off-street parking. 

6. 	
No equipment may be utilized or stored in the conduct of the home occupation except that which is normally used for purely domestic or household purposes.  Said items may only be those produced on the premises or incidental supplies necessary for and consumed in the conduct of the home occupation.  Samples, however, may be kept on the premises but neither sold nor distributed from the residence. 

7. 	
There shall be no signs advertising the home occupation. 

8. 	
No more than 25 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for conducting the home occupation. 

9. 	
One business vehicle used exclusively by the resident is permissible.  This vehicle must be parked in a carport, garage, side yard, or rear yard.  This vehicle shall be no larger in size than a pick-up truck, panel truck, or van, nor have a carrying capacity of more than one and one-half tons. 


10. 	The home occupation shall not create disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, radio, or television interference, voltage fluctuations or unhealthy or unsightly conditions; (Whether the disturbance is sufficient to invoke the prohibition of this section shall be determined by comparing the occupation caused disturbance to noises, smoke, odors, etc., that are commonly found in a residential neighborhood, such as children playing, yard maintenance, tools, etc.) 
-6.2 ­

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 6 of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia  General Provisions 
11. 	
Accessory home occupation may not serve as headquarters or dispatch centers where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations; 

12. 	
All home occupations shall be subject to the periodic inspections by the Department of Planning and Development or its designee; 

13. 	
The Department of Planning and Development must approve all businesses/occupational/home occupational licenses which shall be recertified annually; 

14. 	
Deliveries to the home occupation shall be made by passenger vehicles, mail carriers, or step vans (UPS, Federal Express, etc.) and must not restrict traffic circulations; 

15. 	
Deliveries to the home occupation through tractor-trailers or vehicles with over six wheels shall be prohibited; 

16. 	
The following uses shall be permitted provided they meet the above standards. 

i. 	Instructional, dance, or tutoring services within an enclosed building, but limited to four pupils at one time. 
ii. 	Arts and crafts, artistic studios, including painting, sculpture, composing, writing, and related crafts such as weaving, rug work, dressmaking, canning, baking, and lapidary. 
iii. 	Office service, including word processing, book keeping, transcribing, data entry, and telephone answering services. 
iv. 	
Barber and beauty shops.  Said business shall operate only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.  All local and state licenses as well as any other necessary permits must be obtained prior to the business being open.  The business shall consist of no more than one beauty/barber chair, and no more than two customers shall be permitted at one time. 

v. 	
The accommodation of no more than two (2) boarders or roomers. 


vi. 	The care of not more than six (6) children for compensation. 

17. 	
A customary home occupation specifically does not include the following: 


i. 	Florist or flower shop 
ii. 	Tearooms and restaurants 
iii. 	Tourist homes, boarding houses, or rooming houses 
iv. 	
Fish hatcheries, worm farms, or bait houses 

v. 	
Convalescent and nursing homes 


-6.3 ­

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 6 
of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia  General Provisions 

vi.  Kennels and animal hospitals  
vii.  Clinics and hospitals  
viii.  Retail Sales  

ix. 	Firewood sales. 
18. 	Other similar uses as approved by the Director, Planning and Development. 
Section 608.  Architectural and Design Standards. 
A. 	COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, OFFICE, INSTITUTIONAL, MANUFACTURING and MULTI-FAMILY DESIGN STANDARDS 
1.  Objectives and Findings 
In an effort to maintain high quality, long-lasting and sustainable development within the City of Sugar Hill, the City hereby adopts the following design guidelines and standards for all newly constructed buildings within RM, OI, HSB, BG, LM, HM-1 and HM-2 zoning districts. These guidelines are intended to enhance the visual aspect and livability of the entire city. These guidelines will foster architectural diversity and interest, yet achieve and maintain a consistent, durable and pleasing aesthetic/visual quality. 
Each building should be created as an enduring feature of the City’s built and natural environment contributing to the productivity of our economy, social/civic network and ecological condition.  The use of quality local materials is encouraged in order to minimize the operational and environmental cost over the life of each building.  A typical building exterior shall require little maintenance and achieve a life span of at least 80 years. Nostalgic replications of any building shall be avoided. 
The use of building materials should create a consistent and traditional architectural identity for each building/development. Traditional architecture may include the use of brick, pitched roofs, low-profile signage and subdued colors. For large commercial/retail buildings, variations in facade, roofline and depth shall be provided to lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy and reduce the perceived scale of such a building. 
2.  
Grandfathering and Adoption 

The following design guidelines and standards for all newly constructed non-residential or        multifamily buildings within RM, OI, HSB, BG, LM, HM-1 and HM-2 zoning districts. Any project within the City that has received or applied for a building permit by the date of adoption of these requirements shall be allowed to proceed under the previous requirements. In addition to applicable provisions outlined in Article VIII of the 2000 Zoning Ordinance relating to nonconforming uses, any building addition or enlargement to a lawfully constructed building shall not be subject to these requirements. 

3.  
Building Plans 


-6.4 ­

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 6 of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia  General Provisions 
All building plans submitted as an application for a building permit should clearly indicate all of the proposed building materials and colors for each facade as described herein. The plans should clearly show the location, dimensions and calculate the amount/percentages of all building materials per facade. 
The following design standards are primarily based upon the City’s zoning categories. However if a use is permitted in a more intensive zoning district, building material allocations shall be used for the less intensive classification (e.g. a professional office in a  BG zoning district shall use the building material allocations in Table I for OI categories.) 
4.  Definitions 
Arcade: As used herein, an arcade is a covered entry feature /structural canopy extending along the front facade of a commercial building. 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind. 
Facade: A vertical exterior face or elevation of a building. 
Front facade: Any facade with a public entry which faces a public right-of-way. 
Rear facade: Any facade without a public entry that does not face a public right-of-way.  A rear façade may be technically classified as a side façade. 
Side facade: Any facade without a public entry but facing a public right-of-way or any facade with a public entry but not facing a public right-of-way. A side facade typically connects a front facade with a rear façade. 
5. General Architectural Requirements 
a. 
If provided, dumpsters shall be screened to a height of eight feet with an opaque screen on all sides. Screening wall must be finished with brick and/or stone.  All dumpster screens must be arranged for easy access, located behind the principal building they serve and enclosed with an opaque gate finished to complement the walls of the enclosure. Dumpsters may be located alongside the principal building they serve provided that the dumpster is 75’ away from any neighboring building or use. 

b. 
All ground mounted mechanical, HVAC and like systems shall be screened from public street view on all sides by an opaque wall or fence made of brick, stone or appropriate landscaping. 

c. 
For all commercial/retail buildings, roof mounted mechanical, HVAC and like systems shall be screened on all sides from areas of lower elevation than the building’s roof line. 

d. 
Contrasting accent colors on any single facade shall be limited to no more than 10% of the total wall area for any single facade. 


-6.5 ­

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 6 of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia  General Provisions 
e. Permanently mounted neon lights shall not be allowed. 
f. 
Buildings located on out parcels shall be constructed using similar architectural themes as the principal building with which they are associated. 

g. 
Back-lit awnings, roof mounted lights, and/or roof mounted flag poles are not permitted. Satellite dishes shall be located and painted to blend with the background as much as practical. 

h. 
Each project shall seamlessly relate in form, materials and scale to its neighborhood and site while remaining unique in overall character and style.  Each building design shall be made up of a compatible combination of these traditional architectural elements or similar elements:  low pitched gable roofs; exposed beams or bracing under gables; prominent lintels and sills; open front porticos; prominent columns, posts and/or pilasters; gabled dormers; exposed rafters; wide eaves; brick or stone masonry foundation walls. 

i. 
Bright or vibrant colors of orange, purple, pink, bright green, violet or other similar hues which are considered to be visually obtrusive or otherwise inconsistent with the intent of the design guidelines are not permitted. The exterior color scheme shall be shown for all exterior elevations and included with the building plans. 

j. All site utilities shall be located underground. 

k.    
Roll-up type cargo bay doors shall be limited to the side or rear of buildings located in OI, HSB and BG zoning districts. 


6. Building Materials 
The following building materials may be used and combined to create a consistent, attractive, interesting and long-lasting building design within the general architectural requirements. The quantity and type of building materials are outlined below. 
a. 
Allowed Building Materials: 

i. 
Brick – Painted brick and simulated brick veneers which are intended to imitate masonry exteriors are not permitted; 


ii. Stone – Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone, and marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta, cast stone, cultured stone are also acceptable. Painted stone or mass produced sheets of simulated stone which are intended to imitate masonry exteriors are not permitted; 
iii. Glass – Reflective or glass tinted more than 20% is not permitted; 
iv. High grade fiber cement siding; 
-6.6 ­

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 6 
of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia  General Provisions 

v. High grade stucco / E.I.F.S (Exterior Insulation & Finish Systems); 
vi. 
Split Face Block; 

b. 
Ratios and Amounts of Allowed Building Materials: 


The following tables outline the allowed building materials for uses within each zoning category within the City of Sugar Hill: 
-6.7 ­

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 6 of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia  General Provisions 
Table 1 - Allowed Building Materials - Buildings under 30,000 square feet Gross Floor Area (GFA) 
Zoning Category  Brick  Stone (Cultured orNatural?  Glass        Tilt/ Pre-Cast  Stucco / EIFS  Concrete Block/CMU  Split-Face Block  Siding  Metal  Tile  
Front  Side/Rear  Front/Side  Rear  Front/Side  Rear  Front  Side/Rear  
RM  Yes  Yes  No  No  Max. 20% per Facade  Max. 25% per Facade  No  No  No  No  Max. 20% per Facade  Max. 20% per Facade  No  No  
OI  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  Max. 20% per Facade  Max. 25% per Facade  No  No  No  No  No  No  No  No  
HSB  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  Max. 20% per Facade  Max. 25% per Facade  No  No  No  No  No  No  No  No  
BG  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  Max. 20% per Facade  Max. 25% per Facade  No  No  No  No  No  No  No  No  
LM  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  Max. 20% per Facade  Max. 25% per Facade  No  No  No  No  No  No  No  No  
HM-1  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  Max. 20% per Facade  Max. 25% per Facade  No  No  No  No  No  No  No  No  
HM-2  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  Max. 20% per Facade  Max. 25% per Facade  No  No  No  No  No  No  No  No  

Table II - Allowed Building Materials - Buildings with 30,000 - 150,000 square feet GFA 
Zoning  Stone (Cultured or       Tilt/  Stucco / EIFS  Concrete Block/CMU  Split-Face Block  Siding  Metal  Tile  
Category  Brick  Natural?  Glass  Pre-Cast  Front  Side/Rear  Front/Side  Rear  Front/Side  Rear  Front  Side/Rear  
LM  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  No  No  No  No  Yes  Yes  No  No  No  No  
HM-1  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  No  No  No  No  Yes  Yes  No  No  No  No  
HM-2  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  No  No  No  No  Yes  Yes  No  No  No  No  

NOTES: 
Table III - Allowed Building Materials – Buildings or common developments with more than 150,000 square feet GFA 
Zoning  Stone (Cultured or       Tilt/  Stucco / EIFS  Concrete Block/CMU  Split-Face Block  Siding  Metal  Tile  
Category  Brick  Natural?  Glass  Pre-Cast  Front/Side  Rear  Front/Side  Rear  Front/Side  Rear  Front  Side/Rear  
BG  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes*  Max. 30% per Facade  No  No  Yes#  Yes  Yes  No  No  No  No  
LM  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes*  Max. 30% per Facade  No  No  Yes#  Yes  Yes  No  No  No  No  
HM-1  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes*  Max. 30% per Facade  No  No  Yes#  Yes  Yes  No  No  No  No  
HM-2  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes*  Max. 30% per Facade  No  No  Yes#  Yes  Yes  No  No  No  No  

NOTES: 
# Allowed only on rear facades of single buildings or common developments larger than 150,000 square feet gross floor area and must be finished to match building’s primary color.    Rear building wall must be screened from adjacent right of way, residential uses, retail uses or service uses by an opaque landscape buffer to sonsist of multiple staggared    rows of evergreen and semi-evergreen trees and shrubs native or adapted to the area.  Trees shall be 6' tall at time of planting. Plantings shall be arranged to provide an effective visual screen of at least the geight of the wall at maturity.  Buffer must be shown on a landscape plan to be approved by Planning and Dvelopment prior to receiving any permits. 
*	   Exterior walls must be constructed and finished in accordance with all other provisions of the Architectural and Design Standards.  Acceptable finish treatments shall include any    of the allowed building materials from Table III adapted for use in a tilt / pre-cast wall application. 
-6.8 ­
c. Accent/Trim Exterior Building Material 
Small amounts of building materials such as wood, tile, etc., may be used to enhance the elevation of the building or for decorative elements but should not exceed 10% of total wall area per facade. 
d. Facade Calculations 
With the exception of accent/trim materials, there shall be no more than two primary building materials used. When a material is restricted as a percentage in Table I or Table II, such as stucco or siding, the building material may not be considered a primary building material or be combined with another restricted building material. The allowed facade materials shall not apply to windows, glass-front windows, entry doors and/or roll-up doors.  The amount of permitted material shall be calculated using the gross square footage of wall area per facade. A building material that is allowed (such as brick) may be used in any percentage throughout the structure. A material that is restricted (such as stucco and split face block) is allowed as a maximum percentage.  For example, a building has a front facade with a gross facade area of 1,200 square feet with 400 square feet consisting of windows and doors. Begin with 1,200 square feet for required building material calculations. In this case, the front facade of a building in BG zoning district with a wall area of 1,200 square feet shall have no more than 300 square feet of stucco on the front facade [ex. (1,200 X 25% = 300)]. The balance shall be brick or other allowed material. 
i. For buildings with less than 15,000 square feet GFA, multi-pane windows shall be used in individual window openings, rather than large glass sheets. 
ii. Mirrored glass with a reflection greater than twenty (20%) percent and glass curtain walls shall be prohibited. 
iii. For buildings with less than 15,000 square feet GFA, window areas shall not extend down to the floor line.  A wall of not less than 2’ in height shall separate the floor from the bottom of the window frame. 
iv. Building facades shall be visually divided into segments through articulation of the façade achieved by methods such as but not limited to variation in building materials, roof line, building setback, the use of additional window bays, pilasters.  The segments shall be determined based on the length of the façade as shown: 
Façade Length  Maximum Segment Length  
50’ – 150’  50’  
151’ – 300’  75’  
301’ +  150  

-6.9 ­
7. Roof Requirements 
a. Pitched Roofs 
All one-story buildings less than 10,000 gross square feet must have a pitched roof (between 
3:12 
and 12:12). If a pitched roof is not possible, a combination of flat roof and pitched roof shall be required.  Provide a pitched roof on front and side of the building to screen view of any flat roof. Cover arcades, canopies, porches, balconies and other similar features with a pitched roof.  Materials for pitched roofs shall be limited to architectural dimensional grade asphalt shingles, natural slate, natural terra cotta, natural wood shake, or factory finished enamel metal roofing.  The use of copper enamel standing seam metal roofing is the signature treatment for buildings in Downtown Sugar Hill. 

b. 
Mansard Roofs 


Mansard roofs shall have a maximum pitch of 12:12 with a minimum 12 foot vertical surface length. 
c. Flat Roofs 
Flat roofs may be of any material that meets local codes.  If factory finished metal flashing is used the color must be subdued to blend with other materials used in the construction of the roof.  All buildings with flat roofs shall include parapet articulation on the front façade(s) of such building. There shall be roof articulations/offsets at a minimum of one per each 120 linear feet of length by a change in the top line of the parapet. Additional articulation may occur at any lesser distance. If the front facade is less than 120 linear feet, then a minimum of one roof articulation must occur. 
d. Other 
Drive under canopies for gasoline pumps may have flat roof with vertical or factory formed facing of finished sheet metal. 
8. 
Arcade / Structural Canopy for Retail Commercial Buildings 

For all commercial retail/service buildings, a covered entry shall be provided at the front of the building. The arcade or canopy shall provide covered areas for relief from the weather and extend from the building a minimum of five feet.  They shall be designed in a manner which adds architectural variation and a sense of depth to the façade. 

9. 
Alternate Review 


This Ordinance is intended to be followed as outlined above. In the event the intent of this Ordinance can be achieved with minor deviations which do not substantially impact the goals or intent of this Ordinance, the Director of the City of Sugar Hill Department of Planning and Development has the authority to modify the specific provisions.  If substantial modifications or changes are necessary, any 
-6.10 ­
person, firm, group or organization may apply for relief from these requirements to the City Council in accordance with article 15 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Any application for an alternate architectural arrangement shall be accompanied with proposed elevations, building materials, and/or renderings necessary for the City Council to make a determination whether the alternate proposal meets the intent of these requirements. The City Council, as part of an approval, may include conditions, modifications or requirements necessary to mitigate any part of their decision. The City may establish filing requirements, fees and deadlines as needed. 
10. Severability 
Any requirement set forth herein deemed unconstitutional, vague, illegal and/or otherwise unenforceable in a court of law shall not invalidate the subject Ordinance and all other provisions and requirements thereto shall remain in full force and effect. 
Section 609.  Minimum Floor Area Requirements. 
All dwelling units shall have a minimum heated finished living area, excluding a basement, attic, carport or garage, as provided for in Article 9. Use Provisions for each residential zoning classification of this Ordinance. 
Section 610.  Area, Yard and Height Requirements. 
When developing under any Zoning Classification the requirements of area, yard, and height requirements shall be met. 
In all districts, the height requirements must be met unless the applicant is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Planning Commission and after a public hearing.  Provided, however, that an increase in height of less than fifteen (15) feet for any structure may be requested under the provisions of Article 14, Section 1400 as an Administrative Variance when no increase is involved in the number of stories which would otherwise be permitted under the applicable zoning district. 
Section 611.  Flood Hazard. 
Except for stormwater retention facilities, no structures or obstruction to storm water flow shall be erected within the limits of the maximum flood elevation of 100-year recurrence interval storm. 
Section 612.  Frontage on Corner Lots. 
On lots having frontage on more than one (1) street that intersects in front of the lot, the minimum front yard shall be provided for each street. 
-6.11 ­
Section 613.  Junked Automobiles. 
Any automobile, truck, vehicle or trailer of any kind or type, without a valid license plate attached thereto, shall not be parked or stand on any private property or public roads and is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, and invite plundering and vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare and, when on county streets, to create a traffic hazard and endanger public safety. 
This Section shall not be the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or contrivances within the City Limits of Sugar Hill but shall be supplemental and in addition to the other regulations and regulatory codes, ordinances, statutes, or provisions of law heretofore and hereinafter enacted by City, County, State, or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
A. Conditions describing a Junked Vehicle. 
An inoperative or junk condition shall include, but not be limited to any automobile, vehicle, trailer 
of any kind or type, or contrivance or part thereof, the condition of which is one or more of the 
following: 
1. 	
Wrecked. 

2. 	
Dismantled. 

3. 	
Partially dismantled. 

4. 	
Inoperative. 

5. 	
Abandoned. 

6. 	
Discarded. 

7. 	
One which does not have a valid license plate attached thereto. 


B. Junked Automobiles which would be permitted within the City Limits of Sugar Hill. 
The following conditions allow the parking or standing of a junked vehicle on any property within 
the City of Sugar Hill. 
1. 	
One or two junked vehicle(s) enclosed within a building on residentially zoned property provided the occupant of the home is in the process of reconditioning the vehicle(s) for his or her personal use. 

2. 	
It shall be on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner for the purpose of repairing, reconditioning or remodeling of the vehicles in conformance with the requirements for an automobile impoundment yard, an automobile repair garage, or other 


-6.12 ­
such similar use.  Such vehicles shall not be stored for the purpose of salvage of parts but shall be in continual process of repair or reconditioning. 
3. 	It shall be on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner and licensed as a junk yard under the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Section 614.  Prohibited uses. 
Uses of land and buildings which are incompatible with existing and future development within the city limits of the City of Sugar Hill and are prohibited in all districts.  The Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals do not have the authority to grant variances or special exceptions for these prohibited uses.  Prohibited uses are as follows: 
1. 	The keeping or raising of livestock or poultry, whether for domestic or commercial purposes. The keeping of no more than five  (5) rabbits or the keeping of no more than one (1) pure bred Vietnamese pot belly pig, provided said animals are kept purely for domestic purposes to be used as pets shall not be prohibited by this Section provided that the animals are maintained in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1) 	
The animals may not be raised for or offered for sale to the public. 

(2) 	
The property on which the animal is being kept or raised must be located in an AF, RS­100, RS-150, RS-175 or RS-200 Zoning District, must be used for single-family residential purposed or agricultural purposes. 

(3) 	
The pens, hutches or other facilities in which a rabbit or pure bred Vietnamese Pot belly pig are maintained must be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner in accordance with all health department regulations.  All such facilities must be set back at least 30 feet from all property lines.  Each rabbit must have separate quarters. All rabbit quarters or hutches shall have a minimum floor space of at least four (4) square feet and a maximum floor space of sixteen (16) square feet per rabbit.  The floor surface shall consist of half solid wood and half rabbit wire. 

(4) 	
Anyone raising or maintaining rabbits or pure bred Vietnamese pot belly pigs must keep all such animals in the rear yard and the rear yard of the property on which said animals are maintained must be separated from adjacent properties by a six foot high solid wood or chain link fence.  Off spring may be kept a maximum of six weeks. 


No administrative variance shall be granted regarding the provisions of this subsection and the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be authorized to grant variances regarding the provisions of this subsection. 
1. 	
Yards for the sale, transfer, or temporary holding of livestock. 

2. 	
Poultry killing, plucking, and dressing. 

-6.13 ­

3. 
Meat packing, slaughtering, eviscerating, and skinning. 

4. 
Rendering of byproducts of slaughtering and killing animals or poultry. 

5. 
The use of equipment which causes off-site radio or television interference. 


-6.14 ­
ARTICLE 7. 
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 
Section 700.  Fences and Walls. 
Fences or walls shall be permitted in any zoning district subject to the following requirements: 
A. 	Location & Visibility. 
1. 	
No fence or wall shall obstruct the view of adjoining property owners entering or leaving the public/private street, nor obstruct the visibility at street intersections (refer to Development Regulations 9.6.8). 

2. 	
A fence or wall may be placed up to the applicant’s property side or rear lot line, but shall not encroach onto adjacent property or any easement without written permission from the property owner or easement holder. 

3. 	
Fences or walls along a public or private street shall be setback a minimum of three (3) feet from the property line. 

4. 	
Encroachment within a drainage easement shall require approval of a Drainage Easement Agreement in a form approved by the City Manager. 

5. 	
No fence or wall shall be placed or permitted in the public right-of-way.  It is in violation of this Ordinance to place any fence or wall within the public right-of-way and it shall be removed immediately. 

6. 	
Adequate provisions shall be made for access of normal utility service (including but not limited to garbage collection as well as water, gas and electricity meters and cutoffs), mail delivery and emergency responders. 


B. 	Design Standards. 
1. 	
Fences shall be constructed of durable weather proof materials such as wood, brick, stone and metal. 

2. 	
Walls shall be constructed of wood, concrete, concrete block, brick, stone or cultured stone. Concrete or concrete block that is visible from adjacent property shall be painted or stained. 

3. 	
All parts of a fence or wall visible from adjacent property shall be colored to compliment the principal building and shall be finished with natural wood colors, white, beige, ivory, cream, off-white, black or dark green.  Chain link type fences may be unfinished if constructed of galvanized metal. 

4. 	
The finished side shall face the exterior of the property. 

7.1 	Updated 7-10-17 kbl 

5. 	
Woven wire, chain link or metal mesh fences placed along a public or private street shall be screened by landscaping between the fence and property line subject to approval by the City Manager. 


C. 	Maintenance. 
1. 	
The fence or wall shall be maintained by the property owner(s) at all times, in appearance and structural integrity. 

2. 	
All fences and walls shall be maintained in good condition, so as to present a neat and orderly appearance.  Peeling, flaking, chipped or fading exterior surfaces shall be eliminated and refinished.  The City Manager may cause to be removed after due notice any fence which shows gross neglect, becomes dilapidated, or is subject to removal under any other provision of this Ordinance. 


D. Electrified Fences. 
1. 	
Electrified fences shall be limited to a side and rear yard and shall be enclosed by at least a four (4) foot high perimeter fence. 

2. 	
Electrified fences shall not extend above exterior perimeter fence. 

3. 	
Fence chargers shall be a commercially made Underwriters’ Laboratories (UL) approved device retailed for safe residential use around adults and small children.  Maximum output shall be limited to .50 joules. 

4. 	
The installation of an electric fence shall be clearly indicated by a warning sign placed at 100’ intervals along the outer perimeter or at least one on each side and rear lot line to be approved by the City Manager. 

5. 	
Adequate provisions shall be made for access of normal utility service (including but not limited to garbage collection as well as water, gas and electricity meters and cutoffs), mail delivery and emergency responders such that the charging device and fence can be disabled or bypassed for entry. 


E. 	Walls or fences in a Residential Zoning District. 
Fences and walls located within a residential zoning district shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
1. 	No such fence or wall shall be constructed with: barbed wire, razor wire, spikes, glass, tires, junk or other discarded materials. 
7.2 	Updated 7-10-17 kbl 
2. 	
Maximum height is eight (8) feet.  Engineered retaining walls higher than eight (8) feet may be permitted upon approval of an administrative variance. 

3. 	
The maximum height of a fence or wall in the front yard shall be four (4) feet subject to visibility requirements above.  For the purposes of this section, on corner lots and/or other lots with multiple frontages, the City Manager shall determine which yard is considered a front and which yard is considered a side.  All fences shall be subject to the visibility requirements above and the City Manager may impose conditions pertaining to the location and design of any fence within a front yard in order to maintain a tasteful appearance that is visually consistent with other nearby properties.  Chicken wire, hog wire, or welded wire mesh may only be used as a backing on the interior side of an approved wooden picket or rail fence and shall be securely attached. Hog wire backing shall not contain barbed wire. 

4. 	
Chicken wire, hog wire or welded wire mesh may only be used as a backing on the interior side of an approved wooden picket or rail fence and shall be securely attached. Hog wire backing shall not contain barbed wire. 


Section 701.  Structures Excluded from Height Limitations. 
The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, flagpoles, monuments, cupolas, domes, ornamental towers, nor to observation towers not intended for human occupancy, water towers, transmission towers, radio or television towers or aerials (other than as provided in Article 13.5), chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, derricks, parapet walls extending not more than four (4) feet above the roof line of the building, or to necessary mechanical roof appurtenances. 
Section 702.  Substandard Lots of Records. 
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, which has an area or a width that is less than is required by this Ordinance, may be used, subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
1. 	
Adjoining lots.  When two (2) or more adjoining lots of record with continuous frontage are in one (1) ownership at any time after the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance and such lots, individually, have an area or width that is less than required by this Ordinance, such groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of the minimum width and area required in the district in which they are located. 

2. 	
Individual lot that does not meet the minimum lot size requirements.  Except as set forth in subsection (1) of this section, in any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, any lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, which has an area, width or depth less than that required by this Ordinance, may be used as a building site for single-family dwelling. 


In the case of such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width single-family dwelling, the Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby authorized to reduce the side yard requirements for such lot the 
7.3 	Updated 7-10-17 kbl 
minimum amount necessary for a reasonable dwelling, but in no case shall each of the side yards be less than five (5) feet in width. 
Section 703.  Reduction of Front Yard Requirements for Dwellings. 
The front yard requirements of this Ordinance for dwellings shall not apply on any lot where the average depth of the front yard of existing buildings located wholly or in part within one hundred 
(100) feet on each side of such lot within the same block or zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the minimum required front-yard depth.  In such cases, the depth of the front yard on such lot may be less than the required front-yard depth but shall not be less than the average of the front yards of the aforementioned existing buildings. 
Section 704.  Temporary Buildings. 
A temporary building or buildings for use in connection with a construction project or land subdivision development shall be required to acquire a temporary permit for a period of six (6) months.  If the temporary building or buildings is needed for a period beyond six (6) months, re­application may be made at the end of the six (6) month period. 
Section 705. Permitted Encroachments upon Required Setbacks. 
Cornices, eaves, chimneys, landings, porches, bay windows, or other similar architectural features may extend into the required front, side, and rear yard provided such extensions do not exceed three (3) feet.  Decks and patios may extend into the side or rear yard but no closer than five (5) feet from any property line.  Steps and landings may extend into the required setbacks provided such extensions do not exceed ten (10) feet for the front yard and three (3) feet for side yards.  Steps and landings may extend into the rear yard, but, no closer than five (5) feet from the property line.  Canopies, covered entrances or walkways for non-residential day care facilities, churches, or other similar uses may extend into the required side or rear yard provided such extension does not exceed three (3) feet and may extend into the required front yard provided such extensions do not extend to a point any closer than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of­way line or future right-of-way line as designated on the Long Range Road Classification Map of the City of Sugar Hill or Gwinnett County, whichever is greater.  However, canopies over pump islands or over sidewalks may extend up to the street right-of-way line or future right-of­way line as designated on the Long Range Road Classification Map of the City of Sugar Hill or Gwinnett County, whichever is greater. 
7.4 Updated 7-10-17 kbl 
of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia 	Non-Conforming Uses 
ARTICLE 8. 
NON-CONFORMING USES 
Section 800. Continuance of Non-conforming Uses. 
The lawful use of any building or structure or land existing at the time of the enactment or amendment of this Ordinance may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance, except that the non-conforming use shall not be: 
1. 	
Extended to occupy a greater area of land. 

2. 	
Extended to occupy a greater area of a building or structure unless such additional area of the building or structure existed at the time of the passage or amendment of this Ordinance and was clearly designed to house the same use as the non-conforming use occupying the other portion of the building or structure. 

3. 	
Re-established after discontinuance for one (1) year. 

4. 
Changed to another or different non-conforming use. Section 801. Continuance of a Non-Conforming Building or Use. A non-conforming building or use existing at the time of the enactment or amendment of this 


Ordinance may be retained except as follows: 
1. 	
No building or structure other than a single-family detached dwelling may be enlarged, or altered except in conformance with this Ordinance but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe and sanitary condition. 

2. 	
No building or structure other than a single family detached dwelling shall be rebuilt or altered after damage if the cost of the repair or alteration will exceed 50% of the value of the structure prior to the damage.  Any such structure shall be brought into conformity with this ordinance.  A single family detached dwelling which has been damaged as a result of fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other natural disaster or any accident may be rebuilt, altered or repaired structure contains at least as many square feet of heated space as the dwelling which was damaged or destroyed. 


8.1 

of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia 	Non-Conforming Uses 
Section 802. Amortization and Discontinuance. 
Certain uses of land, buildings, and structures have an adverse affect on the orderly development of the community and on the general health and welfare of the citizens.  Such uses can reasonably be required to cease after a reasonable time, irrespective of the general rules governing non-conforming uses as presented in Sections 800 and 801.  The following uses shall be removed, discontinued or made conforming within the specified amortization period.  Said amortization period shall commence upon the serving of written notice to the Owner by the City: 
1. 	
Fences, walls and foliage which might constitute a hazard by virtue of impairing sight distances at a curve or intersection shall be made conforming within one (1) calendar year. 

2. 	
Outdoor advertising signs and billboards shall conform within eight (8) years. 

3. 	
All provisions in business or industrial districts of this Ordinance setting forth specifications for the operation of a business or industry requiring fencing or visual screening shall conform within three (3) calendar years. 

4. 	
Non-conforming open storage operations, such as truck parking, automobile wrecking or salvage, salvage material storage and similar uses shall conform within two (2) calendar years. 

5. 	
Mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions shall conform within three (3) calendar years. 


Section 803. Validity of Previously Issued Permits and Approvals. 
No provision of this Zoning Ordinance shall be construed to affect the validity of any of the following: 
1. 	
Any building permit lawfully issued prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, or any Amendment thereto, provided that all time constraints and any procedures for extension specified by such permit shall be observed. 

2. 	
Any grading permit lawfully authorized prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, or any Amendment thereto, provided that all time constraints and any procedures for extension specified by such permit shall be observed. 

3. 	
Any development permit lawfully authorized prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, or any Amendment thereto, upon approval of relevant construction drawings; and such development may proceed to record provided that all time constraints and conditions relating to the approval are observed, and that the lot size and construction of buildings shall be in accordance with the area and dimensional requirements existing on the date of such approval. 


8.2 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 9 
of the City of Sugar Hill , Georgia  Lot and Building Dimensional Standards 
ARTICLE 9. 
LOT AND BUILDING DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS Section 900. Purpose. This section sets out the standards that control lot size, placement of buildings and structures and intensity of 
development for all lots within the city limits. Section 901. Lot area and residential density. All property on which a residential use is to be located shall meet or exceed the lot area and density requirements shown on Table 9.1 for the zoning district in which the property is situated.  Section 902. Lot area and non-residential density. All property on which a non-residential use is to be located shall meet or exceed the lot area requirements shown on Table 9.1 for the zoning district in which the property is situated. Section 903. Floor area provisions. The minimum building floor area required for a dwelling unit within each zoning district is shown on Table 
9.1. Section 904. Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for a lot within each zoning district is shown on Table 9.1. Section 905. Minimum setbacks, principal buildings. All principal buildings shall be set back from the right of way and all other lot lines no less than the distance shown on Table 9.1. Section 906. Minimum setbacks, accessory buildings. For accessory buildings 240 square feet or less, refer to section 600.  Accessory buildings having a gross floor area more than 240 square feet shall be subject to the same setbacks required for principal buildings as shown on Table 9.1. Section 906. Building and structure heights. The maximum height of all buildings and structures in each zoning district, except as otherwise noted, shall be as shown on Table 9.1. Section 907. Maximum Lot Coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings is shown as a percentage of the lot area in Table 9.1. 
9.1 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance 	Article 9 
of the City of Sugar Hill , Georgia  	Lot and Building Dimensional Standards 
Table 9.1 -Lot and Building Dimensional Standards. Setback from Max. Min. Lot Lot Area Per Density (6) Min Dwelling Unit Size (Sq. Ft.) Min. Lot Right-of-way (Ft.) Min. Min. Max. % of Area Dwelling (Units / Acre) Single Story / Two Story or more Width Major Collector Side Yard Rear Yard Height Lot Dist. (Sq. Ft.) Unit (Sq. Ft.) (Ft.) Street Street (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) Coverage(1) 

AF  40,000(2)  40,000  - 2,000 / 2,400  100  60  50  20  35  35  25  
RS-200  20,000(2,3)  20,000  1.8  2,000 / 2,400  100  45  35  10  35  35  25  
RS-175  17,500(2,3)  17,500  2.1  1,900 / 2,200  100  45  35  10  35  35  25  
RS-150  15,000(2,3)  15,000  2.5  1,700 / 2,000  100  45  35  10  35  35  25  
RS-100  10,000(2,3)  10,000  3.7  1,600 / 1,800  70  45  35  10  30  35  25  
CSD  10 Acres  5,000  - 1,600 / 1,800  60 Avg.  20  20  5  20  35  - 
RM  8,000(2,3)  5,400  8  1,000 / 2,400  50  45  35  10(5)  20(5)  35(4)  50  
MH  20 Acres  6,000  - 600  40  30  20  10(5)  5(5)  35  35  
OI  10,000(2)  - - - 50  50  40  10(5)  30(5)  35  40  
HSB  10,000(2)  - - - 70  50  40  10(5)  30(5)  45  40  
BG  NONE  - - - 60  40  30  10(5,7)  30(5,7)  45  75  
LM  43,560(2)  - - - 100  50  50  20(5)  20(5)  50  50  
HM-1  43,560(2)  - - - 100  50  40  20(5)  20(5)  70  75  
HM-2  43,560(2)  - - - 100  50  50  20(8)  20(8)  50  75  

1 	Includes principal and accessory buildings but not pavement areas. 
2 	No portion of any lot which is flooded by a 100-year recurrence interval storm event may be counted as part of the required minimum lot area. No subdivision lot which contains less than fifty percent (50%) of the minimum lot area required by the applicable Zoning District or eight thousand (8,000) square feet, whichever is greater, 
3 
located above the base flood elevation shall be approved.  All area above the flood elevation used to satisfy this requirement shall be contiguous and shall not be separated by any flood area. 4 
The maximum number of stories is two for any multi-family bldg.(basement  floor shall not be used for any separate units). 
Buffer zones are required in addition to side and rear yard where an office-institutional, business, or manufacturing use abuts a residential District and where a multi-family or mobile home use 

5 
abuts a single-family residential District. 6 
Density calculations shall not include right of way dedications, power line easements & flood plain. 7 
Side yard required only if abutting a District requiring side yards. 8 
The minimum setback adjoining an residential Zoning District is one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
9.2 

Section 1000.  Planned Unit Developments. 
The purpose of planned unit developments is to encourage the best possible site plans and building arrangements under a unified plan of development rather than under lot-by-lot regulation.  The developer benefits from better land utilization, economy in the provision of roads and utilities and flexibility in design.  The City gains the advantages of variety in building types, compatibility of uses and optimum community development.  Review of the development plan by the Sugar Hill Planning and Zoning Commission provides an opportunity to assure that the development will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood in which the development is located. 
The planned unit development is not intended to encourage greater density of development but rather to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning.  The planned unit development is, furthermore, not intended to enhance the value of the property for speculative purposes.  Approval of a planned unit development is therefore conditional, and if construction is not commenced within one (1) year, and pursued in an orderly manner toward completion, the Mayor and City Council may, upon written notice to the property owner, abolish the Zoning or reduce the size of the tract to fit the scope of actual development. 
A.  Types of Planned Unit Development. 
The following types of planned unit developments are authorized by this Ordinance.  They are required to have the minimum acreage indicated: 
1. 	
Planned Residential Development (PRD) – Ten (10) acres. 

2. 	
Senior Residential Development (SRD) – Five (5) acres. 


B.  Ownership Control. 
The land area of a planned unit development shall be a contiguous land area to consist of all property within its exterior boundaries and shall not include any islands.  For purposes of this Section, an island is defined as any property in which its aggregate external boundaries abut the surrounding property contained in the planned unit development.  Upon application for a PUD, all land within the land area of the planned unit development must be owned by the same individual, corporation or other legal entity. Individual properties in a planned unit development may be sold after a plat has been recorded, with the properties subject to private deed covenants that assure the continuance of the planned unit development as originally approved and developed. 
C.  Standards Applying to All Planned Unit Developments. 
All planned unit developments shall meet the following standards and such other requirements as are set forth with respect to each of the permitted types of planned unit developments: 
1. 	
The development shall be compatible with the topography of the land and shall preserve any unusual topographic or natural features. 

2. 	
The development shall not adversely affect developed or undeveloped neighboring properties. 

3. 	
The development shall utilize design and development features that would not be possible by the application of lot-by-lot Zoning District regulations. 

4. 	
Water, sewerage, and street facilities shall be adequate for the proposed development or there shall be a definite proposal for making them so. 

5. 	
Yards:  The yard requirements of the Zoning District in which the planned unit development is located may be waived by the Mayor and Council except along the exterior boundaries of the development.  Buffer zone requirements shall be met. 

6. 	
Height:  The height limitation of the Zoning District in which the planned unit development is located may be waived by the Mayor and City Council. 

7. 	
Off-street parking and loading and unloading requirements:  The off-street parking and loading and unloading requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be met. 


10.1 
D.  Standards Applying to Planned Residential Developments. 
1. 	
Location.  A planned residential development may be located within any residential Zoning District if it meets all the required standards for planned residential developments. 

2. 	
Permitted uses.  A planned residential development may contain single-family detached houses, condominiums, attached single-family houses, customary home occupations and customary residential accessory building and uses. 

3. 	
Common open space requirements.  In a residential planned unit development, the lot size may be reduced from the general lot size for that district at the discretion of the Mayor and City Council.  For all lots in a residential planned unit development the developer shall reserve five hundred fifty (550) square feet per lot for open space.  In addition to the five hundred fifty (550) square feet per lot, the developer shall reserve an amount of land equivalent to the reduction in any lot size for open space to be preserved and maintained for its scenic values, passive recreation or conservation purposes. (Example: Lot size required by underlying zoning district is 10,000 sq. ft.  A request for an 8,000 sq. ft. lot requires a set aside of 2,550 sq. ft. of open space [2,000 sq. ft. for equal offset from 10,000 sq. ft. plus 550 sq. ft. for the dwelling unit on the lot]). 


i. 	The required open space shall not include areas devoted to public or private streets and parking areas. 
ii. 	Up to one-half of the required open space may be located in a 100-year floodplain or an existing lake. 
iii. 	The required open space shall be left in its natural state as passive greenspace unless otherwise approved by the City Council. 
iv. 	
If requested by the City, the owner of the planned residential development shall deed to the city the land set aside as required open space. 

v. 	
If the City does not require that the land be deeded to it, then the open space shall be deeded to a property owner’s association comprised of residents of the planned residential development for the benefit of the residents. The organization of the property owner’s association and its adequate financing for the discharge of its responsibilities shall be assured through acceptable private deed covenants tied to the land. 


10.2 
vi. 	In the event the property owner’s association fails to maintain the common open space properly, the City may serve written notice upon the property owner’s association and upon the residents and owners of the planned residential development setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the common open space in a reasonable condition. Said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within thirty (30) days thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within fifteen (15) days of the notice. The deficiencies are not corrected within the said thirty (30) days, the City, in order to preserve that taxable values of the properties within the planned residential development and to prevent the common open space from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said common open space and maintain the same for one (1) year and thereafter until the property owner’s association is prepared to provide proper maintenance. The cost to such maintenance by the City shall be assessed against the properties within the plan residential development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space and shall become a tax lien upon said properties.  
4. 	
General private deed covenants.  The entire planned residential development shall be included within private deed covenants tied to the land assuring the continuance of the planned residential development in accordance with approved plans and development. 

5. 	
Minimum lot sizes.  The minimum lot sizes of the Zoning District in which the planned residential development is located may be waived by the Mayor and Council provided that any lot touching the exterior boundary of the development shall meet the minimum frontage and minimum square footage requirements for the underlying Zoning District.  

6. 	
Gross density.  Except where noted herein, the overall maximum density of a planned residential development shall not exceed the density of the zone in which it is located. 


E.  Standards Applying to Senior Residential Development. 
A Senior Residential District (SRD) is designed to serve the housing need of adults who are 55 years of age or older. It is recommended that these districts be located in areas that facilitate pedestrian access to nearby commercial goods and services, and/or amenities/cultural facilities. These areas are intended to function as communities with parks and open spaces.  At least 80% of the occupied units shall be occupied by at least one person who is 55 years of age or older. The other 20% is not intended as a set aside for younger residents and efforts should be made to minimize the number of units that do not meet this requirement. 
1.Location.  An SRD shall be located within an RS100 or RM Zoning District.  
2.Permitted Uses.  Detached or attached single-family homes, villas/town homes, attached residences, plus customary residential accessory building and uses.  A combination of these housing units may be used, but each type of permitted use must be clustered within the development and not randomly situated.  The development plans shall indicate what type of housing units are to be located within the development. 
10.3 
3.Common open space requirements.  No less than twenty-five (25) percent of the site acreage shall be set aside as open space, and no more than 50% can be in a Flood Hazard area, as identified by Sugar Hill Floodplain Management Ordinance. 
4.Minimum lot sizes.  The minimum lot sizes of the Zoning District in which the planned residential development is located may be waived by the Mayor and Council provided that any lot touching the exterior boundary of the development shall meet the minimum frontage and minimum square footage requirements for the underlying Zoning District. 
5.Area and dimensional standards: 
Within the SRD, the following requirements shall be met for detached homes: Maximum gross density – 5 units per acre. Minimum lot area – No minimum. Minimum lot width – 45 feet (45’) Minimum front yard – Fifteen feet (15’) Maximum front yard – Twenty five feet (25’) Minimum side yard – Five feet (5’) Minimum rear yard – Twenty feet (20’) 
Within the SRD, the following requirements shall be met for attached homes: Maximum density: Eight (8) units per acre or twelve (12) units per acre where driveway access is from an alley or otherwise from the rear of the lot. Lot Area – No Minimum. Lot Width – No Minimum. Internal Road Frontage – No Minimum. External Road Frontage For Overall Development – Fifty feet (50’) Minimum unit width: Twenty feet (20’) Minimum internal front yard – Fifteen feet (15’) Maximum internal front yard – Twenty five feet (25’) Minimum distance between buildings – Fifteen feet (15’) Minimum rear yard – Twenty feet (20’) An opaque landscape buffer of twenty-five feet (25’) shall be maintained and planted along the exterior of the development where it abuts residential zoned property of a lower density. 
5. Site and Architectural Design Standards: 
i. A 10’ landscape strip shall be provided on the property adjacent to all public right-of-way on the exterior/perimeter of the development.  The landscape strip may incorporate natural vegetation, a landscaped berm, picket type fence with brick or stone columns every 30 feet or a decorative brick or stone wall. 
ii. Street trees shall be planted in the right-of-way, a minimum of two feet (2’) from back of curb and spaced equal distance between street lights. Street trees shall be planted no more than fifty feet (50’) apart and no closer than twenty five feet (25’) from street intersections.  The tree plan shall be prepared by a registered Landscape Architect or 
10.4 
iii. All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
iv. 
Homes/Buildings shall be constructed of traditional design with brick, stone, fiber cement horizontal siding or fiber cement shakes/shingles.  No vinyl or metal siding shall be permitted. 

v. 
All attached dwelling units shall have a minimum 850 square feet for 1 bedroom villas/town homes; 1,000 square feet for two bedroom units/homes; and 1,200 square feet for three or more bedroom units/homes.  Detached dwellings to have a minimum of 1,400 square foot heated space. 


vi. All dwellings shall be provided at least a single-car garage. 
vii. Provide six-foot (6’) wide sidewalks at six feet (6’) from the back of the curb and street trees adjacent to both sides of interior streets or private driveways.  Reference the City’s Development Regulations for design standards.  All sidewalks shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) as applicable. 
viii. A system of paved six-foot (6’) wide multi-use paths shall be constructed to connect greenway/open space areas, outdoor amenities/recreation areas, homes, clubhouse, and other amenities. 
ix. 
A four-foot (4’) wide walkway, constructed of concrete, shall extend from the sidewalk to the steps, stoop, or porch of all homes.  Reference the City’s Development Regulations for design standards.  All sidewalks shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) as applicable. 

x. 
Street lights within the subdivision shall be located seventy-five (75’) apart, on average. 


6.Building Standards for Accessibility.  All dwellings shall incorporate accessibility standards which shall include the following: 
i. 	A step-free feature to at least one entrance of the unit and levered door handles on all doors. 
ii. 	Minimum thirty six inch wide, clear passage doorways throughout the unit. 
iii. 	Wheelchair, step-free access and 5’ turnaround radius to the following areas, at a minimum:  kitchen; dining area; entertainment area (e.g., living room/den, great room, etc.); at least one bedroom; at least one full bathroom; and laundry room with washer/dryer connection. 
10.5 
iv. 	
The installation of full sheets of ¾” plywood blocking in all bathrooms to allow for future installation, if necessary, of grab bars. 

v. 	
Levered faucets and anti-scald valves at all sinks. 


vi. 	Drawers in all lower cabinets rather than shelves.  Pull out shelving for all other cabinets.  C-pulls instead of knobs. 
vii. 	Gas sensors near all appliances, smoke and burglar alarms for the hearing impaired. 
viii. Luminous light switches at 42” height. 
7.Mandatory Homeowner’s Association.  A mandatory homeowners association shall be incorporated which provides for building and grounds maintenance and repair, insurance and working capital. Said association shall publish and adhere to policies and procedures that demonstrate that the community is intended to provide housing for persons 55 years of age and older including maintaining surveys or affidavits verifying compliance with 55 years of age and older occupancy requirements as permitted by 42 U.S.C. Section 3607, (b)(2)(c) of the Federal Fair Housing Act and implementing regulations. Said association shall also include declarations and bylaws including rules and regulations, which shall at a minimum regulate and control the following: 
i. 	Restriction on homes being occupied, with at least 80% of the occupied units occupied by at least one resident who is age 55 years of age or older. 
ii. 	
Restrictions on persons under 18 years of age permanently residing in the community. 

F.
  Justification of Planned Unit Development. 


Applications seeking a zoning or rezoning to a Planned Unit Development shall contain a statement or statements explaining the following: 
1. 
How 	the design of the proposed PUD encourages ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning. 

2. 
How and why the design does not encourage greater density of development. 

3. 
How the development is compatible with the topography of the land. 

4. 
What natural features and unusual topography exist on the land and how the design preserves those features and topography. 


G.  Site Plan Specific and Substantial Compliance with Approved Site Plan. 
10.6 
Land that is zoned to a planned unit development classification shall be conditioned upon the site or concept plan submitted to and approved by the Mayor and City Council at the time of the public hearing on the zoning request. Any change that substantially alters the site or concept plan approved by the Mayor and Council shall be considered a change in conditions of zoning and shall be resubmitted for approval by the Mayor and City Council.  For the purposes of this Section, a substantial change shall include but not be limited to any change that increases the number of lots, the number of buildings or the density of the development, any reduction of lot sizes, setbacks or required buffers, changes of access locations or roadway structure other than as required by the state or county agencies for safety purposes. 
H.  Covenants and restrictions. 
Legally binding covenants and/or deed restrictions tied to the land shall apply to all PRD and SRD units that will bind the applicant, any assignee, mortgagee, or buyer, and all other parties that receive title to the property.  No deed for sale or transfer of any housing unit shall be drafted or offered until and unless it contains restrictions approved by the Director of Planning and Development that are consistent with the requirements of this Section. The grantor must state in any deed or instrument conveying title to a PRD or SRD housing unit, that the property conveyed is a PRD or SRD housing unit and is subject to the restrictions contained in this Section.  No covenant involving a development containing a PRD or SRD housing unit shall be recorded until and unless it contains restrictions approved by the Director of Planning and Development that are consistent with the requirements of this Section, with such modifications as he or she may deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this Article. Such review and approval shall be completed within thirty (30) calendar days following date of submission of such documents to the Director of Planning and Development. Failure of the Director of Planning and Development to respond within the thirty (30) calendar-day period shall constitute approval of the documents. The Director of Planning and Development may take legal action to stop or cancel any transfer of any property permitted in this district if any party to the transfer does not comply with all requirements of this Section. 
Section 1001. TOWN CENTER OVERLAY DISTRICT 
The following provisions shall apply to all property inside the Town Center Overlay District (TCO) as delineated on the Town Center Overlay District Boundary Map, which is attached as Exhibit 1 and incorporated by reference.  
The TCO is an overlay zoning district. The land use regulations applicable to the underlying zoning remain in full force and effect except where superseded herein.  When there is a provision not expressed in the underlying zone, or where a provision hereof is in conflict with the underlying zone, the provision of the overlay district shall govern. 
A. Purpose and Intent 
In preparing a Town Center Master Plan under the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC) Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) program, the City surveyed its constituents and found that the people of Sugar Hill have widely shared values related to protection of the visual environment and enhancement of the pedestrian experience Downtown.  Those surveys revealed the community’s collective affinity for traditional architecture consistent with late 19th century to early 20th century American styles and the original small town feel of business districts from that era.  These regulations are therefore based on the visual sensibilities of the average person in the community as well as widely accepted standards for ensuring a universally positive experience for Downtown Sugar Hill visitors, residents and businesses. 
10.7 
Attractive and integrated architectural and urban design features tend to improve an area’s image, raise overall property values, attract new businesses and residents, as well as enhance the quality of life. Furthermore, visual harm to a widespread pattern of community preference as well as damage to the economic, architectural and social infrastructure of the City can occur without the imposition of the provisions of this Ordinance, which places limitations on or prohibits altogether certain uses, structures, and practices that would be out of harmony or incongruent with the distinctive character or visual features of the surrounding area.  
In order to establish a regulatory framework that addresses these issues this section establishes an overlay zoning district for Sugar Hill that sets up design standards and a design review process for any new construction or material change in exterior appearance to existing structures within the TCO. 
B. Exceptions 
Variances shall be processed in accordance with Article 15 of the City of Sugar Hill Zoning Ordinance. 
C. Severability 
Any requirement set forth herein deemed unconstitutional, vague, illegal and/or otherwise unenforceable in a court of law shall not invalidate the remainder of this Section and all other provisions and requirements of this Section shall remain in full force and effect. 
D. Use Provisions. 
1. 	
Maximum Building Height.  Maximum building height shall be 4 stories with a maximum of 50 feet. 

2. 	
Mixed Use.  Mixed uses are encouraged within the TCO.  Refer to Section 1003 Mixed Use Developments. 

3.	
   Special Uses.  A special use permit may be granted by the City Council for a non-conforming use due to its existence at the time of the adoption of the Town Center Overly District in 2008. In order to qualify for a special use permit, the property must abut Georgia Highway 20, a portion of the property must have been acquired as right-of-way for the widening of Georgia Highway 20, and the use on the property must have been in continuous operation since the adoption of the Town Center Overlay District. In addition to the consideration set forth in Article 17 of this Zoning Ordinance, in considering an application for a special use permit under this section, the Council shall consider the following: 


a. 	
the appropriateness of the continuation of the use based on the development of surrounding properties; 

b. 	
any benefits or harms to the surrounding properties and the Town Center Overlay District as a result of the continuation of the existing business and use; 

c. 
whether and how the continued use of the property was negatively affected by the 


10.8 
widening of Georgia Highway 20; and 
d. 	whether appropriate conditions will allow a continuation or expansion of the use that is consistent with the intent of the Town Center Overlay District. 
The Council shall have the right to place any conditions upon approval of a special use permit that it deems necessary and appropriate to carry out the intent of this Ordinance. 
4. 	Special Uses along Principal Arterial Corridors.  Georgia Highway 20 (Hwy 20) and Peachtree Industrial Boulevard (PIB) intersect each other near the western edge of the TCO.  While these regionally important arterial roadways create significant challenges for development within the TCO they move a large amount of people and goods around Downtown Sugar Hill on a daily basis.  In consideration of the heavy volume and higher speeds of vehicular traffic along these corridors adequate provisions should be granted to facilitate appropriate commercial development which addresses the needs of our traveling consumers while promoting pedestrian oriented development patterns within Downtown Sugar Hill.  Therefore, the uses shown below in table 1001.D.4 may be granted a special use permit by the City Council provided that the property abuts Hwy 20 or PIB for at least 350 feet of continuous frontage, does not interfere with the safe and normal flow of traffic, is not within 1,320 feet of Hillcrest Street, has an existing commercial driveway permit from the state or county Department of Transportation, is not within 1,320 feet of a similar use along the same direction of travel and meets the specific conditions associated with each use as shown in table 1001.D.4.  In addition to the criteria set forth in Article 17 of this Zoning Ordinance, in deliberating a special use permit under this section, the Council shall consider the: 
a. 
Appropriateness of the use based on the development of surrounding properties; 

b. 
Any benefit or harm to the surrounding properties and the TCO as a result of the use; and 

c. 
Whether the use is consistent with the intent of the TCO and this section. 


Table 1001.D.4 – Special Uses along Principal Arterial Corridors and Associated Conditions 
Use:  Conditions:  
1. Convenience store, with or without fuel pumps.  Signs are prohibited on fuel pumps, canopy and other accessory structures. Vehicle washing facility is prohibited. Fuel pumps and associated canopy shall be located in the side or rear yard. Outdoor display of items for sale are prohibited.   

10.9 
2. Farmer’s market.  Outdoor storage is prohibited.  
3. Fruit and vegetable stand.  Operation shall be limited to daylight hours on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays. Outdoor storage is prohibited.  Shall only be approved in conjunction with a lawfully approved principal use.  
4. Microbrewery.  Outdoor storage is prohibited. Must include a restaurant and/or tasting room as an accessory use.  
5. Rental, passenger vehicles.  Vehicles for lease shall be parked in a designated parking stall and shall count toward maximum parking ratio for the general business use category.  

6. Restaurant, with drive through service.  Shall incorporate outdoor dining into site design.  Provide at least one outdoor seat for every five indoor seats or a minimum of 12 outdoor seats.  

E. 	Design Criteria and Standards. 
These design criteria and standards shall be used to evaluate every development, redevelopment, rehabilitation and building project whether new or a material change in exterior appearance on all properties located within the boundary of the TCO. 
1. Design Criteria – Architectural Design: 
Each individual building or project must contribute to a consistent architectural identity for the TCO by using traditional forms, authentic materials and quality craftsmanship. For illustrative examples of style and detail refer to Appendix A Downtown Sugar Hill Character Preference Guide, attached and incorporated by reference.      
Standards: 
i. 	New construction or any material change in exterior appearance of an existing building shall be compatible in appearance with the detailing of other nearby buildings in window shape, cornice lines, masonry work, building outline, color, scale and similar architectural or external design features. 
ii. 	Trademarked, branded, franchise, stylized and/or corporate architecture that is standardized or otherwise generic in nature shall not be permitted. 
10.10 
iii. Nostalgic copies of exterior elevations shall be avoided while achieving the desired traditional feel. 
iv. 	
Each building shall be designed with a similar scale and reconciled to the proportions of nearby buildings. 

v. 	
First floor building elements and facades shall be limited to details that are of a pedestrian scale. Upper floors may incorporate elements of a larger scale for appreciation from the street and moving vehicles.  Refer to Appendix B Excerpts from Designing Downtown by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs Office of Downtown Development, attached and incorporated by reference, for guidelines on treatment of the traditional Three-Part Façade. 


vi. 	Facades shall be varied such that slight recesses and projections create interplay of light and shadow contributing to the dimension and interest of each facade. 
vii. Single use buildings in excess of 50,000 GFA shall be prohibited. 
2. Design Criteria -Skyline: 
The design and construction of every building must contribute to a desirable skyline when viewed from the street level or at a distance. Variations in rooflines must be created from one building to the next to produce a desirable rhythmic appearance to the skyline. 
Standards: 
i) 	No structure, signage, poles, statuary or similar appendages may protrude beyond the roofline of any building. 
ii) 	All antennae must be screened from view from any view point from ground level. 
iii) 	Parapets and entablature must include some architectural detail. Uniform planes created with little detail may not be used in the roofline or upper façade of any building. 
iv) 	Roof mounted electrical, mechanical and other similar systems or utility/service areas shall be screened and incorporated into the design of the building and/or hidden from public view when viewed from any public space or street level. 
3. Design Criteria – Building Materials: 
Buildings must be designed and constructed as enduring features of the Downtown built environment using quality materials. Building exteriors should be designed to require little maintenance and to achieve a life span greater than 80 years.  Architectural elements within the streetscape should be characterized by a higher level of detail than materials above the first floor. 
10.11 
i) 	Allowed building materials for non-residential and mixed-use buildings shall be brick, stone, glass, high grade fiber cement siding (up to 30% of any facade) and high grade EIFS for cornice only (up to 10% of any facade). 
ii) 	Roofs shall be non-reflective concrete or clay tiles, asphalt shingles, thick textured composition shingles or factory finished standing seam metal panels.  Appendix A provides the approved color palette. 
iii) 	Stamped concrete imitating masonry or other similar treatment shall be prohibited. 
iv) 	Materials such as tile, stone, copper flashing, metal and wood may be considered for accent materials to make up no more than 10% of any facade. 
v) 	Building colors shall be limited to the approved color palette found in Appendix A.      
vi) 	The following materials are prohibited on the finished exterior of all buildings: exposed plywood, particle board, unfinished foundation walls, glass curtain walls, highly reflective materials, concrete masonry units, metal siding, vinyl siding, fiberglass siding, plastic siding and faux brick. 
vii) 	All exterior elevations on residential buildings shall be finished with brick, stone, fiber cement siding or similar product as approved by the Design Review Board. 
4. Design Criteria -Signage: 
Signage must be compatible in style, composition, material, color and detail of the buildings they serve. 
Standards: 
i) 	Signs must not block or alter architectural elements of the building on which they are mounted as well as neighboring buildings. 
ii) 	Window signage must not cover more than 30% of the glazed area of the window.  For the purposes of this section, a window sign shall be defined as a wall sign placed within a window. 
iii) 	Signage projecting from the building must be no greater than 15 square feet.  Signs may project horizontally from the building to a maximum of four feet (4’). No sign shall project beyond the curb line of the public street, alley or other access driveway. 
iv) 	No sign shall extend higher than the roof line of the building. 
v) 	The lowest point of any projecting sign may not be closer than 10 feet to the surface of the sidewalk directly beneath the sign. 
10.12 
vi) 	Window Signs. Commercial buildings located at the street level shall be allowed to permit up to 16 square feet of sign face area upon the window(s) of any façade facing the street.  Each individual business or occupied tenant space (whichever is less) shall be allowed no more than a total aggregate of 16 square feet window sign face area.  For the purposes of this section a window sign shall be defined as a wall sign.  Such window signs shall be subject to the requirements of Article 13 Signs but shall not be counted toward the maximum sign face area for wall signs.  Window signs shall not cover more than 30% of the glazed area of any window. 
vii) 	Door Signs. Commercial buildings located at the street level shall be allowed to permit up to four (4) square feet of sign face area upon each entry door of the façade facing the street level entrance. Each individual business or occupied tenant space (whichever is less) shall be allowed no more than a total aggregate of eight (8) square feet door sign face area.  For the purposes of this section, a door sign shall be defined as a wall sign. Such door sign(s) shall be subject to the requirements of Article 13 Signs but shall not be counted toward the maximum sign face area for wall signs. 
F. Design Review and Approval Required 
1. Design Review Authority within the TCO 
The Mayor and City Council shall act as the Design Review Authority for all design review applications within the TCO. 
The Council is authorized to receive, consider, approve, approve with conditions, table, request more information or deny applications for Certificate of Design Review as required by this Ordinance. In granting a design review approval, the Council may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to the location, construction, maintenance and operation of any use or building, in addition to those expressly set forth herein, as may be deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. 
2. Design Review and Approval Required 
Within the TCO, no new construction of any building or land improvement; no material change in exterior appearance of any existing building, structure or activity; nor any other type of development shall be allowed until an application for design review has been approved by the Council in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances and regulations. 
Building permit or land disturbance permit applications may be filed simultaneously with a design review application; however, no permits shall be issued prior to approval of the design review application by the Council. 
3. Application Requirements 
All applications for design review approval shall be made as required by the City Manager and shall at minimum contain the following information: 
10.13 
i) 	Elevation Drawings, Color and Material Samples.  Every application or review involving the construction of a new building or structure, alterations, and/or additions to existing structures shall be accompanied by exterior elevation color renderings, drawn to scale and signed by an architect, engineer or other appropriate professional. These shall be submitted in sufficient number of copies as required by the City Manager.  Said exterior elevation color renderings shall clearly show in sufficient detail the exterior appearance and architectural design of proposed change(s) to buildings or structures and new construction, as applicable.  Each application shall also indicate proposed materials, textures and colors, and provide samples of materials and colors. 
ii) 	Photographs. All applications shall be accompanied by photographs of all sides of the existing building(s) or structure(s) affected, and of adjoining properties. Photographs shall be submitted in printed copy and in digital form unless otherwise specified by the City Manager. 
iii) 	Site Plan and Landscaping Plan.  For every application, a plot plan or site plan, drawn to scale, shall be submitted which shows all improvements affecting appearances, such as walls, walks, terraces, plantings, tree protection areas, accessory buildings, signs, lights, and other elements. 
iv) 	Fee.  A fee, as may be established by the Mayor and City Council, shall be submitted for said application. 
v) 	Additional Information.  The City Manager may reasonably require any additional information to be submitted with the application. 
4. Criteria for Acting on Design Review Applications 
In reviewing applications for design review, the Council shall consider the appropriateness of the design of any building or any proposed material change in exterior appearance in the context of the following criteria: 
i) 	Consistency with any adopted design guidelines for the type of development, and/or the proposed use.  
ii) 	The nature and character of the surrounding areas, and the consistency and compatibility of the proposed application with such nature and character. 
iii) 	The general design, character and appropriateness of design, scale of buildings, arrangement, texture, materials, and colors of the structure in question and the relation of such elements to similar features of structures in the immediate surrounding area, site, and landscaping. 
iv) 	As long as the interior arrangement or use will not have any effect on exterior architectural features and complies with the standards herein it will not be considered. 
v) 	The following are other grounds for considering a design inappropriate. 
-Character foreign to the area. 
-Arresting and spectacular effects. 
10.14 
-Violent contrasts of material or color, or intense or lurid colors. 
-A multiplicity or incongruity of details resulting in a restless and disturbing appearance. 
-The absence of unity and coherence in composition not in consonance with the density and character of the present structure or surrounding area. 
5. 
Action by the Council 

Once a Certificate of Design Review application is determined complete and is accepted by the City Manager, it shall be forwarded to the Council for consideration at its next scheduled meeting. If the City Manager fails to accept or reject an application within 30 calendar days of receipt it shall be deemed accepted and forwarded to the Council for consideration at its next scheduled meeting.  The Council may approve the application and direct the City Manager to issue a Certificate of Design Review if it finds that the proposed material change in exterior appearance or development would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic or architectural significance and value of adjacent and nearby properties, and if the Council finds the application is consistent with the criteria for acting on applications above. The Council may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper and conditionally approve the application if the applicant agrees to the conditions, or the Council may deny the application as submitted. In the event the Council rejects an application, it shall state its reason(s) for doing so and the City Manager shall transmit a record of such action and reason(s) for rejection, in writing, to the applicant. The Council may also table the application or request more information.  The applicant, if he or she desires, may make modifications to the plan(s) and may resubmit the application. 

6. 
Enforcement and Appeals 


Refer to Article 14. Administration, Enforcement, Penalties and Remedies for inspection and enforcement procedures. 
Refer to Article 15. Variances and Appeals for procedures and filing requirements.  Except applications for design review of a sign which shall follow the procedures and filing requirements for administrative variance. 
10.15 

10.16 
Section 1002. CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT OVERLAY 
The following provisions shall apply to all property inside the Central Business District (CBD) as delineated on the Central Business District Boundary Map, which is attached as Exhibit 2 and incorporated by reference. 
The CBD is an overlay zoning district. The land use regulations applicable to the Town Center Overlay District (TCO), the Central Business District (CBD), as well as the underlying zoning remain in full force and effect except where superseded herein.  When there is a provision not expressed in the TCO or underlying zone, or where a provision hereof is in conflict with the TCO or underlying zone, the provision of the CBD overlay district shall govern. 
A. Purpose and Intent 
To further the goals of the Downtown Sugar Hill LCI Study and to foster development of the city center that contributes to the function and feel of traditional small town business districts prominent throughout this region during the late 19th century to the early 20th century. To recreate this feeling by using traditional block patterns characterized by common side walls, building fronts abutting the sidewalk and on street parking; breaking up large blocks; optimizing multi-modal connectivity and incorporating small public gathering spaces. In order to establish a regulatory framework that creates this traditional small town urban character; promotes compact mixed use growth; supports community development and the need for walkable, pedestrian oriented public and commercial spaces; provides incentives and removes barriers to redevelopment, rehabilitation and revitalization of vacant and underutilized properties in the area this section establishes an overlay zoning district for Sugar Hill that provides for an appropriate mix of uses, establishes standards of development to facilitate urban forms and sets up a design review process for any new construction or material change in appearance to existing structures within the CBD. 
B. Exceptions 
Variances shall be processed in accordance with Article 15 of the City of Sugar Hill Zoning Ordinance. 
C. Severability 
Any requirement set forth herein deemed unconstitutional, vague, illegal and/or otherwise unenforceable in a court of law shall not invalidate the remainder of this Section and all other provisions and requirements of this Section shall remain in full force and effect. 
D. Use Provisions. 
1. 
Maximum Building Height.  Maximum building height shall be a maximum of 70 feet except as shown below: 

2. 	
Prohibited Uses.  Unless otherwise noted, the following uses shall be prohibited: Adult entertainment businesses/facilities; automotive sales lots and associated service facilities; automobile repair shops and tire stores including lubrication or tune up centers; truck stops; service stations; boarding and rooming houses; contractors equipment depot; restaurants with drive-through service; equipment rental; facilities engaging in the business, trade, or profession of psychic reading, fortune telling, astrology, phrenology, palmistry, clairvoyance, or related practices; adult novelty retail stores; pawn shops; tattoo parlors; vehicle or emission inspections; warehousing; mini-warehouse/personal storage facilities; moving van or truck rental and taxi/limousine queue lots.  If any of the above listed uses exist within the CBD prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, those uses shall, upon the adoption of this Ordinance become non-conforming uses, shall not be expanded by more than 10% in area, and shall, otherwise, comply with and be governed by Article 8 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

3. 
Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted on all properties within the CBD and shall supersede or 


10.17 

10.18 
replace the underlying zoning district’s permitted uses as shown in Table 4.1. 
Use: 

1. 	
Art gallery. 

2. 	
Bakery shop. 

3. 	
Bank. 

4. 	
Barber and beauty shop. 

5. 	
Bed and breakfast inn. 

6. 	
Bike Shop 

7. 	
Book or stationery store. 

8. 	
Cafe. 

9. 	
Cafeteria. 

10. 	
Church, temple, synagogue or mosque. 

11. 	
Cultural facility. 

12. 	
Dance studio. 

13. 	
Day care facility. 

14. 	
Financial service/institution. 

15. 	
Fitness center. 

16. 	
Florist. 

17. 	
Food store. 

18. 	
Furniture store. 

19. 	
Gift shop. 

20. 	
Hardware store. 

21. 	
Health club. 

22. 	
Hobby shop. 

23. 	
Hotel. 

24. 	
Ice cream shop. 

25. 	
Interior decorating shop. 

26. 	
Jewelry store. 


27. 	
Lodges, fraternal and social organization. 

28. 	
Movie studio. 

29. 	
Museum. 

30. 	
Music store. 

31. 	
Music studio. 

32. 	
Office. 

33. 	
Pharmacy. 

34. 	
Photo studio. 

35. 	
Public and private educational institution offering general education courses, including nursery school and kindergarten.  Business college or school operated as a business enterprise. 

36. 	
Recording / rehearsal studio. 

37. 	
Recreation facility, indoor. (Such as bowling alley, skating rink, shooting range and movie theater.) 

38. 	
Residential or community shelter. 

39. 	
Restaurant. 

40. 	
Retail store. 

41. 	
Retirement community. 

42. 	
Shoe repair shop. 

43. 	
Shoe store, retail. 

44. 	
Spa. 

45. 	
Theater. 

46. 	
Trade / vocational school. 

47. 	
Upholstery shop. 

48. 	
Vet clinic. 


10.19 
4. 
Conditional Uses. The following uses shall be permitted on all properties within the CBD provided the associated conditions are met. 

5. 	
Special Uses. Each of the following uses shall be allowed only as a special use permit (approved by Mayor and City Council in accordance with the special use requirements in Article 17 of the Zoning Ordinance) on all properties within the CBD and shall supersede or replace the underlying zoning district’s special uses entirely. 


Use:  Conditions:  
1. Single Family Residential.  Shall be limited to townhome, row house, or zero lot-line building type.  Refer to Appendix A. Minimum density = 4 dwelling units per acre, Maximum density = 12 dwelling units per acre. Density shall be calculated by dividing the number of residential units by the difference in land area of the development in acres devoted to non-residential uses from the total site area.  Where total property area = A. Non-residential area = N. Count of residential units = R.  Density = R / (N-A).  
2. Multi-Family Residential.  Shall be limited to mid-rise, courtyard building type (Refer to Appendix A): Minimum FAR = 1:1, Maximum FAR = 2:1  
3. Customary residential accessory structures and uses.  Refer to Section 600. Accessory Uses or Structures for location requirements and conditions.  
4. Brew Pub  Subject to all local, state and federal regulations and licensing requirements.  No outdoor storage.  Shall be limited to restaurants that brew and sell 25% or more of their own beer for on-premise consumption.  
5. Growler Shop  Subject to all local, state and federal regulations and licensing requirements.  Shall be limited to a business establishment for the sale or refilling of malt beverages, craft beers or hard cider for consumption at a location other than the licensed premises.  
6. Wine Bar  Subject to all local, state and federal regulations and licensing requirements. No outdoor storage.  A bar or restaurant where wine sales comprise 50% or more of the alcohol sales for on-premise consumption.  

Use: 
1. 
Boarding house. 

2. 
Dormitory. 

3. 
Group or personal care home. 

4. 
Half-way house. 

5. 
Hospital, clinic, convalescent home. 

6. 
Nursing home. 

7. 
Manufactured home. 

8. 
Orphanage. 

9. 
Parking garage. 


10.20 
6. 	Mixed Use. 
Two or more of the allowed uses, conditional uses and special uses may be present and allowed subject to the following restrictions and all other zoning and development requirements unless specifically exempted by this Section. No zoning buffers will be required between parcels within the Central Business District or between parcels within the Central Business District and parcels directly outside of the boundaries. 
a. 	Residential or office uses in buildings containing retail or other uses are encouraged and the acreage on which such buildings are located may be used in either or both classifications for density purposes. 
7. 	Special Uses along Principal Arterial Corridors.  The CBD is bounded on two sides by Georgia State Route 20 (SR20) and Peachtree Industrial Boulevard (PIB).  While these regionally important arterial roadways create physical limits to the development and expansion of the CBD they move a large amount of people and goods around Downtown Sugar Hill on a daily basis.  In consideration of the heavy volume and higher speeds of vehicular traffic along these corridors adequate provisions should be granted to facilitate appropriate commercial development which addresses the needs of our traveling consumers while promoting pedestrian oriented development patterns within Downtown Sugar Hill.  Therefore, the uses shown below in table 1002.D.7 may be granted a special use permit by the City Council provided that the property abuts Hwy 20 or PIB for at least 350 feet of continuous frontage, does not interfere with the safe and normal flow of traffic, is not within 1,320 feet of Hillcrest Street, has an existing commercial driveway permit from the state or county Department of Transportation, is not within 1320 feet of a similar use along the same direction of travel and meets the specific conditions associated with each use as shown in table 1002.D.7.  In addition to the criteria set forth in Article 17 of this Zoning Ordinance, in deliberating a special use permit under this section, the Council shall consider the: 
a. 
Appropriateness of the use based on the development of surrounding properties; 

b. 
Any benefit or harm to the surrounding properties and the CBD as a result of the use; and 

c. 
Whether the use is consistent with the intent of the CBD and this section. 


Table 1002.D.7 – Special Uses along Principal Arterial Corridors and Associated Conditions 
Use:  Conditions:  
1. Convenience store, with or without fuel pumps.  Signs are prohibited on fuel pumps, canopy and other accessory structures. Vehicle washing facility is prohibited.  

10.21 
Fuel pumps and associated canopy shall be located in the side or rear yard. Outdoor display of items for sale are prohibited.  
2. Farmer’s market.  Outdoor storage is prohibited.  
3. Fruit and vegetable stand.  Operation shall be limited to daylight hours on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays.  Outdoor storage is prohibited.  Shall only be approved in conjunction with a lawfully approved principal use.  
4. Microbrewery.  Outdoor storage is prohibited. Must include a restaurant and/or tasting room as an accessory use.  
5. Structured parking.  If directly adjacent to the street, at least 80% of the front façade(s) at street level shall include retail, office or restaurant use(s).  
6. Rental, passenger vehicles.  Vehicles for lease shall be parked in a designated parking stall and shall count toward maximum parking ratio for the general business use category.  
7. Restaurant, with drive through service.  Shall incorporate outdoor dining into site design. Provide at least one outdoor seat for every five indoor seats or a minimum of 12 outdoor seats.  

E. Design Criteria and Standards. 
These design criteria and standards shall be used to evaluate every development, redevelopment, rehabilitation and building project whether new or a change in appearance on all properties located within the boundaries of the CBD. 
1. Design Criteria – Physical Relationship to Streetscape: 
All forms of ground transportation are important to the urban infrastructure of Downtown Sugar Hill and access to all modes to include auto, pedestrian, bus and bicycle should be encouraged.  Providing for transportation choices allows our less mobile citizens to get around with dignity and may reduce congestion in and around Downtown. 
Standards: 
i) All lots shall share a frontage line with a street or square; lots fronting a square shall be provided rear alley 

access.  
ii)  All buildings adjacent to Alton Tucker Blvd and  West Broad St  must align with the sidewalk edge and have their principal orientation toward the street except to accommodate features that enhance the pedestrian experience and contribute to the character of the streetscape such as outdoor dining areas, exhibition spaces for art, gathering space for events or lines such as a ticket window, gardens, courtyards or similar recessed features.  
iii)  Buildings shall be set back from the right-of-way between zero (0) and twelve (12) feet.  Porches, canopies and awnings may extend into the front setback up to six (6) feet but shall not encroach into the right-of-way or within 6’ of back of curb.  No front loading attached garages shall be permitted.  All attached garages shall be side or rear entry.  Zero (0) foot side setbacks are allowed for attached residential dwellings and  
Updated 8-8-16 kbl 


10.22 
nonresidential buildings.  Detached residential dwellings shall be subject to the underlying zoning district’s setback requirements. 
iv) 	New structures shall fit in with the surrounding buildings.  Refer to Appendix B for suggested guidelines on siting new buildings. 
v)Large scale single use facilities such as conference spaces, theaters and athletic facilities shall generally occur behind or above smaller scale uses of pedestrian orientation. Such facilities may exceed maximum first floor area standards if so sited.  No structure shall exceed 30,000 square feet as a single use. 
vi) 	Parking structures adjacent to a street shall be oriented with its shortest dimension along the street frontage and shall include facilities for commercial or office space at the ground level for at least 50% of the frontage.  A landscaped pedestrian plaza shall make up any remaining frontage. 
vii) 	All development shall coordinate pedestrian and vehicular circulation patterns with adjacent buildings and sites as well as interconnect with existing adjacent sidewalks.  Where development adjoins undeveloped properties, the sidewalk for the new project shall terminate at the property line at a point where the next project can continue the sidewalk along the public right-of-way with little difficulty in vertical or horizontal transition. 
viii) 	Access connections shall be required where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to important civic uses such as churches, schools, parks, transportation and other critical community facilities. 
ix) 	Mechanical and electrical equipment, solar collectors, satellite dishes, dumpsters, compactors, storage tanks, utility meters, valves, vents and other similar equipment shall be located to the rear of the building or otherwise concealed from public street view. 
x) 	Adjacent to public streets and dedicated pedestrian walkways, chain link, razor wire, barbed wire, corrugated metal, plastic, exposed concrete and exposed concrete block walls and fences are prohibited. 
xi) 	Walls and fences shall have vertical articulation at least every 40 linear feet. 
2. Design Criteria – Pedestrian Experience: 
Providing a visual connection to the civic uses from the commercial uses inside each building and more private uses on upper floors may increase the level of awareness and self-policing among the users of Downtown Sugar Hill. This additional interaction will contribute to the sense of safety for the pedestrian community, residents and business owners. 
Standards: i) Building facades longer than 40 feet shall be visually divided into segments of no more than 20 feet through articulation of the façade achieved through methods such as but not limited to architectural recesses, breaks in materials, additional window bays, variation in roof line, and building setback. 
ii) 	Streetscape elements such as benches, trash receptacles, fencing and/or bike racks shall match the finish, style, design, material and quality of the approved City of Sugar Hill streetscape elements found in Appendix A, which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.  Dining tables and chairs in outdoor seating areas shall be maintained clean and in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance.  All metal and wood furniture shall be finished to preserve their natural color or match colors from the exterior color palettes shown 
10.23 
in Appendix A.  Wood furniture may be stained to preserve their natural texture and color.  All other furniture shall match the exterior color palettes shown in Appendix A.  
iii)  A lighting plan for the site including standard data and design details showing location, character and light coverage shall be approved by the City Manager.  Proposed lighting appurtenances must be visually compatible with the approved City of Sugar Hill street lights found in Appendix A.  
iv)  A minimum of 50% of the street facing facades on the ground level shall be transparent through windows and doors.  
v)  A minimum of 40% of all facades on the upper floors shall contain windows or balconies.  
vi)  Reflective or glass tinted more than 30% is not permitted.  No glass may be more than 30% opaque.  
vii)  Awnings, canopies or overhangs shall be integrated into the building design for all pedestrian ways.  
viii)  Awnings or similar type structures must be constructed of durable, protective and water repellant materials. Plastic or fiberglass awnings are not permitted.  
ix)  Awnings must project a minimum of 42” from the building and are limited to segments of eight feet (8’) in length.  
x)  Awnings may serve as sign panels for businesses provided the total sign area on the awning is included in the calculations for the wall signs on the associated façade.  
xi)  Discharge of water along the surface of a walkway is prohibited.  e.g. storm water from gutters, condensate from air conditioning units, etc.  
xii)  All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground.  
xiii)  Dumpsters shall be screened on all sides by a minimum six-foot high brick or stone wall with access via an opaque metal gate (chain link gates are not permitted).  
xiv)  Service and loading areas shall be located to restrict visibility from and otherwise conflict with public streets, sidewalks and neighboring uses.  
xv)  Sidewalk displays related to a licensed business shall only be permitted directly in front of the subject business location and shall not project into the sidewalk more than three (3) feet and shall not otherwise obstruct pedestrian or ADA accessible travel ways.  
xvi)  Maximum block length = 500’.  
Updated 8-8-16 kbl 


10.24 
3. 	
Design Criteria – Vehicular and Pedestrian Access: Vehicular access and parking should be adequate while serving to enhance the overall pedestrian experience. Size and location of off street parking lots should be small and limited to the rear of the businesses they serve. Standards: i) Sidewalks are required on all streets except for alleys. ii)Sidewalks adjacent to Alton Tucker Boulevard and West Broad Street shall be 15 feet in width. iii) All other sidewalks shall be at least six (6) feet wide. iv) A combination of off-street, on-street (10% Max.) and shared parking (10% Max.) may be used for off-street parking requirements as long as no required parking space is more than 700 feet from an entrance to the building, unit, suite and/or space it serves. v)Except parking structures, no off street parking areas shall abut the street and/or sidewalk. vi) All development shall accommodate ADA accessible, safe and continuous pedestrian walkways to and through parking areas. vii) 25’ minimum width inter-parcel access easements are required along the rear portion of each property to accommodate 24’ minimum width inter-parcel driveway for two-way traffic. 

viii) Front and rear entrances for the public shall be provided for each building. 
ix) Garages, carports and/or parking areas that serve residential uses must be located in a rear yard. 


4. 	
Design Criteria -Signage: Signage must be compatible in style, composition, material, color and detail of the buildings they serve. Standards: 


i) 	Signs must not block or alter architectural elements of the building on which they are mounted as well as neighboring buildings. 
ii)Signage projecting from the building must be no greater than 15 square feet.  Signs may project horizontally from the building to a maximum of four feet (4’).  No sign shall project beyond the curb line of the public street, alley or other access driveway. 
iii) 	No sign shall extend higher than the roof line of the building. 
10.25 
iv) 	The lowest point of any projecting sign may not be closer than 10 feet to the surface of the sidewalk directly beneath the sign. 
v)Window Signs. Commercial buildings located at the street level shall be allowed to permit up to 16 square feet of sign face area upon the window(s) of any façade facing the street.  Each individual business or occupied tenant space (whichever is less) shall be allowed no more than a total aggregate of 16 square feet window sign face area. For the purposes of this section a window sign shall be defined as a wall sign.  Such window signs shall be subject to the requirements of Article 13 Signs but shall not be counted toward the maximum sign face area for wall signs.  Window signs shall not cover more than 30% of the glazed area of any window. 
vi) 	Door Signs. Commercial buildings located at the street level shall be allowed to permit up to four (4) square feet of sign face area upon each entry door of the façade facing the street level entrance.  Each individual business or occupied tenant space (whichever is less) shall be allowed no more than a total aggregate of eight (8) square feet door sign face area.  For the purposes of this section, a door sign shall be defined as a wall sign. Such door sign(s) shall be subject to the requirements of Article 13 Signs but shall not be counted toward the maximum sign face area for wall signs. 
vii) 	Sandwich Boards and Display Boards.  For the purposes of this Section a sandwich board is defined as a free standing sign structure, which is not permanently anchored to the ground, consisting of two sign faces set up back to back in a triangle shape. For the purposes of this Section a display board is defined as a wall sign. Commercial buildings located at the street level may display either a sandwich board or display board without the requirement of a permit, subject to Section 1309 Maintenance and Appearance.  Such sign must be located within ten (10) feet of the business entrance and shall provide a clear path of at least five (5) feet along the adjacent sidewalk as not to obstruct pedestrian traffic or otherwise create a safety hazard. Maximum dimensions for a sandwich board are 24 inches wide by 42 inches high.  Maximum height for a display board shall be 80 inches. No such sign face shall be more than six (6) square feet sign face area. No more than 12 square feet sign face area shall be allowed per business address. Each sign shall clearly and legibly indicate the address to which business it belongs. Such signs may only be displayed during business hours and must be secured indoors while the business is closed. 
F. Design Review and Approval Required 
1. 	
Design Review Authority within the CBD The Mayor and City Council shall act as the Design Review Authority for all design review applications with the CBD. The Council is authorized to receive, consider, approve, approve with conditions, table, request more information or deny applications for Certificate of Design Review as required by this Ordinance.  In granting a design review approval, the Council may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to the location, construction, maintenance and operation of any use or building, in addition to those expressly set forth herein, as may be deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. 

2. 	
Design Review and Approval Required Within the CBD, no new construction of any building or land improvement; no material change in exterior appearance of any existing building, structure or activity; nor any other type of development shall be allowed 


10.26 
until an application for design review has been approved by the Council in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances and regulations. Building permit or land disturbance permit applications may be filed simultaneously with a design review application; however, no permits shall be issued prior to approval of the design review application by the Council. 
3. 	Application Requirements All applications for design review approval shall be made as required by the City Manager and shall at minimum contain the following information: 
i) 	Elevation Drawings, Color and Material Samples. Every application or review involving the construction of a new building or structure, alterations, and/or additions to existing structures shall be accompanied by exterior elevation color renderings, drawn to scale and signed by an architect, engineer or other appropriate professional. These shall be submitted in sufficient number of copies as required by the City Manager. Said exterior elevation color renderings shall clearly show in sufficient detail the exterior appearance and architectural design of proposed change(s) to buildings or structures and new construction, as applicable. Each application shall also indicate proposed materials, textures and colors, and provide samples of materials and colors. 
ii) 	Photographs. All applications shall be accompanied by photographs of all sides of the existing building(s) or structure(s) affected, and of adjoining properties. Photographs shall be submitted in printed copy and in digital form unless otherwise specified by the City Manager. 
iii) 	Site Plan and Landscaping Plan.  For every application, a plot plan or site plan, drawn to scale, shall be submitted which shows all improvements affecting appearances, such as walls, walks, terraces, plantings, tree protection areas, accessory buildings, signs, lights, and other elements. 
iv) 	Fee.  A fee, as may be established by the Mayor and City Council, shall be submitted for said application. 
v) 	Additional Information.  The City Manager may reasonably require any additional information to be submitted with the application. 
4. Criteria for Acting on Design Review Applications In reviewing applications for design review, the Council shall consider the appropriateness of the design of any building or any proposed material change in exterior appearance in the context of the following criteria: i) Consistency with any adopted design guidelines for the type of development, and/or the proposed use. 
ii) 	The nature and character of the surrounding areas, and the consistency and compatibility of the proposed application with such nature and character. 
iii) 	The general design, character and appropriateness of design, scale of buildings, arrangement, texture, materials, and colors of the structure in question and the relation of such elements to similar features of structures in the immediate surrounding area, site, and landscaping. 
iv) 	As long as the interior arrangement or use will not have any effect on exterior architectural features and complies with the standards herein it will not be considered. 
v) 	The following are other grounds for considering a design inappropriate. 
-Character foreign to the area. 

-Arresting and spectacular effects. 
-Violent contrasts of material or color, or intense or lurid colors. 
-A multiplicity or incongruity of details resulting in a restless and disturbing appearance. 
10.27 
-The absence of unity and coherence in composition not in consonance with the density and character of the present structure or surrounding area. 
5. 	
Action by the Council Once a Certificate of Design Review application is determined complete and is accepted by the City Manager, it shall be forwarded to the Council for consideration at its next scheduled meeting. If the City Manager fails to accept or reject an application within 30 calendar days of receipt it shall be deemed accepted and forwarded to the Council for consideration at its next scheduled meeting.  The Council may approve the application and direct the City Manager to issue a Certificate of Design Review if it finds that the proposed material change in exterior appearance or development would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic or architectural significance and value of adjacent and nearby properties, and if the Council finds the application is consistent with the criteria for acting on applications above.  The Council may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper and conditionally approve the application if the applicant agrees to the conditions, or the Council may deny the application as submitted.  In the event the Council rejects an application, it shall state its reason(s) for doing so and the City Manager shall transmit a record of such action and reason(s) for rejection, in writing, to the applicant.  The Council may also table the application or request more information. The applicant, if he or she desires, may make modifications to the plan(s) and may resubmit the application. 

6. 	
Enforcement and Appeals 


Refer to Article 14. Administration, Enforcement, Penalties and Remedies for inspection and enforcement procedures. 
Refer to Article 15. Variances and Appeals for procedures and filing requirements.  Except applications for design review of a sign which shall follow the procedures and filing requirements for administrative variance. 
10.28 

Central Business District Overlay 
Boundary Map 
Exhibit 2 

10.29 
Section 1003. MIXED USE DEVELOPMENTS 
A.  Intent and Purpose. 
The Mixed Use Development Districts are established for the following purposes: 
1. 
To encourage larger scale mixed use development which will produce a logically organized and compatible set of land uses resulting in a higher overall quality of development than if accomplished in incremental unplanned stages. 

2. 
To allow a mixture and/or density of land uses not otherwise allowed in an established zoning district; by careful site planning the appropriate site improvements are incorporated into the plan that establish compatible relationships between uses within the site and uses adjacent to the site. 

3. 
To encourage creative site design which seeks to preserve the open space and unique environmental features, conserve energy through efficient building design and clustering, efficiently use the land, and increase the efficiency of public service delivery. 

4. 
To be applied in a manner consistent with the Land Use Plan for the City of Sugar Hill. 


B. General Conditions. 
An area may be considered for rezoning to a Mixed Use Development District if any one of the following conditions exists: 
1. 
The characteristics of the specific site plan and uses proposed for the subject property would only be compatible with the surrounding area if the development were limited to those plans and uses as submitted. 

2. 
Separate land uses, which would not otherwise be permitted to locate within the same zoning district, are proposed for development on one or more adjacent parcels under single ownership. 

3. 
Exceptions or variation from the size, setback, frontage, density, uses or other standards which are required in the conventional zoning districts are being proposed as a part of a planned development. 


10.30 
C.  Uses Within a Mixed Use Development. 
Any use allowable inherently or by City Council approval in the conventional zoning districts set forth herein may be proposed for inclusion in Mixed Use Development.  Each proposed use should be consistent in application with the intent and purpose of the conventional zoning districts in which it is allowed.  Only the specific uses proposed in an application and approved shall be allowed in the district.  Any addition of uses, change of plans, or increase in size or density shall require a separate amendment to the original approved Mixed Use Development and shall follow the same administrative process as any other amendment.  Initial approval of a Mixed Use Development by the City of Sugar Hill does not mean that subsequent amendments to that Mixed Use Development carry any requirement to be approved.  Unless otherwise stated in this section, the development standards and land uses which are presented with an application for amendment shall, if approved, become the standards for the subject property and as such shall become a part of these zoning regulations. 
D.  Required Report and Plans. 
The plans required for inclusion in an application shall be prepared by a registered engineer, architect, land surveyor or landscape architect, proof of which shall be their official registration seal appearing on the plans submitted.  Each Mixed Use Development shall consist of a written report and a set of site plans prepared in accordance with the following guidelines: 
Written Report. A written report shall be submitted which will explain the type, nature, size, intent, and characteristics of the proposed development.  This report shall include, where applicable: 
1. 	
General description and location. 

2. 	
The physical and socio-economic reasons as to why the uses proposed in the planned development would provide a better overall use of this property over the current zoning. 

3. 	
The proposed provision of utilities, including water, sewer and drainage facilities. 

4. 	
The proposed methods for protection of abutting properties. 

5. 	
The proposed densities and total number of acres or square footage for each allowable type of land use, including public facilities and common open space or recreational areas. 

6. 	
The proposed maintenance and ownership agreements for any streets and common 


10.31 
open spaces not proposed for dedication to the City of Sugar Hill. 
7. 	
The proposed standards of development, including restriction on the use of the property, setback requirements and proposed restrictive covenants. 

8. 	
The names and mailing addresses of all adjoining property owners. 

9. 	
Additional relevant data as required by the City Manager. 


Required Site Plans. A detailed site plan prepared by a registered engineer, architect, land surveyor or landscape architect shall be required for all Mixed Use Developments.  The required site plan shall include as a minimum the following information: 
1. 
A survey of the property indicating all property dimensions, property size, adjoining owners, scale, north arrow and tie in point to a known location (road intersection/land lot corner, etc.) 

2. 	
Topography with contour intervals no greater than 20 feet. 

3. 	
Lakes, ponds, and floodplains and the sources of floodplain data. 

4. 
Proposed subdivision of the property, streets, ingress and egress to each building site, internal access and circulation (both pedestrian and auto), off-street parking areas, and public facilities and open areas. 

5. 	
Storm water detention areas. 

6. 	
The proposed architectural style and siting of all structures. 

7. 
Lot lines, sizes, setbacks and proposed location, shape, size, height and lot coverage of all structures. 

8. 	
Floor plans and elevations of all typical units. 


Administrative Review. All of the above identified requirements of the written report and site plan, as well as any other requirements of this zoning ordinance, shall be met before the Mixed Use Development re-zoning request is presented to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation.  Specific requirements of the administrative review process are as follows: 
10.32 
1. 	
The City Manager shall be responsible for reviewing the written report and site plan, and verifying the adequacy of both to appear on the Planning Commission agenda. 

2. 	
The City Manager shall periodically prepare, post and distribute a timetable for his review and verification of the required exhibits. 

3. 	
Neither the Planning Commission, Director, nor any other appointed official shall possess the authority to waive any of the written report or site plan requirements. 

4. 	
An applicant for a Mixed Use Development re-zoning may present a written request to the City Council to waive individual requirements of the written report or site plan; however, a separate request must be submitted for each requested waiver, and must include a specific and valid reason as to why the waiver is necessary.  Economic hardship shall not constitute or be considered as a valid reason for a waiver request. 


E.  Types of Mixed Use Developments. 
Commercial Office Districts (COD) 
1. A commercial office district must abut either Peachtree Industrial Boulevard or Nelson Brogdon Boulevard for a distance of at least 250 feet. 
2. 	
The site proposed for a COD classification must contain an area of fifty (50) acres or more unless specifically approved by the City Council due to special and unusual circumstances.  In no case shall the minimum size be less than thirty (30) acres. 

3. 	
A commercial office district is intended to provide for the possibility of a relatively large scale Mixed Use Development which combines a variety of commercial office and institutional uses, incorporates innovative concepts of efficiency and land use, public service delivery, energy conservation and environmental preservation.  The COD shall make maximum use of natural features and through proper site planning measures shall be designed to substantially conform to the existing character and development pattern of the surrounding area. 

4. 	
Uses allowed inherently.  The following uses are those specifically permitted in a COD: 


a. 	All uses allowed inherently in the HSB, BG, and OI classifications with the exceptions of the following uses: auto repair shops or tire stores including lubrication or tuneup centers (full service and self service); convenience stores; gasoline stations, service stations, and carwashes; 
10.33 
group and congregate personal care homes; mobile buildings; automotive sales lots and associated service facilities (new or used); boarding and rooming houses; equipment rental; mini warehouse/personal storage facilities; moving van or truck rental facilities; taxi/limousine service; transportation terminals for passengers; facilities engaging in the business trade or professional of psychic reading, fortune telling, astrology, phrenology, palmistry, clairvoyance, or other related practices, mortuaries, cemeteries and mausoleums. 
5. 	Restriction of the allowable uses.  The following is a set of restrictions placed on the above listed inherently allowed uses: 
a. 	A minimum of 10% of the land area contained in the development shall be dedicated or set aside as common open space.  The uses inherently allowed in HSB and BG contained in the COD shall not exceed 75% of the land area.  Uses inherently in the OI district shall not exceed 75% of the land area. 
6. 	Additional requirements.  Where a COD abuts an AF, RS150, RS175, RS200, or RS100 district, said COD shall contain a 50 foot wide undisturbed or densely landscaped buffer along the abutting property lines.  The fifty foot buffer requirements shall be added to the side or rear yard requirements and shall be left or planted in such a manner as to create a visual screen between the development and the adjacent residential areas. 
Commercial Office Residential District (COR) 
1. 	
A commercial office residential district must abut Nelson Brogdon Boulevard for a distance of at least 250 feet. 

2. 	
The site proposed for a COR classification must contain an area of fifty (50) acres or more unless specifically approved by the City Council due to special and unusual circumstances.  In no case shall the minimum size be less than twenty 

(20) acres. 

3. 	
The intent of the commercial office residential district is to provide for the possibility of a relatively large scale, Mixed Use Development which combines commercial office, institutional, and residential uses, which incorporates innovative concepts of efficiency and land use, public services delivery, energy conservation, and environmental preservation. 

4. 	
Uses allowed inherently.  Two or more of the following uses shall be present and allowed inherently within the development: 


a. 	All uses inherently allowed in the following districts: RS200, RS 175, RS150, RS 100, RM, OI, HSB, and BG provided that the following uses shall not be allowed: auto repair shops or tire stores including lubrication or tuneup centers (full service and self service); convenience stores; gasoline stations, service stations, and carwashes; group and congregate personal care homes; mobile building; automotive sales lots and associated 
10.34 
service facilities (new or used); boarding and rooming houses; equipment rental; mini warehouse/personal storage facilities; moving van or truck rental facilities; taxi/limousine service; transportation terminals for passengers; facilities engaging in the business trade or profession of psychic reading, fortune telling, astrology, phrenology, palmistry, clairvoyance, or other related practices, mortuaries, cemeteries and mausoleums. 
5. 	Restrictions of the allowable uses: The following is a set of restrictions placed on the above listed inherently allowed uses: 
a. 	
A minimum of 20% of the land area shall be dedicated or set aside as common openspace. Amenity packages for the residential portions of the development may be included within the 20% open space requirements. 

b. 	
Uses inherently permitted in the RM district may not exceed 20% of the land area. 

c. 	
Uses inherently allowed in the RS 200, RS 175, RS 150, and RS 100 districts shall not exceed 60% of the total land area. 

d. 	
Total residential uses for the development shall not exceed 65% of the total land area. 

e. 	
Uses inherently permitted in the OI district shall not exceed 50% of the land area. 

f. 	
Uses inherently allowed in the HSB and BG district shall not exceed 50% of the land area. 

g. 	
The maximum density of the residential portion of the development shall not exceed 6 units per acre.  Density shall be calculated by dividing the number of residential units by the number of acres of the development allotted to residential development.  Any acreage included in the open space requirement shall not be included for density requirements.  The area included for density requirements also shall not include more than 50% of any flood plain or stream buffer area. 


F.  General Provisions. 
1. 	The City Manager is authorized to approve minor changes to Mixed Use Developments without submitting the changes to the Mayor and Council.  Minor changes include increases in lot sizes, decreases in density or the number of lots or residential units, street modifications that are required by Gwinnett County Department of Transportation or the Georgia Department of Transportation for 
10.35 
safety reasons and which do not affect the general street layout or number of access points to the development, and minor adjustments to layout required as a result of engineering data not available at the time of the approval of the plan by the Mayor and Council and which does not significantly change the development or adversely impact any adjacent properties.  Any major changes in the development and the site plan approved as part of the approval of the development shall be resubmitted to the Mayor and Council as a zoning change and shall require approval of the Mayor and Council.  Major changes include, but are not limited to, reductions in lot sizes, changes in the wording of any zoning conditions specifically approved by the Mayor and Council, increase in density or the number of lots; street modifications that would affect adjacent properties, change the basic street structure of the development or change the number of entry or exits to the development, or other changes deemed by the Director of Planning and Development to constitute major changes. 
2. 	
A site plan shall be incorporated into each ordinance approving a Mixed Use Development and shall be a condition of zoning.  Any changes to the site plan which constitute a major change as described above shall constitute a change in zoning and shall require a submittal to the Mayor and Council.  If changes are made at the time of approval of the zoning which require changes to the site plan submitted and reviewed by the Mayor and Council, the Mayor and Council may provide in its ordinance for the necessary changes to be made and submitted to the City Manager for approval.  Upon such approval by the City Manager, a copy of the revised and approved site plan shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council at their next monthly meeting and placed on the agenda for acceptance and ratification by the Mayor and Council. 

3. 	
At the time of approval of the development, the Mayor and Council may place appropriate conditions on the development which requires the sequencing of the development.  By way of example, the Council may require that no more than 50% of the residential development be completed and occupied before at least 25% of the commercial or office development is completed and occupied. 


Section 1004. CONSERVATION SUBDIVSION DISTRICT (CSD) 
A.  Purpose. 
To encourage the development of residential communities, that are density neutral, designed to preserve and protect environmental resources, scenic vistas, and natural and cultivated landscaped. 
10.36 
To enhance land, water, air, and tree/vegetation resources by minimizing the area of land disturbance, reducing impervious surface, optimizing stream buffers, preserving vegetation cover and encouraging the provision of open space. 
To reduce infrastructure maintenance costs as a result of efficient community design. 
To provide open space and pedestrian linkages and wildlife corridors among residential communities and to encourage recreation opportunities. 
To preserve significant historical and archeological features. 
To preserve and protect contiguous undeveloped areas within the development. 
B.  Applicability. 
This district may be requested utilizing the public sanitary sewer system.  Any conditions of zoning or special use approval of the underlying district shall also be observed (exception: lot area, width or quantity).  For properties which are submitted for rezoning to CSD, the applicant shall declare the intent to utilize this district at the time of application and the application shall be accomplished by a Concept Plan and Existing Features Site Analysis Plan meeting the requirements of this section.  
C.  Permitted Uses. 
Those uses permitted in the RS-100 zoning district are permitted, not including Special Uses. 
D.  Existing Features Site Analysis Plan. 
At the time of development, or if a zoning action is proposed, an Existing Features Site Analysis Plan, sealed by a registered engineer, registered architect or registered landscape architect, analysis is to identify areas that are most significant for open space designation.  However, preliminary meeting(s) with the City Manager prior to a formal submittal is required.  The Plan shall include at least the following information; 
Delineation of streams, 100-years floodplains and wetlands to include the source of this 
information. 
Topography contours at intervals no greater than 4 feet. 
Identification of tree lines, woodlands, open fields or meadows. 
Delineation of tree resource areas by type such as hardwood, pines or mixed; and old or 
new growth. 
Delineation of steep slope areas (i.e. greater than 25%). 
10.37 
Identification of historical or archeological features. 
Identification of significant wildlife habitats and scenic vistas as identified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or the Comprehensive Plan. 
Identification of existing structures and easements. 
Identification of open space in adjacent developments. 
E.  Concept Plan. 
At time of development, a Concept Plan shall be submitted by the developer for review and approval in accordance with the requirements and procedures of the Development Regulations.  If a zoning action is proposed, the rezoning site plan shall include the following information: 
Delineation and specifications of open space including calculations and exclusions; and any “pocket parks,” “greens,” or trail system to be constructed. 
A typical detail on the plan including dwelling size, lot width, building setback lines, off-street parking, street trees, sidewalks, and street pavement and right-of-way width. 
Lot width average, area and percent of floodplain specifications in tabular form; and 
density calculations (gross and net). 
F.  Open Space Requirements. 
In order to qualify for this overlay district, open space shall meet the following requirements: 
Delineation. Priority shall be given in delineating open space areas as those areas of significance identified in the Existing Features Site Analysis Plan. 
Undeveloped and Natural. Open space shall remain undeveloped and natural except for the provision of non-motorized passive recreation opportunities such as running, walking, biking, and similar outdoor activities.  Exceptions: “pocket parks,” “greens,” “retention ponds”, and “underground storm water facility” in open space.  A “pocket park” or “green” is a landscaped area larger than 0.33 acres constructed for community gathering or play or visual enhancement.  “Pocket Parks” or “greens” shall not exceed 10% of the total open space. At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract.  The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be 
10.38 
candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space.  Additionally, the open space shall maintain a minimum width of 20 feet in all areas. 
Exclusions. Excluded from meeting the minimum amount of open space are the following: 
i. 	Proposed Permanent Lakes, streams, ponds etc.: No more than 30% of land area located within a proposed lake may be credited. 
Recreation Area Improvements. Impervious surfaces in recreation areas shall not be credited. 
Easement. Land area within power or gas pipeline easements shall not be credited. 
Other. Land area devoted to public or private streets or any land that has been, or is to be, conveyed to a public agency via a purchase agreement for such uses as parks, schools, or other public facilities shall not be credited. 
Ownership: Open space shall be owned in fee-simple by a mandatory property owner’s association; or third party(s) approved in advance by the City Council prior to transfer of land ownership.  The developer shall record the deed to the open space prior to, or concurrent with, the recording of the first final subdivision plat.  An access easement following the alignment of future public streets is acceptable. However, “pocket parks” or “greens” may be deeded concurrent with the unit or phase of the final subdivision plat of which it is a part. 
Property Owner’s Association: The property owner’s association bylaws or covenants, at a minimum, shall contain the following provisions: 
i. Governance of the association by the Georgia Property Owner’s Association Act (OCGA Section 44-2-220 et. Seq.) or a successor to that Act that grants lien rights to the association for maintenance expenses and tax obligations. 
Responsibility for maintenance of the open space. 
Responsibility for insurance and taxes. 
10.39 
Automatic compulsory membership of all lot purchasers and their successors; and compulsory assessment. 
Conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the 
developer to the lot owners. 
Guarantee that the association will not be dissolved without the advance approval of the City Council. 
Maintenance: The property owner’s association, or other entity approved in advance by the City Council, shall be responsible for the continuous maintenance of buffers, open space, recreation area, common areas, and detention ponds etc. 
Conservation Surety: Open space delineated in the concept plan shall be permanently protected by the developer’s conveyance of an undivided fee simple interest in the open space to the mandatory property owner’s association referenced in Section 902A.6.d., and to each of the individual lot owners of the new subdivision.  The deed conveying the open space pursuant to this paragraph shall be recorded and delivered to the property owner’s association prior to the approval of the final plat for the first phase of the subdivision.  In addition, the final plat for each phase of the Subdivision shall contain the following statement: 
“open space delineated on this plat is permanently protected and shall remain undeveloped and natural subject to certain exceptions contained in Sugar Hill’s Conservation Subdivision Overlay District regulations.” 
In addition, the deed conveying the open space shall contain the following language: 
“The land conveyed herein shall remain permanently protected open space shall not be cleared or developed except in accordance with Section 902A6.b. of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill. 
The developer’s deed to the mandatory property owner’s association shall contain a statement that the interest conveyed in the deed runs with the land and benefits all future lot owners within the subdivision.” 
10.40 
G.  Density. 
The subdivisions in CSD district shall not exceed maximum net density in the underlying district, and provide at least the percent of open space defined in §902 A. 6., as stated below: 
RS-100  3 units/acre with 40% open space  
4 units/acre with 50% open space  
H.  Development Requirements.  

Subdivisions in this overlay district shall meet the following requirements unless a Special Use Permit is submitted and approved by the City Council: 
a. 	
Minimum subdivision Size: 10 contiguous acres. 

b. 	
Lot Area:  Minimum lot size 5,000 sq. ft., except that each building lot shall not contain more than 20% of its area within the 100-year floodplain elevation. 

c. 	
Average Lot Width:  The average width of all building lots shall be at least 60 feet. 


Exceptions: Lots that abut non-overlay properties shall meet the standard width requirement of the underlying district; or, open space at least 50 feet wide shall be provided. 
d. 	Minimum Road Frontage per Lot: 40 feet.  
Exceptions: Road frontage may be reduced to 20 feet for lots with frontage upon cul-de-sac or “eyebrow cul-de-sac” turnaround. 
e. 	Minimum Yard Area (Setback): 
Front: 	20 feet.  Exception:  The front yard set back may be reduced to 5 feet if dwellings are provided side or rear entry garages.  To qualify for the reduced setback on a corner lot, side entry garages must be located to the side adjacent to an abutting lot. 
Rear: 20 feet. Side: 5 feet. 
10.41 
f.  Exterior Project Street Frontage Open Space Strip:  
50 feet in width (not part of any building lot).  Landscape entry features such as fences and walls may be allowed in the open space strip.  
g.  Maximum Height:  35 feet.  
h.  Minimum Floor Area:  Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum heated finished living area, excluding a basement, attic, carport or garage, as follows:  
One Story:  1,600 square feet.  
Two Story:  1,800 square feet.  
i.  Sodded Yards: All grassed areas on dwelling lots shall be sodded.  
j.  Garages: Each dwelling unit shall have two-car garage.  
k.  Street Trees: Street trees, in accordance with the requirements of the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance, shall be provided.  
l.  Underground Utilities: Utilities shall be located underground.  

I.  Administrative Variance. 
The City Manager may approve an administrative variance for a project developing in phases to allow clearing and grading for the whole project provided that the site is stabilized and the developer undertakes best management practices and complies with all soil erosion and sedimentation control measures applicable to the project.  The City Manager may approve an administrative variance for setbacks, lot sizes, lot area or reduction of open space.  Said administrative variances shall not exceed a reduction of more than ten percent of the area required by the ordinance and shall be granted only If the applicant demonstrates in writing a hardship or justification for said variance in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 1505 (3) of this ordinance. 
10.42 
ARTICLE 11. 
OFFSTREET PARKING Section 1100.  Off-Street Automobile Parking and Loading and Unloading Spaces Required. 
Off-street automobile parking and loading and unloading spaces shall be provided, as specified in this Ordinance, for uses and structures hereafter established. 
Any building or use that is subsequently enlarged shall meet the off-street parking and loading and unloading space requirements of this Ordinance for the original building plus the addition made. 
Section 1101.  Plan and Design Standards. 
The following are required plan and design standards for off-street parking and loading and unloading spaces: 
1. Each automobile parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide and nineteen 
(19) feet deep when used with twenty-three (23) feet wide interior driveways or eighteen (18) feet deep when used with twenty-five (25) feet wide interior driveways or single row parking bays. A maximum of one foot six inches of the required parking stall dimension may overhang a grassed area.  This overhang cannot be over a sidewalk or right-of-way and must be arranged in such a way as to allow adequate front-to-front parking. 

2. 	
Compact spaces.  Up to 30% of the total required parking spaces may be reduced in size (8’ x 16’) for compact vehicles.  The compact parking spaces shall be clustered together.  Each row or pair of rows shall be indicated by a sign at each end.  No sign face shall exceed one and one-half (1 ½) square feet, aggregate total sign face shall not exceed three (3) square feet.  No such sign shall be taller than 8’ height.  Parking lots larger than 250 spaces shall provide 30% compact spaces. 

3. 	
Interior driveways.  Interior driveways, when used with ninety degree angle parking, shall be at least twenty-two (22) feet wide for each single row parking bay; when used with sixty degree angle parking, shall be at least eighteen (18) feet wide for one-way traffic and twenty (20) feet for two-way traffic.  When used with parallel parking or when there is no parking, interior driveways shall be at least ten (10) feet wide for one-way traffic and at least twenty (20) feet wide for two-way traffic. 

4. 	
Improvement of Off-Street Parking Lots.  All off-street parking lots, whether public or private, for five (5) or more passenger or commercial vehicles required to be licensed for over-the-road use, including trailers, shall meet the following standards: 


11.1 


a. They shall be graded to insure proper drainage, , installed on an approved four 
(4) inch graded aggregate base with a two (2) inch top course of concrete, asphalt, or other approved paving method.  The parking lot shall be maintained in good condition free of weeds, dust, trash and debris.  Alternative paving methods such as porous concrete/asphalt shall be constructed to minimum standards per American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and shall provide a maintenance schedule for approval and recording. 
Exception:  Within HM-1 and HM-2 Zoning Districts, Storage Yards for off-road construction equipment (no vehicle licensing required) may have a graveled surface and shall provide the following: 
i. 	maintained to a uniform depth of at least two (2) inches of crusher run or stone aggregate not larger than #57 stone; and 
ii. 	kept free of debris, weeds and uneven holes or depressions; and 
iii. 	be contained with concrete vertical curbing or minimum twelve inch height earthen berm; and 
iv. 	graded to ensure rain water runoff flows into a detention facility as designed. 
b. 	
Outdoor lighting facilities shall be so arranged that the source of any light is concealed from public view and from adjacent residential properties and does not interfere with traffic. 

c. 	
They shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing or storing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies. 

d. 	
Each parking space shall be clearly demarcated by a painted stripe no less than three (3) inches wide running the length of each of the longer sides of the space or by curbing or by other acceptable method which clearly marks and delineates the parking space within the parking lot. 

e.  	
One-way traffic aisles shall be clearly marked with directional arrows on the pavement. 

f.  	
The boundary of off-street parking lots with 6 or more parking spaces shall have their perimeter enclosed by concrete curb and gutter.  Parking lots with less than 6 parking spaces may be constructed without curb and gutter but shall provide wheel or bumper guards and comply with the all stormwater management requirements. 


11.2 

5. 	
Location of required off-street parking spaces on other property. If the required automobile off-street parking spaces cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on other off-street property lying not more than four hundred (400) feet from the main entrance to the principal use.  In this situation, the applicant shall submit, with his application for a building permit or occupancy permit, an instrument duly executed and acknowledged, which accepts the permanent availability of such off-street parking facilities to serve his principal use.  

6. 	
Sharing of required off-street parking spaces.  . A shared parking analysis shall be performed by the applicant based on the Parking Generation Manual (latest edition) by Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) and submitted to the City for review and approval.  If approved, than the applicant shall prepare a written agreement acceptable to the City Manager and approved by all property owners. The agreement must be written to survive future changes in ownership in perpetuity, unless the agreement is dissolved with approval by the City Manager.  It shall be an obligation running with the title to the property and shall be binding on the current property owners and their successors.  The agreement shall be recorded at the Clerk of Superior Court, Gwinnett County. 


8. 	
Off-street loading and unloading spaces.  Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall have access from a public alley or, if there is no alley, from a public street.  The space shall be so located that it causes a minimum of interference with the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk or alley. 

9. 	
Provision for Surplus Parking.  The maximum parking space allowance may be exceeded by 25% if constructed in the form of an approved porous concrete/asphalt, grassed paving system or other pervious system approved by the City Manager.  The maximum parking space allowance may be exceeded in any amount when contained in a parking deck and/or underground parking structure. 


11.3 

Section 1102.  Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces. 
The following are the minimum and maximum number of off-street parking spaces required.  For uses not specifically listed, the off-street parking requirements shall be those of the most similar use as determined by the City Manager.  Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be required by Georgia State Law and shall be included in the calculation of the overall parking provided. 
Refer to Table 11.1 – Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces. 
For uses not specifically categorized/listed then the applicant shall prepare a Parking Study based on the ITE manual, for review and approval by the City Manager. 
Section 1103.  Off-Street Loading and Unloading Spaces. 
Any use which requires deliveries or shipments shall provide sufficient off-street loading and unloading space so that no public street, alley or access to any parking area is made unsuitable for passage by such activities. 
For every newly established retail, wholesale, service and industrial use larger than 10,000 square feet, space shall be provided as  indicated for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public street or alley.  These requirements may be met by a combination of methods including physical location and scheduling.  Such spaces shall have access to an alley or, if there is no alley, to a street.  Minimum loading and unloading space requirements are: 
1. 	
Gross Building Area (Square Feet) Minimum Number of Spaces 10,001 – 100,000 1 100,001 – 200,000 2 200,001 – 350,000 3 

1 space for each additional 100,000 square feet or portion thereof shall be provided for buildings or common developments in excess of 350,000 square feet. 

2. 	
For retail and service uses, each space must be at least ten (10) by thirty (30) feet. 

3. 	
For wholesale business and industry, each space must be at least ten (10) by fifty (50) feet. 

4. 	
Bus and truck terminals.  Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or be loaded or unloaded at the terminal at any one (1) time. 


Section 1104.  Commercial Vehicle Parking. 
1. 	
Except as provided herein no commercial vehicle shall be allowed to park in any RS­200, RS-175, RS-150, RS-100, RM or MH district, or property used as residential, either on property so zoned or on the streets abutting such property on Monday through Friday between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or on Saturdays or Sundays. 

2. 	
Any commercial vehicle under 13,001 Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) shall be allowed to be parked in a carport, driveway, garage or within a side yard or rear yard on an approved driveway expansion area in accordance with other sections of this Ordinance. 

3. 	
This section shall not apply with regard to any vehicle in an enclosed building or so located upon the premises as not to be readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. 

4. 	
This section shall not apply to school buses parked on school property and church buses or other not-for-profit organization uses parked on the property of the church or other not-for-profit organization. 

5. 	
As used in this section, commercial vehicles specifically include the following: 


11.4 

a. 	
Any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 13,000 pounds. 

b. 	
Any vehicle, other than a motor home, having more than two (2) axles. 

c. 	
Any motorized construction equipment, except when located on private property on which related construction has a valid permit. 

d. 	
Any vehicle designed to carry more than fifteen (15) passengers. 

e. 	
Any vehicle or trailer registered to a business entity. 

f. 	
Any vehicle with a graphic advertising a business activity, service or product that may be seen from the public right of way or private street. 

g. 	
Any other vehicle used in a commercial manner as determined by the City Manager or his designee. 


Section 1105.  Administrative Variance. 
In instances where an applicant shows specific and valid reasons why the requirements of Section 1102 or Section 1103 cannot reasonably be met, and where a reduction of not more than ten percent (10%) in such requirements will not adversely affect the spirit or intent of this Article, the City Manager may administratively grant such reduction. 
In instances where an applicant submits a study showing specific and valid reasons why the requirements of Section 1102 are not reasonable based upon the Parking Generation Manual by ITE (Institute of Traffic Engineers) the City Manager may administratively grant such reduction as requested. 
Section 1106.  Parking Single family Residential. 
This section shall apply to all single family residential zoning classifications, which include the following classifications: AF, RS-100, RS-150, RS-175, RS-200, PRD, CSD, and Residential-Use properties (non-conforming). Parking any motor vehicle, boat, RV, trailer or camper top shall not be allowed in the front yard, side yard or rear yard of a residence unless said motor vehicle, boat, RV, trailer or camper top is parked on a concrete, asphalt or gravel driveway. 
11.5 

Therefore, it shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle, boat, RV, trailer or camper top on the grass, lawn or dirt areas in the yard of any residential structure located within the corporate boundaries of the City of Sugar Hill.  No more than thirty-five percent (35%) of a combination of the front, side and rear yards may consist of a concrete, asphalt or gravel drive way or parking area and the remaining percentage shall be grass or landscaped areas. 
11.6 

Min. # of 
Max. # of Parking 
Parking USE Unit Spaces per 
Spaces per Unit 
Unit 
Residences and Accommodations 

Single Family Dwelling Unit 2 -
Dwelling Multi Family 
1 -
Unit Rooming/Boarding House 
0.75 
1 
Bedroom Hotel / Motel 
1.25 
1.75 
Room Hospital / Nursing Home 
0.25 
1 100 sq. ft. GFA 
Retail, Sales and Service 
Food Stores, General Business, Automotive Sales/Service, Offices, 1 1.5 
300 sq. ft. GFA Institutional, Banks, Commercial or Personal Services. Restaurant, Night Clubs, Taverns and similar establishments serving 
1 2 
100 sq. ft. GFA food or beverages and providing patron use area. Restaurant -Drive in without area for patron use. 
1 1.5 
100 sq.ft. GFA 
Educational 
Public or Private Schools 2 2.5 
Classroom, plus 1 space for every 4 of the capacity of largest assembly area. 
Technical and Trade schools, Business schools, University 10 12.5 
Classroom, plus 1 space for every 4 of the capacity of largest assembly area. 
Day Care .1 .125 100 sq. ft. GFA 
Service and Community 
Beauty Parlors / Barber Shops 1.5 
2 Per grooming chair 100 sq. ft GFA, includ-ing service bays, wash tunnels, 
Gasoline Service 0.25 
0.50 
and retail areas. Lodges, Clubs and Community Centers 
0.50 
0.65 
100 sq.ft. GFA Funeral Home and Services 
25 31.25 
Per each viewing room 
Entertainment and Recreation 
Adult Entertainment Establishment 1.5 
2 
100 sq. ft. GFA Golf Course 
3 3.75 
Hole, plus 
Dining Area 

1 1.25 
3 seats in dining/bar area Private Residential Recreation / Common Areas 
0.75 
1.25 
Per 5 lots Private Recreation Centers 
a.  Indoor facility .4 .5 100 sq. ft. GFA 
b.  Outdoor area. 
20 25 Acre 
Other 
Place of Worship 1 1.25 
4 seats in largest assembly room Public Assembly with fixed seating 
1 1.25 
3 seats in largest assembly room Public Assembly without fixed seating 
4 6 100 sq.ft. GFA 
Manufacturing / Industrial 
Light Manufacturing & Assembly 1 1.25 
1,000 sq. ft. GFA Heavy Manufacturing 
1 1.25 
2,000 sq.ft. GFA Wholesale and Warehousing 
1 1.25 
2,000 sq.ft. GFA not including office space 
* GFA = Gross Floor Area  Sq.ft. = square feet. 
** Parking analysis' shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 

Table 11.1 – Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces 
ARTICLE 12. 
BUFFERS AND SCREENING 
Section 1200. Buffer Between Dissimilar Districts and Construction Buffers. 
A buffer shall be required for the following: 
1. 	
Where nonresidential districts are contiguous with residential districts, or where multi-family or mobile home districts are contiguous with single-family residential districts, the parcel of land shall have a buffer along any rear and side property lines abutting a residential district. 

2. 	
All residentially zoned property to be developed as single family detached subdivisions shall have a minimum twenty (20) foot construction buffer along any rear property lines abutting an existing single family residential zoned parcel. 


Section 1201. Plan Requirements. 
All buffers shall be designated on the appropriate permit application(s) and indicated on the required site plan or final subdivision plat. 
Section 1202. Buffer and Screening Standards. 
All buffer areas and screening shall be established in accordance with the following requirements: 
1. 	
Buffers shall be established and maintained along required property lot lines in accordance with the landscaping policies and standards of The Buffer, Landscape and Tree Ordinance of The City of Sugar Hill and any additional specifications that may be approved by the City Council.  In the event the buffer includes a utility or pipeline easement, a minimum buffer of no less than 20 feet in width will be required outside the easement. In no case will the buffer be less than 20 feet except as may be permitted in Section 1204. 

2. 	
Buffers shall meet the minimum width requirements for dissimilar districts as shown in the "Minimum Buffer Requirements" table (Section 1205). 

3. 	
Screening shall be established within any buffer along the entire length of the side and rear lot lines.  However, this screening requirement may be adjusted in order to observe the sight distance required in the Development Regulations or as a Condition of Zoning, Special Use, or Variance approval or as approved by the City Manager. 

4. 	
Screening may be required where a non-residential use abuts a public street across from a residential district. However, this screening requirement may be adjusted in order to observe the sight distance required in the Development Regulations or as a Condition of Zoning, Special Use, or Variance approval or as approved by the City Manager. 

5. 	
Structures, including driveways, parking facilities, or retaining walls shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any buffer. 


12.1 

Section 1203. Other Screening Requirements. 

Screening and/or buffers shall be required for purposes of obscuring features such as dumpsters, rear 
entrances, utility and maintenance structures, and loading facilities. 
Section 1204. Administrative Variances to Buffer and Screening Requirements. 

A. Administrative Reductions in Required Distances. 
The width of buffers as required in Section 1205 may be reduced by no more than 20 percent, as appropriate, by the City Manager, if and only if, 
1. 	
It is clearly demonstrated that existing topography and/or vegetation within the reduced area achieve the purpose and intent of this Article; or 

2. 	
It is clearly demonstrated that for topographic reasons, a fence, wall and/or other screening device required herein could not possibly screen activities conducted on ground level from view from the normal level of a first story window on any lot in a residential district abutting the use. 


B. Administrative Allowance for Disturbance of Buffers. 
The natural undisturbed buffers as required in Section 1205 may be disturbed, if approved as appropriate, by the City Manager, if and only if, 
1. 	
It is demonstrated the equivalent width of buffer shall be re-established through appropriate plantings and landscaping, and the adjoining residential property is not developed, or 

2. 	
The adjoining property owners grant written permission for such disturbance. 


12.2 

Section 1205. MINIMUM BUFFER REQUIREMENTS. 
AF, 
RS-200 RS-175 RS-150 RS-100 RM MH AF, RS-200, ----------------------­RS-175 RS-150  ----------------------­RS-100 ----------------------­RM 50' 50' 50' 50' ----20' MH 75' 75' 75' 75' 75' --­OI 50' 50' 50' 50' 50' 50' LM 50' 50' 50' 50' 50' 50' HM1 75' 75' 75' 75' 75' 75' HM2 100' 100' 100' 100' 100' 100' HSB 50' 50' 50' 50' 50' 50' BG 75' 75' 75' 75' 75' 75' 
Notes: 
(1) 	
The Mayor & Council may establish or increase the minimum buffer as a condition of rezoning or as a condition to a Special Use Permit. 

(2) 	
The Board of Appeals may increase the minimum buffer required as a condition to granting a variance request. 

(3) 	
No structure shall be located less than five feet from any buffer. 

(4) 	
Construction Buffers are required between residential developments. See Section 1200. 


12.3 

ARTICLE 13. 
SIGNS 
Section 1300. Purpose and Intent. 
It is hereby declared that the aesthetic and safety interests of the City of Sugar Hill are reasonably promoted by the provisions of this article.  Accordingly, it is the intent and purpose of this article to provide for the orderly and harmonious display of signs within the community; to avoid the erection of displays which produce deleterious and injurious effects to adjacent properties and to the natural beauty of the environment; to provide for the safety of the traveling public by limiting distractions, hazards, and obstructions; to minimize visual clutter and encourage a positive visual environment within the City; and to promote the mental and physical health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
The regulations and requirements herein set forth shall be the minimum requirements to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public and to protect the character of the City of Sugar Hill. 
The purpose and intent of these regulations is to create the legal framework for a comprehensive and balanced system of signage to improve and enhance the aesthetic environment of the City and to avoid the visual clutter that is potentially harmful to traffic and to the appearance of the community.  The City Council of the City of Sugar Hill finds that the regulations set forth herein will improve the visual appearance of the City by limiting the number and size of signs within the corporate limits, consistent with constitutional guarantees, while continuing to provide an effective means of communication. 
Section 1301. General Provisions.  
Except as specifically excluded from the provisions of this Ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign without a permit.  A sign permit shall not be required for a change in the copy of a sign for which a permit has been lawfully issued, provided no electrical connections are disturbed or modified and the size or weight of the sign is not increased. 
Section 1302. Permit Application. 
Applications for sign permits required above shall be filed by the sign owner or his agent with the City Manager upon forms furnished by the City. 
A.  	Said application shall describe and set forth the following, and any additional information as may be requested by the City Manager upon forms furnished by the City.  The application shall comply with and be processed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
1. 	
The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this Ordinance. 

2. 	
The cost of construction of the sign. 

3. 	
The street address of the property upon which subject sign is to be located and the proposed location of subject sign on subject property.  In the absence of a street address, a method of location acceptable to the City Manager shall be used. 

4. 	
Sign face area (SFA) per sign and total aggregate SFA per sign structure. 

5. 	
Scaled drawings showing the size and location of the sign, property lines, set backs, easements, and existing buildings. 

6. 	
Signs that exceed 100 square feet of surface area or exceed the height of 15 feet shall be designed and stamped by a Professional Engineer licensed in the state of Georgia. Designs shall include the effective projected area wind load calculations for the appropriate wind speed region as well as any electrical power components, anchoring and footing details. 

7. 	
The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 

8. 	
Written consent of the property owner, or his agent, granting permission for the placement and/or maintenance of subject sign. 

9. 	
The name, address and phone number of the sign contractor. 

10. 
Proof of payment of occupation tax for the current year by the sign owner and contractor, if appropriate. 


13.1 
B.  	Upon the receipt of a signed permit application containing all the information set forth in Subsection A, the Department of Planning and Development of the City of Sugar Hill shall promptly conduct an investigation and review of the application, the proposed sign and the property described in the application.  The City Manager shall grant or deny the sign permit within 30 days from the date the completed application is submitted. 
If after review and investigation as required herein, it is determined that the application meets the requirements contained in this ordinance, the permit shall be issued. 
If after review and investigation as required herein, it is determined that the application fails to meet the requirements contained in this ordinance, the permit shall be denied and the City Manager shall provide the applicant with written notice of the denial and reasons for the denial.  The written notice of denial shall be obtained in person from the Department of Planning and Development of the City of Sugar Hill after 30 days. If, after 60 days, the applicant has not picked up the written notice of denial it shall be sent by certified mail to the address of the applicant as designated on the application. 
Any person denied a sign permit under the provisions of this section may file a written appeal of the denial to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Article 15 of this Ordinance. 
Section 1303. Expiration Date.  
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance, provided, however, that a six-month extension of the permit shall be granted if an additional permit extension fee has been paid prior to the expiration date of the initial permit. 
13.2 
Section 1304. Sign Permit Fees. 
No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the City Manager or his designee and fees have been paid as established by the City Council from time to time. Section 1305. Non-conforming Signs. 
1. 	
Any sign which does not conform to the requirements of this Sign Ordinance shall either be removed or shall be subject to Article 8 of this Ordinance. 

2. 	
No sign, whether conforming or non-conforming, shall be modified except in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 


Section 1306. Signs and Sign Devices Prohibited. 
For aesthetic and safety reasons, the following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning districts of the City of Sugar Hill. 
1. 	
Portable signs. 

2. 	
Signs on public right-of-way. 

3. 	
Signs which contain or are in imitation of an official traffic sign or signal or contain the words "stop", "go", "slow", "caution", "danger", "warning", or similar words, except for construction signs and barricades and except when the words are incorporated in the permanent name of a business. 

4. 	
Signs which change copy at intervals more frequently than once every 20 seconds.  Transition time between automatic copy changes shall take no more than one (1) second.  Copy shall remain static except during transition between copy changes. 

5. 	
Signs attached to any street signs or markers, traffic control signs or devices, or attached to or painted on any utility pole or structure, tree, rock, shrub, plant or other natural object or feature. 

6. 	
Any sign placed or erected on a property without the permission of the owner. 

7. 	
Signs which physically rotate or move at intervals more frequently than once every 20 seconds. 

8. 	
Signs mounted above the roof line or on any part of the roof. 

9. 	
Signs that emit sound. 

10. 
Multi-Message signs within 100 feet of a single family detached residential use. 


The City of Sugar Hill shall be empowered to remove or cause to be removed at the owner’s expense all prohibited signs. 
13.3 
of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia 

Section 1307. Special Permit for Temporary Signs or Devices. 
A.  	Temporary signs shall only be permitted by issue of a temporary sign permit for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days.  No such permit shall be issued for the same address within two months of the termination date of the last permit.  The aggregate total sign face area for all temporary signs shall not exceed the maximum sign face area allowed in accordance with Sections 1311 of this Ordinance. 
B. The	 following temporary devices shall be permitted only by issue of a special permit allowing use of this type of device for a period not exceeding 14 consecutive days.  No such special permit shall be issued for the same address within four months of the termination date of the last permit.  A fee as established from time to time by the City Council shall be charged for each such special permit. 
1. 	
Air or gas filled devices. 

2. 	
Balloons or streamers. 

3. 	
Search lights and similar devices. 


The permit may contain such restrictions as to size, height, and location as the City Manager deems appropriate to keep said temporary devices in compliance with the general restrictions and goals of this Ordinance. 
Section 1308. Signs Exempt from Specified Provisions of this Ordinance. 
In all zoning classifications, the following signs may be erected without the requirement of a permit, subject to Section 1309 Maintenance and Appearance: 
1. 	
Any sign not prohibited by section 1306, provided that the sign(s) shall not exceed thirty six (36) inches in height, six (6) square feet area per sign face and 12 square feet aggregate total sign face area per lot and provided the sign has been erected with the permission of the property owner.  No such sign shall be less than two (2) square feet in SFA. 

2. 	
During any development project or building project, multiple signs may be placed at each entrance to the project site as shown on the approved plans.  No such sign(s) shall exceed the sign face area limits allowed in accordance with section 1311 of this Ordinance.  All such signs shall be removed from the premises once the permits are completed, expired or revoked. 


Section 1309. Maintenance and Appearance of Signs. 
1. 	All signs shall be maintained in good condition, so as to present a neat and orderly appearance.  Peeling, flaking, chipped or fading paint shall be eliminated and surfaces refinished.  The City Manager may cause to be removed after due notice any sign 
13.4 
which shows gross neglect, becomes dilapidated, or is subject to removal under any other provision of this Article or any other provision of this Ordinance.  
2. 	
The City Manager shall give the owner ten (10) days to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign or signs.  This notice shall be in writing.  This decision shall be subject to appeal to the City Council in accordance with Article 15 of the Zoning Ordinance. If the Owner refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign following a final decision on any appeal, the City Manager shall have the sign removed at the expense of the Owner. 

3. 	
Any sign located in the public right-of-way in violation of this Ordinance may be removed immediately. 


Section 1310. Illumination of Signs. 
Only permanent signs shall be allowed to be illuminated provided they meet the following conditions: 
1. 	
Sign lights must be focused, directed and arranged so as to avoid the creation of a traffic or safety hazard. Sign lights must also be focused, directed and arranged so as to avoid creating a nuisance for the occupants of adjacent property. 

2. 	
All lighting must be installed in accordance with all applicable building and electrical codes adopted and enforced by the City. 

3. 	
No sign shall give off light, which glares, blinds, or has any other adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties.  Illuminated signs shall be prohibited within 100 feet of a single family detached residential use. 

4. 	
No sign shall operate at brightness levels of more than 0.20 foot candles above ambient light levels as measured at a distance of 125 feet perpendicular to the sign face. 

5. 	
No sign that is within the line of sight of a residentially occupied property shall operate at brightness levels of more than 0.10 foot candles above ambient light levels as measured from any portion of such residential property. 


Section 1311. Signs Permitted and Regulated in Zoning Districts. 
Any sign not specifically permitted in a zoning district as provided under this Section, shall be prohibited in that district, unless otherwise specifically provided for under this Article.  
A. 	The following types of signs shall be permitted and regulated within the AF, RS-200, RS­175, RS-150, RS-100, RM and MH zoning districts: 
1. 	A maximum of two (2) ground sign structures may be placed at the entrance to any neighborhood, one on either side of the street located on an individual lot.  Such neighborhood entrance signs shall be constructed primarily of brick or stone masonry. 
13.5 
of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia 

Total aggregate SFA shall not exceed 24 square feet in size per entrance intersection. No such sign shall be more than eight (8) feet in height.  Each ground sign shall be mounted to a sign structure that extends from the bottom edge of the sign flush to the ground and is at least as wide as the largest horizontal dimension of the sign. If a lawfully permitted building exists on the property then the sign structure shall be constructed of the same or similar primary building materials and finishes.  Submit plans for approval according to the specifications in Section 1302 of this Article. 
2. 	Lots with frontage along Cumming Hwy (GA State Route 20), Peachtree Industrial Boulevard or Buford Highway (GA State Route 13) shall be allowed one (1) ground sign structure within each lot frontage.  Such a sign shall be constructed of a durable and rigid sign face supported by minimum three and one half (3 ½) inch by three and one half (3 ½) inch wood posts pressure treated, painted white, black, dark green or dark brown in color.  Such signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, 16 square feet area per sign face and 32 square feet aggregate total SFA per lot. No such sign face shall be less than twelve (12) square feet SFA.  
B. 	The following signs shall be permitted and regulated in the O-I, HSB, and BG zoning districts: 
1. 	Ground signs. 
a. 	
Each lot shall be limited to one (1) sign structure within each lot frontage unless otherwise noted.  Except through lots, on which, one (1) sign structure may be located within the rear yard. Ground signs shall be setback from the right-of-way at least five (5) feet and from the edge of all roads and sidewalks a distance greater than or equal to its height.  Common developments with gross floor area in excess of 50,000 square feet and more than 800’ of continuous road frontage shall be allowed a maximum of two (2) ground sign structures within said frontage separated by a distance of at least 500’. 

b. 	
Each ground sign shall be mounted to a sign structure that extends from the bottom edge of the sign flush to the ground and is at least as wide as the largest horizontal dimension of the sign.  If a lawfully permitted building exists on the property then the sign structure shall be constructed of the same or similar primary building materials and finishes. 

c. 	
Each ground sign shall be subject to the following height and size restrictions based on the lawfully permitted gross floor area (GFA) of the building(s) on each lot: 


13.6 
Gross Floor Area (s.f.)  Maximum Height (ft.)  Maximum SFA per sign structure. (s.f.)  Maximum SFA per lot. (s.f.)  
0 -10,000  12  80  120  
10,001 -50,000  12  100  150  
50,001 -100,000  20  160  300  
100,001 -200,000  20  200  400  
200,001 or more.  20 (1)  300  600  

(1) For large common developments with a gross floor area in excess of 200,000 square feet: maximum height of sign can be 30 feet provided it is setback at a distance equal to its height from the edge of the closest street. 
2. 	Wall signs. 
a.  No wall sign shall project more than twelve (12) inches from the building or structure.  
b.  No sign(s) shall cover more than 25% of any individual window pane.  
c.  More than one wall sign may be allowed on each facade up to the Maximum SFA per Facade.  
d.  The maximum SFA per building façade shall be a percentage of the façade area as shown:  

Facade  Max. SFA Per Facade  
Front  5% of façade area.  
Side  3% of façade area.  
Rear  1% of façade area.  

For the purposes of this section, to calculate façade area, multiply the horizontal length of the façade as measured from the exterior face of exterior wall(s) or from the centerline of common wall(s) separating buildings by the vertical height of the occupied story. 
3. 	Multi-message signs may be permitted as ground signs subject to the following additional requirements: 
a. 	
Multi-message signs are prohibited within 100 feet of a single family residential use. 

b. 	
No more than one multi-message sign shall be permitted on a single lot. 

c. 	
Copy shall not change at intervals more frequently than once every 20 seconds.  Transition time between automatic copy changes shall take no more than one (1) second.  Copy shall remain static except during transition between copy changes. 

d. 	
Multi-message signs are subject to the illumination standards found in Section 1310 of this Ordinance.  


13.7 
4. 	Incidental Sign. A sign which is wholly independent of a building consisting of a durable and rigid sign face supported by minimum three and one half (3 ½) inch by three and one half (3 ½) inch wood posts pressure treated, painted white, black, dark green or dark brown in color may be permitted in addition to the above ground signs.  Such signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, 16 square feet area per sign face and 32 square feet aggregate total SFA per lot. No such sign face shall be less than twelve 
(12) 
square feet SFA. 

C. 	
The following signs shall be permitted and regulated in the LM, HM-1 and HM-2 zoning districts: 


1. Ground signs. 
a. 	
Each lot shall be limited to one (1) sign structure within each lot frontage unless otherwise noted.  Except through lots, on which, one (1) sign structure may be located within the rear yard. Ground signs shall be setback from the right-of-way at least five (5) feet and from the edge of all roads and sidewalks a distance greater than or equal to its height.  Common developments with gross floor area in excess of 50,000 square feet and more than 800’ of continuous road frontage shall be allowed a maximum of two (2) ground sign structures within said frontage separated by a distance of at least 500’. 

b. 	
Each ground sign shall be mounted to a sign structure that extends from the bottom edge of the sign flush to the ground and is at least as wide as the largest horizontal dimension of the sign.  If a lawfully permitted building exists on the property then the sign structure shall be constructed of the same or similar primary building materials and finishes. 

c. 	
Each ground sign shall be subject to the following height and size restrictions based on the lawfully permitted gross floor area (GFA) of the building(s) on each lot: 


Gross Floor Area (s.f.)  Maximum Height (ft.)  Maximum SFA per sign structure. (s.f.)  Maximum SFA per lot. (s.f.)  
0 -10,000  12  80  120  
10,001 -50,000  12  100  150  
50,001 -100,000  20  160  300  
100,001 -200,000  20  200  400  
200,001 or more.  20 (1)  300  600  

(1) For large common developments with a gross floor area in excess of 200,000 square feet: maximum height of sign can be 30 feet provided it is setback at a distance equal to its height from the edge of the closest street. 
13.8 
2. Wall signs. 
a. 	
No wall sign shall project more than twelve (12) inches from the building or structure. 

b. 	
No sign(s) shall cover more than 25% of any individual window pane. 

c. 	
More than one wall sign may be allowed on each facade up to the Max. SFA per Facade and Total SFA per Tenant Space. 

d. 	
The maximum SFA per building façade shall be a percentage of the façade area as shown: 


Facade  Max. SFA Per Facade  
Front  5% of façade area.  
Side  3% of façade area.  
Rear  1% of façade area.  

For the purposes of this section, to calculate façade area, multiply the horizontal length of the façade as measured from the exterior face of exterior wall(s) or from the centerline of common wall(s) separating buildings by the vertical height of the story. 
3. 	Multi-message signs may be permitted as ground signs or wall signs subject to the following additional requirements:  
a. 	
Multi-message signs are prohibited within 100 feet of a single family residential use. 

b. 	
No more than one multi-message sign shall be permitted on a single lot. 

c. 	
Copy shall not change at intervals more frequently than once every 20 seconds.  Transition time between automatic copy changes shall take no more than one (1) second.  Copy shall remain static except during transition between copy changes. 

d. 	
Multi-message signs are subject to the illumination standards found in Section 1310 of this Ordinance.  


4. 	Incidental Sign. A sign which is wholly independent of a building consisting of a durable and rigid sign face supported by minimum three and one half (3 ½) inch by three and one half (3 ½) inch wood posts pressure treated, painted white, black, dark green or dark brown in color may be permitted in addition to the above ground signs.  Such signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, 16 square feet area per sign face and 32 square feet aggregate total SFA per lot. No such sign face shall be less than twelve 
(12) square feet SFA. 
5. 	Billboards: 
13.9 13.10 
a.  The dimensions of the sign shall not exceed 400 square feet in size (total aggregate sign face area) and 30 feet in height.  Double sided signs are allowed but the total of both sides shall not exceed the maximum square footage. The billboard shall be supported by a single pole painted brown, dark green or black in order to blend into its surroundings. Between the bottom edge of the sign and the ground beneath it there shall be a clearance of at least 15 feet.  
b.  No billboard shall be located within 1500 feet of another billboard or within  
500 feet of the property line of any property zoned AF, RS-200, RS-175, or RS­100.  
c.  In order to construct a billboard under the standards of this provision, the applicant is required to have a property interest in the site large enough for a Fall Zone. A Fall Zone is defined as an area large enough and set back far enough from any buildings, structures, or property lines equal to 133 percent of the height of the entire structure in every direction.  Within the Fall Zone, no buildings or other structures may be constructed.  
d.  Trees may not be removed or trimmed for the purpose of construction, maintenance or improvement to the visibility of a billboard.  
e.  Each billboard site shall have a designated driveway access point which is shown on the site plan presented with the application.  The applicant shall have a property interest specifically providing for ingress and egress to the site.  The ingress and egress driveway shall be paved and two additional paved parking spaces shall be provided for inspection, maintenance and supervision of the billboard.  
f.  Flashing, blinking, animated, running and neon lights are prohibited.  
g.  Any structure extending beyond the face of any billboard, excluding the aprons is specifically prohibited.  
h.  Billboards shall not change at intervals more frequently than once every 20 seconds.  Transition time between automatic copy changes shall take no more than one (1) second. Billboards shall remain static except during transition between copy changes.  
i.  No more than one billboard shall be allowed per lot not to exceed maximum allowable SFA as shown below.  Billboards shall not be permitted on any site also containing a ground sign.  
j.  Each billboard shall be subject to the following height, setback and size requirements:  

Type of Sign  Maximum Height (ft.)  Setback from Right-of-Way (ft.)  Maximum Sign Face Area (SFA) per lot (s.f.)  
Billboard  30  40  400  

Section 1312. Administration and Enforcement.  
The provisions of this Article shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager.  Any requests for a variance altering the conditions of this Sign Ordinance shall be filed with the City Council in accordance with Article 15 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
In interpreting the provisions of this Article, nothing shall be construed to regulate the content of the message displayed on any sign.  All signs may display a noncommercial message in addition to, or in lieu of, any other message. It is the intent of this Article to regulate the size, height, and location of signs to accomplish the purposes set forth in Section 1300. 
13.11 
The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 13.5 Standards for of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia Telecommunications Antennae
 And Towers 
ARTICLE 13.5. 
STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAE AND TOWERS 
SECTION 1351. PURPOSES. This ordinance is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the City of Sugar Hill, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunications facilities within the City of Sugar Hill so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote the City of Sugar Hill as a proactive city in the availability of wireless telecommunications service. To that end, this ordinance shall: 
A. Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications 
facilities to serve the residents and businesses of the City of Sugar Hill; 

B. 	Protect the City of Sugar Hill’s built and natural environment by promoting 
compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities; 

C. Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful 
design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 

D. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antennae failure 
through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures 
and antennae; 

E. 	Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to 
minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of 
towers throughout the City; 

F. 	Maximize and encourage use of alternative telecommunication tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; and 
G. Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications facilities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
SECTION 1352. DEFINITIONS.  As used in this ordinance, terms shall have the meanings indicated in Article 3 of the City of Sugar Hill Zoning Ordinance. 
SECTION 1353. EXCLUSIONS. The following shall be exempt from this ordinance: 
13.5.1 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 13.5 Standards for of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia Telecommunications Antennae And Towers 
A. Any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height and owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
B. 	Any device for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multi­channel multi-point distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service; or 
C. Any telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the City of Sugar Hill provided a license or lease authorizing telecommunications facility has been approved by the governing body. 
D. Any monopole tower and antenna up to seventy (70) feet in total height except as set forth in Section 1354.D. of this Ordinance. 
E. 	Any antenna located on any existing structure. (i.e. existing towers, watertanks, buildings, utility poles, street lights, etc. 
F. 	Any antenna located on a new or existing utility pole to include poles used for lighting for City owned recreation facilities (i.e. ball fields, tennis courts, etc.) or on new structures properly permitted (i.e. bell towers, steeples, clock towers, street lights, etc.) 
G. Any monopole tower and antenna one hundred (100) feet or less located in an electrical substation. 
H. Any telecommunications facilities operative on the effective date of this 
ordinance. 

SECTION 1354. PLACEMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES BY ZONING DISTRICT. 
A. In Light Industrial (HM-1) and Heavy Industrial (HM-2) zoning districts telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right. Telecommunications towers are permitted as a use by right up to a height of 120 feet following design review  and approval by the Director. Telecommunications towers greater than 120 feet in height shall require a Special Use Permit. An additional 20 feet may be allowed by right for towers, which provide proof of three (3) or more companies locating on the same tower. 
B. 	In General Business (BG) and Light Manufacturing (LM) zoning districts antennas shall be allowed as a use by right on existing structures. New towers and antennas greater than seventy (70) feet in height shall be allowed if permitted by a Special Use Permit approved by the City Council following design review by the Director. Monopole towers up to a height of seventy (70) feet shall be permitted. 
13.5.2 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 13.5 Standards for of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia Telecommunications Antennae And Towers 
C. In Highway Service Business (HSB) and Office-Institutional (OI) zoning districts, telecommunications facilities greater than fifty (50) feet shall be allowed if permitted by a Special Use Permit approved by the City Council following design review by the Director. Telecommunications towers fifty (50) feet or less are permitted. 
D. Except as set forth in this section or listed as an “exclusion” in Section 1353, A.,B,C,E,F,G of this Ordinance, telecommunication facilities shall not be permitted in Low Density Single Family Residential (RS-150, RS-175, RS-200, PUD), Medium Density Single Family Residential (RS-100), Residential Multi Family (RM), or Mobile Home Park (MH) zoning districts . Telecommunications facilities shall be allowed only if the applicant provides evidence that such placement is a technological necessity in order for the applicant to be in compliance with federal law; upon such evidence, such use shall be allowed if approved with a Special Use Permit by the City Council following design review by the Director. 
E. 	Telecommunications facilities outside the guidelines listed above may only be 
built upon approval of a Special Use Permit except for variances to the Zoning 
Ordinance setbacks for a specific zoning district which shall be presented to the 
Zoning Board of Appeals unless the request is part of a Special Use Permit 
application which is presented to the City Council. 

SECTION 1355. PREFERRED LOCATION SITES. 
A. 	Publicly used structures: Publicly used structures are preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunications facilities. Therefore, telecommunications facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly used structures than when placed on commercial or residential structures. Publicly used structures include facilities such as police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. 
B. 	Co-Location Sites: Any existing site on which a legal wireless telecommunications facility is currently located shall be a Preferred Location Site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site, provided, however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this ordinance and co-location sites shall not become an “antenna farm” or otherwise be deemed by the Director or the governing authority to be visually obtrusive. 
13.5.3 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 13.5 Standards for of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia Telecommunications Antennae And Towers 
C. 	Industrial and Commercial Structures: Wholly industrial and commercial 
structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, 
garages, or service stations shall be Preferred Locations particularly where 
existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roof line can and will 
be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunications system. 

D. 	Mixed Use Buildings in Planned Development Districts: Mixed use buildings 
(housing above commercial or other non-residential space) are also Preferred 
Location sites. 

SECTION 1356. REQUIREMENTS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. 
A. General Requirements for All Telecommunications Facilities: The requirements 
set forth in this Section shall govern the location and construction of all 
telecommunications facilities governed by this ordinance. 

1. 	
Building Codes and Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for such telecommunications facilities that are published by the FCC as amended from time to time. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every three years to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a structural engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the Director. 

2. 	
Regulatory Compliance: All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate communications towers and antennae. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this ordinance shall bring such communications towers and antennae into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 

3. 	
Security: All telecommunications facilities shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device.  This requirement may be waived by the Director if it is deemed that this would produce negative visual clutter or obstruct a view corridor. 

4. 	
Lighting: No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless part of a approved public lighting program or required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction in which case the 


13.5.4 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 13.5 Standards for of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia Telecommunications Antennae And Towers 
Director may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
5. 	
Advertising: No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. 

6. 	
Visual Impact: 

a. 	
Telecommunications facilities shall, subject to applicable standards of the FAA or other federal or state agencies, be maintained with a galvanized metal finish, painted a neutral color, or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.  Telecommunications facilities located in residentially zoned areas shall be painted in a neutral color or textured to match the existing environment to minimize visual obtrusiveness. If federal or state regulations require, telecommunication facilities shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or other required finish. 

b. 	
If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower and is generally visible to the public, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to , or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers, or other background. 

c. 	
Antennas mounted on architecturally significant structures or significant architectural details of the building shall be covered by appropriate casings, which are manufactured to match existing architectural features found on the building. 

d. 	
Where feasible, antennas can be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 

e. 	
Towers or roof mounted antennas shall not be placed in direct line with significant view corridors, as designated by the City of Sugar Hill or by any state or federal law or agency. For purposes of this ordinance a significant view corridor shall be defined as an area to be kept free of obstructions or structures which interfere with the view of any scenic area, or historic building or area. A view corridor shall be established by ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, by zoning restrictions adopted in accordance with the ordinances of the City of Sugar Hill, or by any state or federal law or agency in accordance with provisions of federal laws or duly adopted regulations. 




13.5.5 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 13.5 Standards for of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia Telecommunications Antennae And Towers 
f. 	Any equipment shelter or cabinet must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters shall be screened from public view and may use landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding structures. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
7. 	Landscaping: 
a. 	
Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 

b. 	
Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 

c. 	
The Director may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes or for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the Director. 


8. 	
Maintenance Impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion.  Where the site abuts or has access to a collector and local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector street. Access drives and maintenance vehicle parking shall be paved unless the requirement is waived by the Director. 

9. 	
Principal, Accessory and Joint Uses: 

a. 	
Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower. 

b. 	
Towers may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same build able area. Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of volatile, 




13.5.6 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 13.5 Standards for of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia Telecommunications Antennae And Towers 
flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals. 
10. Lot Size and Setbacks: 
a. 	The site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide an adequate setback from the base of the tower to any property line abutting a residential district, public property, or public street. Such setback shall be sufficient to: 
(1) 
Provide for an adequate vegetative, topographic or other buffer as required in Section 1356 (A)(7); 

(2) 
Preserve the privacy of surrounding residential property; and 

(3) 
Protect adjoining property from the potential impact of tower failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer’s analysis required in Section 1357 (B)(1)(d.)(iv.). 


11. The proposed project must not disrupt the overall community character. 	For purposes of this ordinance, the term overall community character shall be determined by applying the criteria set forth in Section 1707 of Article 17 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia. 
B. 	Additional Requirements for Towers: 
1. 	
Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district as much as possible.  Wireless communication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical (i.e. camouflaging through integration with structures or appearance such as artificial trees, etc.). 

2. 	
Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 

3. 	
At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment.  

(i.e. artificial tree appearance, steeples, decorative fencing, etc.) 

4. 	
Towers greater than 70 feet in height shall not be located any closer than 1500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually 


13.5.7 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 13.5 Standards for of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia Telecommunications Antennae And Towers 
preferable as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals through a variance request. 
5. 	
When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, it must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance equal to one hundred and thirty-three percent (133%) its total height. 

6. 	
Towers shall not be sited where they will create visual clutter or negatively affect specific view corridors as designated by the City of Sugar Hill or any state or federal law or agency. 

7. 	
Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided requirement number 4 above is met along with all setback, design and landscape requirements as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 


SECTION 1357. APPLICATION PROCEDURES. 
A. Special Use Permits: 
1. 	
A request for a Special Use Permit shall be initiated by application to the Director and handled in accordance with the Special Use Permit provision of Article 17 of the City of Sugar Hill Zoning Ordinance. The applicant may obtain a Special Use Permit pursuant to the City of Sugar Hill Zoning Ordinance provided that all of the requirements of Section 1356 have been satisfied and further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 

2. 	
In granting a special use permit, the City Council may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 


B. 	General Application Requirements for All Building and Special Use Permits. Application for a building permit or special use permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the Director. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any Building Permit, Special Use Permit or other permit or variance included in this ordinance: 
1. 	Basic Information: 
13.5.8 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 13.5 Standards for of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia Telecommunications Antennae And Towers 
a. 	
Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas; and adjacent land uses. 

b. 	
Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in Section 1356 (7)(A). 

c. 	
An Impact Statement fully describing the effects that the proposed telecommunications facility will have on the environment and surrounding area including the impacts on adjacent residential structures and districts, impacts on structures and sites of historic significance and impacts on streetscapes and significant view corridors. The Impact Statement shall include a description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 


d. 	Report from a professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting the following: 
i. 	Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
ii. 	Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
iii. 	Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure (i.e. Engineers statement that structure is built to meet or exceed Standard Building Code); and 
iv. 
Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications tower(s) over seventy (70) feet and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 

v. 	
Setbacks for telecommunication tower(s) seventy (70) feet and less shall not be closer to a residential structure than 133% of the height of the tower. 


e. 	
A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity. 

f. 	
The identity of a community liaison officer to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 


13.5.9 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 13.5 Standards for of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia Telecommunications Antennae
 And Towers 
g. 	The existing towers and tall structures located within the geographic service area should be identified on a map along with written justification at to the need for a new tower in place of an existing structure. 
2. 	
A map indicating all existing tower and antennae sites located within the City and within two (2) miles of the City boundaries. 

3. 	
The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the Director, City Council, or Zoning Board of Appeals to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 


C. Grant or Denial of Permit: 
1. 	
The Director shall review the completed application for a Building Permit or Special Use Permit and shall issue a grant or denial of a Building Permit or forward the application for consideration for a Special Use Permit pursuant to Article 17 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill within a reasonable time. 

2. 	
Any decision to deny a building permit or Special Use Permit pursuant to Article 17 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill shall be supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 


SECTION 1358. CO-LOCATION. Application and owner shall allow other future wireless communications companies including public and quasi-public agencies using similar technology to collocate antenna equipment and facilities on the tower unless specific technical constraints prohibit said co-location.  Applicant may negotiate any type of agreement for co-location but shall not charge fees, which are so unreasonable at to prohibit co-location. 
SECTION 1359. APPEALS. Appeals from any decision of the Director shall be to the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Article 15 of the Zoning Ordinance of City of Sugar Hill.  Any decision on a request to build a tower or for a Special Use Permit for a tower shall be in writing, and any denial of any such request or Special Use Permit shall be supported by substantial evidence and a written record. 
SECTION 1360. NUISANCES. Telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times within the limits of the City of Sugar Hill Noise Ordinance, shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. 
13.5.10 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 13.5 Standards for of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia Telecommunications Antennae
 And Towers SECTION 1361. REMOVAL OF ANTENNAE AND TOWERS. All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the Director or his designee any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the minimum Standard Building Code or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have thirty (30) days to bring such facility into compliance.  In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within thirty 
(30) days, the City may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice, the City may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal or seek costs incurred through court action. Delay by the City in taking action shall not in any way waive the City’s right to take action. The City may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the minimum Standard Building Code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The City may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owners’ or operator’s intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
SECTION 1362. ABANDONED TOWERS. 
A. Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it.  The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within sixty (60) days of receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the City may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal or seek costs incurred through court action. The City may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by the City in taking action shall not in any way waive the City’s right to take action. The City may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owners’ or operator’s intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
B. 	If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this ordinance as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
13.5.11 

The 2000 Zoning Ordinance Article 13.5 Standards for of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia Telecommunications Antennae And Towers 
SECTION 1363. PRE-EXISTING TOWERS/NON-CONFORMING USE. 
A. All telecommunications facilities operative on the effective date of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a non-conforming use and shall be treated as a non-conforming use in accordance with Article 8 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill.  Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing telecommunications facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance.  The Director may approve the addition of twenty (20) feet to any existing tower whereby it can be shown that this would provide for co-location and eliminate the need for a new tower and it is determined that adequate site area exists for the location of any equipment buildings. Approval of an additional twenty (20) feet applies to all zoning districts, however, additions greater than twenty (20) feet shall require a Special Use Permit. 
B. 	A telecommunications facility that has received City approval in the form of either a building permit or special use exception, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
C. Placement of an antenna on a non-conforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the non-conforming structure. 
SECTION 1364. COORDINATION WITH FEDERAL LAW. Whenever the Governing Authority finds that the application of this ordinance would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a Special Use Permit waiving any or all of the provisions of this ordinance may be granted.  
SECTION 1365. SEVERABILITY. 
A. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
13.5.12 

ARTICLE 14. 
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 
Section 1400. Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed, on behalf of the City Council of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, to administer and enforce this Ordinance.  Such authority shall include the right to order, in writing, the remedy of any condition found in violation of this Ordinance, and the right to bring legal action in all courts of competent jurisdiction to ensure compliance with its provisions, including injunction, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding. 
The powers and duties of the City Manager include: 
1. 	
Examining and approving applications pertaining to the use of land, buildings, or structures when the applications conform with provisions of this Ordinance. 

2. 	
Authorizing issuance by the city of all building permits and certificates of occupancy, and keeping permanent records thereof. 

3. 	
Conducting such inspections of buildings, structures, and uses of land as are necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 

4. 	
Maintaining permanent and current records of the Zoning Ordinance including maps and amendments. 

5. 	
If the City Manager shall find that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.  He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 

6. 	
The City Manager may revoke a permit or approval issued under this Ordinance where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based or upon determination that the conditions of the permit or this Ordinance were violated. 

7. 	
The City Manager shall have the power to grant variances (except for density and use variances) from the development standards of this Ordinance where, in his opinion, the intent of the Ordinance can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a variance.  The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variances from the following requirements: 


14.1 
Updated  7-10-17 kbl 
a.  Front yard or side yard adjacent to public street – variance not to exceed ten (10) feet.  
b.  Side yard – variance not to exceed five (5) feet.  
c.  Rear yard – variance not to exceed ten (10) feet.  
d.  Height – variance not to exceed fifteen (15) feet, provided that no increase in the height for a sign may be granted nor may the variance result in an increase in the number of stories than would otherwise be allowed under the applicable zoning district.  
e.  Buffers – the dimensions or screening treatment of a buffer as required under Article 12 may be reduced as specified in said section, provided, however, that no buffer required as a condition of zoning shall be modified.  
f.  Parking under Article 11 and demarcation of parking spaces – parking spaces may be left unmarked, provided all of the following conditions are present:  
1)  The parking lot must be designated to serve only a multi-family residential project which is designed and intended for rental occupancy.  
2)  The parking lots must be designed in relation to internal circulation system such that the areas reserved for parking are easily identified and clearly distinct from the interior driveways because of their location, design, orientation, or configuration, such as in parking areas with a single interior driveway having parking spaces located perpendicular to and along the sides of the access driveway, allowing the curbing to delineate the exterior dimension of the single parking bay.  
3)  Approval for the elimination of the striping has been obtained by the applicant in writing from the Fire Services Division of the Gwinnett County Fire Department.  
g.  Accessory structures allowed within the front yard – accessory structures may be allowed within the front yard of residential zoning districts provided all the following conditions are met:  
1)  The residentially-zoned property contains at least three acres.  
2)  The accessory structures are limited to a swimming pool, garage/carport, barn, storage building, or other similar structures.  
3)  The accessory structure is set back a minimum of 100 feet from the right­of-way and located no closer than 40 feet to any side property line.  (If the accessory use is for animal quarters, this must be a minimum of 100 feet from any property line.)  
Updated  7-10-17 kbl 


14.2 
4) 	The accessory structure shall be screened with walls, fences, or suitable landscaping so that it is not visible from the street. 
h. 	A single accessory structure may be allowed within the side yard of a corner lot or other lots with multiple frontages provided all the following conditions are met: 
1) 	The accessory structure is limited to a garage, carport, gazebo or storage building and meets all other requirements for an accessory structure. 
2) 	The accessory structure meets all the minimum setback requirements for the underlying zoning district. 
3) 	The accessory structure shall be screened with walls, fences, or suitable landscaping so that it is not visible from the street. 
i. 	Any other use or requirement which is specifically listed as an administrative variance within any section of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Section 1401. Building Permit Required. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this ordinance or City Code, no building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a Building Permit issued by the City Manager.  No Building Permit shall be issued except in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the current building code. 
All applications for Land Disturbance Permits, and Building Permits for uses other than one-family and duplex dwellings shall be accompanied by plans, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the sizes and the locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use and the location on the lot of the building or structure to be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance.  These applications and plans shall conform to the requirements of the City of Sugar Hill Development Regulations. 
Section 1402. Certificate of Occupancy Required. 
A Certificate of Occupancy issued by the City is required prior to the use or occupancy of: 
1. 	
Any lot or change in the use thereof. 

2. 	
A building hereafter erected or a change in the use of an existing building. 

3. 	
A change in any lawful non-conforming use.  The Certificate of Occupancy shall state specifically wherein the non-conforming use fails to meet provisions of this Ordinance. 


No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or building or structure complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance. 
14.3 
Updated  7-10-17 kbl 
A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file at the City and a copy shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
Section 1403. Fees. 
The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of occupancy, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this Ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the Planning and Development Department and may be altered and amended by the City Council, from time to time, to cover the costs of administration of this Ordinance. 
Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
Section 1404. Construction Progress 
If no substantial construction progress has been made within six (6) months of the date of issuance of the building permit, the permit becomes invalid.  The permit may be re-issued only upon completion of the application procedure outlined in Sections 1402 and 1403 of this Ordinance. 
14.4 
Updated  7-10-17 kbl 
Section 1405. Penalties for violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted Ordinance of City of Sugar Hill, and shall be punished either by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars nor more than five hundred dollars, or by confinement in the County jail for a total term not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. 
Section 1406. Alternative Sentences or Penalties. 
The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this Ordinance on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence.  As a condition of said suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
Section 1407. Remedies. 
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, moved, added to, demolished, structurally altered, maintained, or used in violation of this Ordinance, any appropriate authority, or any property owner whose property would be damaged by such violation may file a written complaint with the City Manager stating fully the causes and basis for the complaints.  The City Manager shall properly record such complaint, shall immediately investigate, and shall take action thereon as provided by this Ordinance.  Nothing herein shall, however, prevent any person from instituting injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such building, structure, or land. 
14.5 
Updated  7-10-17 kbl 
ARTICLE 15. 
VARIANCES AND APPEALS 
Section 1501. Power to Hear Appeals and Grant Variances 
The Council shall have the following powers: 
1. 	
To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the City Manager in the enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance or the Construction/Building and Technical Codes adopted by the City Council. 

2. 	
To hear and decide requests for Special Exceptions of the Zoning Ordinance. 

3. 	
To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variances from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the Zoning Ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Council that: 

a. 	
There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular property in question because of its size, shape or topography, or 

b. 	
The application of the Ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship, or 

c. 	
Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 

d. 	
Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the property owner, and 

e. 	
Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor impair the purposes or intent of this Ordinance. 




No variance may be granted for a condition of zoning required by the City Council in approving a rezoning application; a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this Ordinance; or to permit a use which would result in a greater intensity of development on a property than would otherwise be allowed if no variance were involved. 
4. 	In exercising the above powers, the Council may, in conformity with the provision of this Ordinance, reverse decisions or determinations from which the appeal is taken and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the City Manager from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or revoke or direct the issuance or revocation of a Building or other permit. 
15.1 

Section 1502. Appeals 
Appeals to the Council may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any official of the City affected by any decision of the City Manager. Such appeal shall be taken within fifteen days after the decision appealed from by filing with the City Manager and with the City Clerk a Notice of Appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The City Manager shall forthwith transmit to the City Council all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the City Manager certifies to the City Council that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by Order of the Councilor by a restraining order granted by a court of record on application and notice to the City Manager for good cause shown. 
Section 1503. Required Public Hearings 
Before the Council acts upon an application for a Variance or a Special Exception, it shall hold a public hearing thereon. The notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least 15 days prior to the hearing in the official organ of the City. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
In addition, the City shall erect in a conspicuous place on the property involved a sign which shall contain information as to the Variance or Special Exception applied for and the time and place of hearing. Failure to erect and maintain the sign as specified above shall not invalidate the subsequent determination provided the required notice has been published. 
Section 1504. Reapplication 
If an application for a Special Exception or Variance is denied by the Council, a reapplication for such Special Exception or Variance may not be made earlier than 12 months from the date of the original application, except as provided in Section 1701. 
Section 1505. Appeals from Decisions 
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the Council under the powers granted in this Article may present an Appeal to the Superior Court. Such an Appeal to the Superior Court shall be By Writ of Certiorari as specified in the official Code of Georgia except, however, that the Appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision of the Council.  Upon failure to file the appeal within thirty (30) days, the decision of the City Council shall be final. 
15.2 

ARTICLE 16. 
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
Section 1600. Conflict with Other Laws. 
Whenever the regulations of this Ordinance require a greater lot width or depth or size of yards, or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or covenants, the requirements of this Ordinance shall govern.  Whenever the provisions of any other statute or covenants require more restrictive standards than are required by this Ordinance, the provisions of such statute or covenants shall govern. 
Section 1601. Severability. 
In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordanance shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the Ordinance if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.  The provisions of this Ordinance are declared severable to the maximum extent allowed by law. 
Section 1602. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. 
All Ordinances and parts of Ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed. 
Section 1603. No Prejudice to Pending Applications. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, this Ordinance shall not in any way prejudice or affect any application for rezoning already heard by the Planning Commission of the City of Sugar Hill at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. 
Section 1604. No Legality to Nonconforming Uses. 
Nothing herein shall be considered to approve or give legality to any nonconforming use which has been discontinued more than six (6) months within the City of Sugar Hill. 
Section 1605. Zoning Map of the City of Sugar Hill. 
The Zoning Map of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia dated January 11, 2010 is adopted as the Official Zoning Map of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.  Any property that is located within the municipal boundaries of the City of Sugar Hill that is not shown on the zoning map attached hereto or that is not shown within a specific zoning classification on the zoning map attached hereto shall be classified as Agricultural and Forest (AF). All conditions of zoning that were placed on any land in the City of Sugar Hill at the time of any prior zoning of that property shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.   
16.1 

A copy of the Zoning Map dated January 17, 2006 and adopted by this ordinance as the Official Zoning Map of the City of Sugar Hill is attached hereto and is incorporated herein by reference.  Any annexations or zonings approved after January 17, 2006 are not shown on this map. 
Section 1606. Effective Date. 
This Ordinance shall take effect; and shall be in force from and after the date of its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
16.2 

ARTICLE 17. 
AMENDMENTS 
Section 1700. Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendment Procedure.  
A. 	This Ordinance, including the City of Sugar Hill Zoning Maps, may be amended from time to time by the City Council of the City of Sugar Hill, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. 
B. 	If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within 40 days of its first meeting after it has received an amendment request complete in all respects, it shall be deemed to have given a recommendation of "no comment" on the proposed amendment.  However, the Planning Commission and the applicant for an amendment may jointly agree to an extension of the forty-day period. 
C. 	Before the Planning Commission or the City Council of the City of Sugar Hill enact an amendment, they shall each hold a public hearing thereon.  At least fifteen but not more than forty-five days prior to the date of each such hearing, the City Council shall cause to be published within the official organ of the City, a notice of the hearing.  The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
D. 	If a proposed amendment is for the rezoning of property and involves a change in the zoning classification of 10 or fewer parcels of land, then: 
1. 	
The notice, in addition to the requirements of Subsection C. above, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; 

2. 	
A sign containing the information outlined in Section D. 1. above, shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property not less than fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing; and 

3. 	
The City Council shall give notice of the proposed rezoning by regular mail to the property owner of record and to all abutting property owners of record as shown by Gwinnett County tax records. Such notice shall be mailed at least fifteen days prior to the Planning Commission public hearing and shall include a description of the application and the date, time and place of public hearings.  


Notice deposited in the mail with adequate postage thereon and addressed to the last known address of the above-named property owners as shown on Gwinnett County tax records shall be deemed to be adequate compliance with the requirements of this Section. 
17.1 

Section 1701. Initiation of Amendments.  
Applications for amendment of the text or maps of this Ordinance may be initiated by Resolution of the City Council, or by motion of the Planning Commission, or by petition of any property owner addressed to the City Council. In the case of a petition for the rezoning of property, such petition shall be submitted by the owner of record of said property, the owner's agent or by a contract purchaser with the owner's written consent. 
Any amendment request brought before the City Council by petition of any property owner, cannot be resubmitted by petition of a property owner, in less than six (6) months from the date of hearing by the City of Sugar Hill City Council, unless the petition was allowed to be withdrawn by The City of Sugar Hill Council at the public hearing. 
A. 	Initiation by motion of the City Council or by motion of the Planning Commission. 
Once a map amendment is initiated by the City Council or by motion of the Planning Commission, no application for a clearing, grubbing, grading, septic tank, building, development or other similar permit, for the affected property shall be accepted until final action is taken by the City Council on the proposed map amendment.  Provided, however, that if the City Council does not take final action on the proposed map amendment within six (6) months from the date of initiation, Permit applications shall again be accepted and reviewed pursuant to existing zoning. And, further provided that such permit applications shall be accepted during the map amendment process if the proposed use is authorized under the same conditions in both the existing and proposed Zoning District. 
B. 	Any applicant seeking a rezoning involving property being annexed into the City of Sugar Hill which contains less than five acres and the requested use of the annexed property is the same as the existing use of said property, a rezoning involving a request for RS100, RS150, RS175, or RS200 which will result in the development of less than three individual building lots, and a rezoning for a non residential zoning classification in which the property that is the subject of the application contains one acre or less and the proposed development on the property will include a non residential building of less than 10,000 square feet shall initiate the rezoning process by submitting a petition. 
Such petition shall be submitted by the owner of record of said property, the owner's agent or by a contract purchaser with the owner's written consent. Such petition shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1. 	
Petition Application (on form provided by the Department of Planning and Development).  The application includes, but not limited to, information on intended use, address of the subject property, Letter of intent, Standards Governing Exercise of the Zoning Power etc. 

2. 	
Survey of Property to be considered. 

3. 	
Legal Description in hard copy and digital format (Determined by the Director, Planning & Development). 

4. 	
Copies of site plan to scale. 

5. 	
Any other pertaining information, data, traffic studies, utility studies, drainage studies, elevation drawings, and graphics requested by the Director of Planning for an understanding and evaluation of the project which may not have impact on the surrounding areas. 

6. 	
Application for any rezoning other than those set forth above shall be initiated by the filing of a petition. 


17.2 

a. 	
Petition Application (on form provided by the Department of Planning & Development). 

b. 	
Survey of the property to be considered. 

c. 	
Legal Description and address of property to be considered. 

d. 	
Petitioners impact analysis and any additional information as required in Section 1703 below. 

e. 	
Letter of Intent from applicant. 

f. 	
State the intended use. 

g. 	
State the number of lots, residential units, density per acre, square footage if proposed for non-residential building, or square feet per acre of total buildings. 

h. 	
All applications for a rezoning or special use shall be accompanied by a plat prepared and stamped by a registered land surveyor, engineer, architect or landscape architect containing the following information, however, the Director of Planning and Development may waive any requirements(s) or alter any of the following requirements or require any additional information or data necessary for understanding or evaluation of the project. 


The site plan shall be clearly legible drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch on a sheet size not to exceed 24 inches X 36 inches. The Director of Planning and Development may approved other sheet sizes as deemed appropriate. 
i. 	Project name; 
ii. 	Project owner and address (both local and permanent address if different) and telephone number and fax numbers; 
iii. Date, scale and north arrow; 
iv. 
Vicinity map; 

v. 
Proposed use of the property to be developed; 


17.3 

vi. Required yard set backs appropriately dimensioned;  
vii. Total acreage; 
viii. Total number of lots and minimum lot sizes (if applicable); 
ix. 
Size, location, and names of adjoining existing streets or access drives and proposed right-of-ways and roadways; 

x. 
Topography with contour interval no greater than 10 feet; 


xi. Proposed method of sewerage disposal (express as a note); 
xii. Property lines and dimension (showing bearings and distances); 
xiii. All contiguous property under the ownership or control of the applicant, except those lands specifically to be excluded. Areas not planned for development at the time of the submittal shall be shown as “Future Developmetn”; 
xiv. Location of ingress and egress points; 
xv. Location of 100 –year floodplain, ponds and other water courses, 
xvi. Dumpster location; 
xvii. Existing and proposed landscaping; 
xviii. Building heights; 
xix. For multi-family and non-residential developments, the approximate location and arrangements of existing buildings, parking areas, and other improvements including stormwater detention areas and all required buffers; 
xx. Location of existing and proposed sidewalks; 
xxi. Existing zoning of the property and adjoining properties; 
xxii. Land lot and district; 
xxiii. Name of person or company preparing the plats; 
xxiv. Boundaries of the Chattahoochee River Corridor and Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Areas, if applicable; 
xxv. General Development data (in tabular form) for multi-family or non­residential site developments, such as number of residential units, gross square feet of each building, number of parking spaces, etc; 
17.4 

xxvi. General development data (in tabular form) for single family developments, such as minimum lot size, floor area of homes, and all relevant conditions of zoning; 
xxvii. Any other data requested by the Planning Director or Planning Commission or City Council necessary for an understanding and evaluation of the project, this additional information may include without limitation, traffic studies, utility studies and drainage studies; 
xxviii. Additional information is required when requesting a Planned Unit Development. 
Section 1702. Standards Governing Exercise of the Zoning Power.  
The City Council finds that the following standards are relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of property and shall govern the exercise of the zoning power: 
a. 	
Whether a proposed rezoning will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 

b. 	
Whether a proposed rezoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 

c. 	
Whether the property to be affected by a proposed rezoning has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 

d. 	
Whether the proposed rezoning will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 

e. 	
Whether the proposed rezoning is in conformity with the policy and intent of the Land Use Plan; and 

f. 	
Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed rezoning. 


Section 1703. Impact Analysis.  
If a proposed amendment is for the rezoning of property and involves a change in the zoning classification of 10 or fewer parcels of land, then: 
7. 	The initiating party, if a party other than the City Council or Planning Commission, shall be required to file, with its application for amendment, a written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed zoning with respect to each of the matters enumerated in Section 1702 above.  Such a zoning proposal and analysis shall be a public record. 
17.5 

b. 	
The City Manager shall, with respect to each such zoning proposal, investigate and make a recommendation with respect to each of the matters enumerated in Section 1702 above. The City Manager shall make a report of the investigation and recommendations to the Planning Commission and City Council, and this report shall be made part of the public record. 

c. 	
The Planning Commission shall, with respect to each such zoning proposal, investigate and make a recommendation with respect to each of the matters enumerated in Section 1702 above.  The Planning Commission shall make a written record of its investigation and recommendations, and this record shall be a public record. 


Section 1704. Action by City Council. 
Following its public hearing the City Council may: 
a. 	
Adopt the proposed amendment as presented; 

b. 	
Adopt the proposed amendment as revised or supplemented by conditions of approval established by the City Council, said revisions may include, if the proposed amendment is for the rezoning of property, rezoning to the proposed Zoning District with conditions or rezoning to any other less intense Zoning District with or without conditions; 

c. 	
Deny the proposed amendment in whole or in part; 

d. 	
Table the proposal; or 

e. 	
Approve the petition for amendment to be withdrawn with the consent of a majority of the City Council. 


Section 1705. Conditional Zoning.  
In adopting an amendment to the Zoning Map, or approving a Special Use Permit or a Variance, the City Council may impose special conditions which it deems necessary in order to make the requested action acceptable and consistent with the purposes of the district(s) involved and to further the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.  Such conditions may consist of:  setback requirements from any lot line; specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas or other land uses; driveway curb cut restrictions; restrictions as to what land uses or activities shall be permitted; maximum building heights or other dimensions; special drainage or erosion provisions; landscaping or planted area which may include the location, type and maintenance of plant materials; fences, walls, berms, or other buffering provisions or protective measures; preservation of existing trees or other vegetation; special measures to alleviate undesirable views, light, glare, noise, dust or odor; permitted hours of operation; architectural style; a requirement that the existing building(s) be retained; a requirement that developers must build according to the site plans as adopted; a limitation on exterior modifications of existing buildings; or any other requirement that the City Council may deem appropriate and necessary as a condition of rezoning or issuance of a variance or Special Use Permit. 
17.6 

Such conditions: 
1. 	
Shall only be valid if they are included in the motion approving the amendment for adoption; 

2. 	
Shall be in effect for the period of time specified in the amendment; 

3. 	
Shall be required of the property owner and all subsequent owners as a condition of their use of the property; and 

4. 
Shall be interpreted and continually enforced by the City Manager in the same manner as any other provision of this Ordinance. 


Section 1706. Special Use Permits.  
The Special Use Permit is designed to be used when: 

a. 	
A Special Use listed under the Zoning District is desired for development and a more intensive Zoning District which contains that use as a use by right would not be appropriate for the property, or, 

b. 	
A Special Use listed under the Zoning District is desired for development and no Zoning District contains that use as a use by right, or, 

c. 	
A unique use not addressed in any Zoning District is desired for development and is not likely to be duplicated within City of Sugar Hill, or, 

d. 	
The density of development may be affected by the height of a building, or, 

e. 	
The neighboring properties may be affected by the height of any structure, and, 

f. 	
The Special Use would be consistent with the needs of the neighborhood or the community as a whole, be compatible with the neighborhood and would not be in conflict with the overall objective of the Comprehensive Plan. 


Section 1707. Special Use Permit Procedure.  
In order to accommodate Special Uses, the Special Use Permit allows the City Council to approve a Special Use on a particular parcel without changing the general Zoning District.  Such approval shall be subject to the requirements set forth below and any additional conditions deemed necessary to ensure the compatibility of the Special Use with the surrounding properties.  All Special Use Permit applications shall be for firm development proposals only.  The Special Use Permit shall not be used for securing early zoning for conceptual proposals which may not be undertaken for some time.  A Special Use Permit application shall be considered only if it is made by the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent.  The minimum requirements for a Special Use Permit are: 
1. 	
Any uses permitted under a Special Use Permit shall also conform to the requirements of this Ordinance and the Development Regulations for the use as found in the Zoning District. 

2. 	
The application and review process for a Special Use Permit shall be the same as for the Zoning District under which the Special Use is found. In addition to the information and/or site plans which are required to be submitted for the proposed development, additional information deemed necessary by the City Manager in order to evaluate a proposed use and its relationship to the surrounding area shall be submitted.  In the review process, particular emphasis shall be given to the evaluation of the characteristics of the proposed use in relationship to its immediate neighborhood and the compatibility of the proposed use with its neighborhood. 

3. 	
In the approval process for a Special Use Permit application, the City Council shall consider the policies and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, particularly in relationship to the proposed site and surrounding area, and shall consider the potential adverse impacts on the surrounding area, especially in regards but not limited to traffic, storm drainage, land values and compatibility of land use activities. 

4. 	
If an application is approved and a Special Use Permit is granted, all conditions which may have been attached to the approval are binding on the property.  All subsequent development and use of the property shall be in accordance with the approved plan and conditions. Once established, the Special Use shall be in continuous operation. Upon discovery that the operation of the Special Use has or had ceased for a period of 90 days or more and the owner of the property has not requested voluntary termination of the Special Use Permit, the City Manager shall forward a report to the City Council through the Planning Commission which may recommend that action be taken to remove the Special Use Permit from the property. 

5. 	
Changes to a Special Use, or development of a site for the Special Use, shall be treated as an amendment to the Special Use Permit and shall be subject to the same application and review process as a new application. 

6. 	
The Special Use for which a Special Use Permit is granted shall commence operations or construction within 12 months of the date of approval by the City Council.  If, at the end of this 12-month period, the City Manager determines that active efforts are not proceeding toward operation or construction, a report may be forwarded to the City Council through the Planning Commission which may recommend that action be taken to remove the Special Use Permit from the property. 

7. 	
An application for a Special Use Permit in a residential district and which use is proposed to operate in a dwelling or as an accessory use to a dwelling is subject to the following additional requirements: 


17.7 

a. 	
The Special Use Permit shall be valid for no more than a two-year period.  Upon or before the expiration of a Special Use Permit, the owner shall make application to continue the Special Use Permit if continuance is desired. However, after the first two year period the City Council may waive the two year time limitation with the concurrence of the Planning Commission. 

b. 	
The Special Use shall operate within the dwelling on the property or, if approved by the City Council, in an accessory structure. 

c. 	
The exterior character of the dwelling shall be preserved in its residential state and there shall be no outside evidence of the operation of the Special Use to the neighborhood, except for any accessory structure approved by the City Council. 

d. 	
The owner of the property shall occupy the property and shall operate any business associated with the Special Use. 

e. 	
The owner of the property shall submit with the application a signed statement in which he/she agrees that the Special Use Permit, if approved, shall automatically terminate in the event that the property is sold, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to any other party, or the business which operates the Special Use is sold, transferred, otherwise conveyed or discontinued. The owner shall also agree to notify the City Manager in writing upon the occurrence of any of these events 

f. 	
In addition to the information and/or site plans required by this Section, the owner of the property shall submit with the application for a Special Use Permit information regarding the ownership of any business associated with the use, the experience and background qualifications related to the operation of said business, prior similar businesses operated, applicable State of Georgia certifications, licenses and like information. 


17.8 

8. 	
The owner of the property approved for a Special Use Permit, may voluntarily request termination of the Special Use Permit by notifying the City Manager in writing.  The City Manager shall notify the City Council through the Planning Commission of the voluntary termination as they occur and shall change the official zoning maps to reflect any voluntary termination.  The approval of a Special Use Permit for a specific use which may be operated by a lessee under a private agreement with a lessor in any non-residential district shall not obligate the City Council to be responsible for or be required to resolve any disputes which may arise out of the voluntary termination of the Special Use Permit by the property owner. 

9. 	
The City shall have the right to periodically examine the operation of the specific use to determine compliance with the requirements and any conditions.  If the City Manager determines that the requirements and conditions are being violated, a written notice shall be issued to the owner of the property outlining the nature of the violation and giving the owner of the property a maximum of ten (10) days to come into compliance.  If after ten (10) days the violations continue to exist, the City Manager shall forward a report to the City Council through the Planning Commission which may recommend that action be taken to remove the Special Use Permit from the property. 

10. 
Upon approval by the City Council, a Special Use Permit shall be identified on the official zoning maps. 

11. 
Upon approval by the City Council of a Special Use Permit, the owner of the property shall be issued a notice from the City Manager which states the specific use permitted, the requirements of this Section and any conditions attached to the approval. 

12. 
The City shall not issue a Certificate of Occupancy for the specific use unless all requirements and conditions of the Special Use Permit have been fulfilled by the owner of the property. 


17.9 

SECTION 1708. Policies and Procedures.  For purposes of this section the terms “zoning decision” shall have the meanings set forth in O.C.G.A. §36-66-3.  Prior to making any zoning decision, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing. The public hearing shall be called and a public notice provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 1700 of this Ordinance and in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §36-66-4. At any such public hearing, the following procedures shall apply: 
1. 	
A member of the planning staff will briefly summarize the requested zoning change;  and shall respond to any questions from the Mayor or member of the Council regarding the staff recommendations related to the proposed zoning change; 

2. 	
The applicant shall be provided an opportunity to be heard, and may present any evidence, information or materials which the applicant desires for the City Council to consider in arriving at its determination; 

3. 	
Public comments will be accepted and individuals making public comments may present any evidence, information and/or materials which the individual desires for the City Council to consider in arriving at its determination. 

4. 	
The City Council may place reasonable time limitations on the presentation of the applicant and on public comments by individuals in support or opposition to the zoning decision. An equal time period be allowed for presentation of data, evidence and opinion by proponents of the zoning decision and by opponents of the zoning decision, and in no event shall the minimum time period allowed for presentation be less than ten minutes per side. 

5. 	
Persons speaking either in support of or in opposition to a zoning decision shall be recognized by the Mayor, shall state their name and address for the public record, and shall present any written documents which they desire to be included in the record of the meeting to the City Clerk. 

6. 	
All comments shall be directed to the Mayor and City Council and shall be made in an orderly manner. 

7. 	
The applicant and any opponents to the zoning decision shall acquaint themselves with the provisions of §36-67a-3 and shall comply with the provisions of that statute. 


Section 1709. Withdrawal of Application for Amendment, Variance or Special Use Permit. 
Once an application for an amendment to the zoning map or an application for a Variance or Special Use Permit has been made, the applicant may withdraw such application without prejudice only until such time as the legal advertisement of a public hearing thereon is placed.  No application shall be allowed to be withdrawn without action by the City Council after public notice of the public hearing has been placed. All applications, having been advertised, shall be considered by the City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate, and shall receive final action. 
17.10 

Section 1710. Lapse of Time Requirement for an Amendment, Variance or Special Use Permit Re-application. The following shall apply to the applicable re-application: 
If an application is denied by the City Council, or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate, no application or re-application for the same Zoning Map amendment, Variance, or Special Use Permit affecting the same land or any portion thereof shall be acted upon within twelve (12) months from the date of last action, unless such twelve (12) month period is waived by the City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals as appropriate, and in no case may such an application or re-application be reconsidered in less than six (6) months from the date of that action by the City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate. Administrative variances shall not be subject to this time lapse requirement as outlined in Article 15, Section 1508. 
Section 1711. Actions to be Taken if Plans of Property Owner are not Implemented Within Specified Time Limits. 
For any zoning map amendment for which the City Council is not the applicant, and upon which property a development permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy has not been issued within 12 months of the date of approval of said amendment, the City Council may review the Zoning District classification of the property and determine whether it shall be continued or initiated for rezoning. 
Such properties may first be reviewed by the Planning Commission, which shall make such findings and recommendations as it deems appropriate. 
17.11 

A M E N D M E N T S 
1. April 9, 2001 
Amend Section 1701, Subsection B, Paragraph 8,  “Initiation of Amendments, by deleting and replacing its entirety. 
2. June 11, 2001 
Amended Section 907B by adding 24. Facilities engaging in the business, trade or profession of psychic reading, fortune telling, astrology, prenology, palmistry, clairvoyance, or related practices. The section is further amended by redesignating the paragraph presently following paragraph 23 and being improperly number “1” to be renumbered “25”.   
3. October 8, 2001 
Article 3 adding definition for Adult Entertainment Facility Section 907 Deleting in its entirety subparagraph C 8. Adding Additional subparagraph 15 (a-f) to Section 909 paragraph B. 
4. May 13, 2002 
Article 6 - Section 608 amended by deleting in its entirety and inserting with Architectural and Design Standards. 
5. November 11, 2002 
Article 6 - Section 614, subparagraph 1 deleting in its entirety keeping & raising of livestock  or poultry replacing with subparagraph 1, subsections 1-4. 
6. December 8, 2003 
Article 3 - Definition Customary Home Occupation, Delete item #(1 and (2) in its entirety, Article 6 - Section 607, Added items #10 through 18. Article 6 - Section 608, VI  Architecture and Design Standards, Added items #E through K, Article 7 - Section 700.2.B.  Walls and Fences, Deleted and Added 700. 2. B from I through vi, Added “E”,  Modified Section 700.1 from City Building Inspector to the Director, Planning and Development. 
7. January 12, 2004 
Article 17 -Section 1701 B. Redefined the criteria to apply for Annexation and Rezoning and application requirements, Article 9 - Section 902A, Added Section 902A as Conservation Subdivision District (CSD). 
Page 1 of 7 

8. February 11, 2004 
Article 9 - Section 902A, Amendments to 6, and 8b, Conservation Subdivision District (CSD), Article 3 - Definitions Tattoo criteria, Article 9 -Section 910, C. added 13. Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishments. 
9. April 12, 2004 
Article 15 - deleting in its entirety (ZBA) and replacing with Amendments. 
10. June 14, 2004 
Article 9 - Amended square footage requirements for Section 900, 901, 902, & 903.  Amended Article 8, Section 801 subparagraph 2. 
11. April 11, 2005 
Article 11 - Section 1106. Added Parking Single Family Residential.  Article 6 -Corrected incorrect numbers only under Section 607 Requirements for Customary Home Occupations. 
12. June 13, 2005 
Article 10 -Section 1001, 1002, 1004, Amended, Added Sections 1008 & 1009 
13. August 8, 2005 
Article 10 -Section 1004, paragraph 3 deleted in its entirety and replaced. 
14. 
September 12, 2005 

15. 
October 10, 2005 


Article 6 - Section 608 deleted in its entirety and replaced with new Section 608. 
Article 10.5 - Mixed Use Developments added. 
16. February 13, 2006 
Section 1605, Zoning Map of the City of Sugar Hill. Adopted new map dated January 17, 2006. 
Page 2 of 7 

17. September 11, 2006 
Section 608. Architectural and design Standards in its entirety and replacing. Amend Section 901A. 902 A, adding a new category entitled. “Maximum Density Per Acre” to the chart contained in that section. 
18. April 9, 2007 
Article 3 - Definitions: Amended Yard Front. 
19 July 9, 2007 Article 6, Section 608 Paragraph A deleted and replaced.  Article 13 - Sign Ordinance deleted and replaced. Amended, Definitions for ground sign, project informational sign,and wall sign. 
20 September 10, 2007 Article # 11- Delete entirely the text of Article 11, Off Street Automobile Parking and Loading and Unloading Spaces and replacing it with 
21. December 10, 2007 
Article 9 - Section 902A (6) Open Space Requirements, Added sentences to Undeveloped and Natural section. 
22. March 10, 2008 
Article 9 - Permitted Uses and Special Use Provisions,  under RM, OI, HSB, BG, LM, HM-1, and HM-2 Zoning Districts. Zoning Ordinance Amendment Section 1605 Zoning Map Adoption.  Zoning Ordinance Amendment Article 10 -Planned Unit Developments.  Zoning Ordinance Amendment, Delete Paragraph B of Section 608, Architectural and Design Standards in its entirety and add Section 911. Town Center Overlay District to Article 9. 
23. 
November 9, 2009 

24. 
September 14, 2009 


Zoning Ordinance Amendment, Deleted Article 6 – Section 600 & 601 in its entirety and replaced. 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment, Article 9 - Section 909 C 5 & 6 pertaining to Bulk Storage. 
Page 3 of 7 

25. January 11, 2010 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment Article 16, Zoning Map Adoption. 
26. April 12, 2010 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment, Article 9, Section 911, Subsection 5d, replaced in its entirety. 
27. May 10, 2010 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment, Article 3,  Article 13, & Article 14 pertaining to Signs. 
28. September 13, 2010 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment, Article 3, & Article 9, Section 904 Subsection 1, Paragraph B, pertaining to Manufactured Homes. 
29. February 14, 2011 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment, Article 9, Use Provisions 
30. June 13, 2011 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment, Article 13 - Section 1311 & Table in Section 1312 (Billboards) 
31. December 12, 2011 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment, Definitions to be incorporated into Article 3, Article 9 - Section 911, Article 9 - Section 912, Updated Cover Page Appendix A, Excerpts from Designing Downtown Appendix B, Updated Exhibit 1, Updated Exhibit 2. 
32 September 10, 2012 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment, Article 4, Article 6, Article 9, and Article 10, made Quick Reference Addendum obsolete, updated Table of Contents and Amendment Page. 
33 March 13, 2013 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment, Article 7, Section 700 replaced in its entirety.  Article 4, Section 406 Accessory Building Minor, and Accessory Building Major replaced in its entirety. 
34. JUNE 10, 2013 
Page 4 of 7 

Zoning Ordinance Amendment, amended Article 4, Section 404, 405, 406 & 407, Table 4.1,  Table 4.2, Article 10, Section 1001, 1002, 1003, and 1004, deleted Article 10.5 Mixed Use and Developments in its entirety, and Article 11 deleted in its entirety and replaced. 
35. SEPTEMBER 9, 2013 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment, amended Article 4 to include Auto Sales under HSB as well as title pawn, and pawn shops, and amended Article 10, updated TCO use provisions in accordance with recommendation by City Attorney. 
36. NOVEMBER 12, 2013 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment, Article 7, Section 700, Subsection E, # 2, and Subsection E, # 3, deleting all contents in its entirety and replacing. 
37. DECEMBER 9, 2013 
Article 3 Definitions, deleting in its entirety; Sign, Project Informational, and replacing the following definitions; Sign, Ground, Sign, Multi-Message, and Sign, Wall.  Amended Article 4, Table 4.3 and replaced in its entirety. Amended Article 10, Section 1001, Town Center Overlay District, Subsection F and replaced in its entirety, and amended Article 10, Section 1002, Subsection F and replaced in its entirety. 
38. MAY 12, 2014 
Sign Ordinance Amendment, replaced Article 13. Signs in its entirety.  Article 10 changes as follows; replaced Paragraph 4, Design Criteria – Signage of Sub-section E. Design Criteria and Standards of Section 1001. Town Center Overlay District, added Paragraph 4. Design Criteria 
– Signage of Sub-section E. Design Criteria and Standards of Section 1002. Central Business District. 
39. JULY 14, 2014 
Article 4, Section 406 Restrictions on Principal Uses (Brew Pub, Growler Shop, Microbrewery, Wine Bar) Adding those principal Uses to Table 4.1, and adding those uses and restrictions to Section 1002, Paragraph 5, Conditional Uses.  
40. NOVEMBER 10, 2014 

Page 5 of 7 

Article 4, Section 407. Restrictions on Accessory uses as follows; Inserting  ‘Outdoor storage associated with garden supply center, plant nursery and greenhouse’ with restrictions items 1-4. 
Amending Article 4, Table 4.2 Accessory Uses as follows.  Service facilities associated with automotive sales lots (new or used) is allowed as an accessory use with a Special Use Permit (SU) under General Business (BG). Outdoor Storage associated with garden supply center, plant nursery and greenhouse is allowed as a Special Use with Restrictions (SU-R) under Highway Service Business (HSB).  Outdoor storage associated with garden supply center, plant nursery and green house is allowed with restrictions (A-R) under General Business (BG). 
41. NOVEMBER 10, 2014 
Article 10, Section 1002, Central Business District Boundary Map Revision.  
42. JULY 13, 2015 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment Table 4.1 & 4.2, Section 406 & 407 Added Firework sales. Zoning Ordinance Amendment – Article 10 TCO & CBD, replaced Section 1001 & 1002, and Appendix A, Downtown Character Preference Guide replacing Fig. 9 and Fig 10. 
43. OCTOBER 12, 2015 
Article 10, Section 1002, Central Business District Boundary Map Revision.  
44: DECEMBER 14, 2015 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment Article 7, Fences & Walls. Deleted Article 7, Section 700, subsection E, Paragraph 2 & 3 in its entirety and replaced.  
45: MAY 9, 2016 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment Article 4, Zoning District and Use Provisions, Amended Section 406, and updated Table 4.1 pertaining to car washes. 
46. APRIL 11, 2016 Zoning Ordinance Amendment Article10, Section 1002. Central Business District Overlay, Amendments pertaining to Parking Garages.  (Conditional Uses, Special Uses, and Design Criteria). 
Page 6 of 7 

47. AUGUST 8, 2016 Zoning Ordinance Amendment Article10, Section 1000 Purpose of Planned Unit Development, and 1002 Central Business District Overlay.  Central Business District Overlay, Amendments pertaining to Parking Garages.  (Conditional Uses, Special Uses, and Design Criteria). 
48. JULY 10, 2017  
Zoning Ordinance Amendment – Articles 4, 7, and 14 related to accessory Uses, including fences, walls, general references and Associated Administrative processes. 
Page 7 of 7 


Through surveys and questionnaires the citizens have expressed a general preference for traditional style and detail. Each in­dividual building or project must contribute to a consistent archi­tectural identity for the TCO by using traditional forms, authen­tic materials and quality craftsmanship. Refer to Appendix A, on file with the Department of Planning and Development, to see il­lustrative examples of desirable style and detail. 

Fig. 1— Illustrative Purposes Only 

Fig. 2—Illustrative Purposes Only 

Fig. 3—Illustrative Purposes Only 

Fig. 4—Illustrative Purposes Only Fig. 5—Illustrative Purposes Only 


Fig. 6—Illustrative Purposes Only Fig. 7—Illustrative Purposes Only 


Fig. 8—Illustrative Purposes Only Zero Lot Line Single Family Residential 


Townhome/Row House 
Fig. 9—Illustrative Purposes Only 


Mid-Rise Courtyard Building Type 
Fig. 10—Illustrative Purposes Only Fig. 11—Sherwin Williams Exterior Color Preservation Palette. Fig. 12—Sherwin Williams Exterior Color Palette. 


Eggplant 

Gray 

Black 

Copper 


Metal Standing Seam Roof Color Selection 
Fig. 13—Metal Standing Seam Roof Color Selection 

Fig. 14—Approved street light. 

Fig. 15—Illustrative Purposes Only 

Fig. 16—Illustrative Purposes Only 



City of Sugar Hill
Development
Regulations
Last updated 6/12/2017.
Article 1. Authority, Title, Purpose & Intent. ..................................................................... 4
Section 1.1 Authority and Title. ............................................................................... 4
Section 1.2 Purpose. ................................................................................................. 4
Section 1.3 Intent and Application. .......................................................................... 4
Section 1.4 Agricultural Exemption. ........................................................................ 4
Article 2. Definitions. .......................................................................................................... 5
Section 2.1 Use of Words and Interpretation. .......................................................... 5
Section 2.2 Definitions of Words and Phrase ........................................................... 5
Article 3. Application of the Regulations. ........................................................................ 12
Section 3.1 Application. ......................................................................................... 12
Section 3.2 Dedication of Public Lands and Facilities. .......................................... 12
Section 3.3 Transfer of Land Ownership. ............................................................... 12
Section 3.4 Subdivision Exemptions. ..................................................................... 12
Article 4. Permits Required for Development or Construction. ....................................... 16
Section 4.1. Authorization Required for Land Disturbance or Development
Activities. 16
Section 4.2 Land Disturbance Permits. .................................................................. 18
Section 4.3 Building Permits .................................................................................. 20
Article 5. General Requirements. ...................................................................................... 23
Section 5.1 Suitability of the Land. ........................................................................ 23
Section 5.2 Offers of Land Dedication. .................................................................. 23
Section 5.3 Zoning and Other Regulations. ............................................................ 23
Section 5.4 Required Public Improvements. .......................................................... 23
Section 5.5 Lots. ..................................................................................................... 24
Section 5.6 Survey Monuments. ............................................................................. 24
Section 5.7 Standard Drawings. ............................................................................. 24
Section 5.8 Buffers, Landscaping, Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement. ...... 24
Section 5.9 Recreation Areas. ................................................................................. 26
ARTICLE 6. Access and Right of Way Requirements and Street Improvement and
Construction Requirements. .............................................................................................. 30
Section 6.1 Access .................................................................................................. 30
Section 6.2 Streets. ................................................................................................. 31
Section 6.3 Minimum Right-of-Way and Street Improvements. ............................ 31
Section 6.4 General Layout Requirements. ............................................................ 36
Section 6.5 Traffic Control Devices ....................................................................... 38
Section 6.6 Specifications....................................................................................... 39
Section 6.7 Subgrade Preparation for All Streets. .................................................. 39
Section 6.8 Project Access Improvement Standards. ............................................. 39
Section 6.9 New Local and Minor Collector Streets. ............................................. 39
Section 6.10 New Major Thoroughfares. ................................................................. 40
Section 6.11 Curb and Gutter. .................................................................................. 41
Section 6.12 Underground Utilities. ......................................................................... 42
Section 6.13 Sidewalks. ............................................................................................ 42
Article 7. Utilities and Easements. .................................................................................... 44
Section 7.1 Placement of Utilities. ......................................................................... 44
Section 7.2 Water System and Fire Hydrants. ........................................................ 44
Section 7.3 Sanitary Sewer Disposal. ..................................................................... 44
Section 7.4 Easements. ........................................................................................... 45
Section 7.5 Street Cuts............................................................................................ 46
Article 8. Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts and Piped Drainage Systems and
Soil Sediment Control Requirements. ............................................................................... 48
Section 8.1 Site Grading. ........................................................................................ 48
Section 8.2 Stormwater Detention. ......................................................................... 49
Section 8.3 Culverts and Piped Drainage Systems. ................................................ 59
Section 8.4 Surface Drainage. ................................................................................ 65
Section 8.5 Erosion Control. .................................................................................. 66
Section 8.6 Dams .................................................................................................... 66
Section 8.9 Water Quality Best Management Practices. ........................................ 73
Article 9. Performance Guidelines. ............................................................................. 78
Section 9.1 General................................................................................................. 78
Section 9.2 Lots ...................................................................................................... 78
Section 9.3 Blocks .................................................................................................. 79
Section 9.4 Access .................................................................................................. 79
Section 9.5 Roadway Design .................................................................................. 80
Section 9.6 Street Intersections. ............................................................................. 83
9.7 DRIVEWAY INTERSECTIONS ...................................................................... 87
9.8 STORMWATER DETENTION GUILDELINES ............................................. 89
9.9 CULVERTS AND PIPE COLLECTION SYSTEM GUIDELINES ................. 95
Article 10. Plan and Plat Specifications. ........................................................................... 98
10.1 CONCEPT PLAN SPECIFICATIONS .......................................................... 98
10.2 SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLANS ................................................ 100
10.3 FINAL PLAT SPECIFICATIONS ............................................................... 105
10.4 HOUSE LOCATION PLAN (HLP) ............................................................. 110
10.5 RESIDENTIAL DRAINAGE PLAN (RDP) OR STUDY (RDS) ............... 111
10.6 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS .................................................................. 113
10.7 TREE PRESERVATION/REPLACEMENT PLAN SPECIFICATIONS ... 118
10.8 BUFFER AND LANDSCAPE PLAN SPECIFICATIONS ......................... 118
Article 11. Procedures. .................................................................................................... 119
11.1 SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCEDURES ................................................. 119
11.2 NON-SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCEDURES ....................................... 123
11.3 ASSIGNMENT OF NAMES AND ADDRESS .......................................... 127
11.4 INITIATION OF DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES ..................................... 129
11.5 APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT CONFORMANCE ............................. 131
Article 12. Fees. .............................................................................................................. 136
Article 13. Administration, Appeal and Violations. ....................................................... 137
13.1. Administration. ............................................................................................. 137
13.2. Regulations to be published. ......................................................................... 137
13.3 Modifications. ............................................................................................... 137
13.4 Appeal and waiver of the regulations. .......................................................... 137
13.5. Violations, enforcement and penalties. .............................................................. 138
13.5.1. Enforcement Procedures. ................................................................................ 138
13.5.2. Legal Penalties and/or Remedies. ................................................................... 140
Article 14. Adoption and Amendment. ........................................................................... 141
14.1. Effective Date. .............................................................................................. 141
14.2 Amendments. ................................................................................................ 141
14.3. Severability. .................................................................................................. 142
14.4. Conflicting Regulations. ............................................................................... 142
Development Regulations Authority, Title, Purpose and Intent
City of Sugar Hill 1.4
Article 1. Authority, Title, Purpose & Intent.
Section 1.1 Authority and Title.
1.1.1 These rules and regulations are adopted under the authority of the Constitution of the
State of Georgia and laws enacted pursuant thereto.
1.1.2 These regulations shall be known as "The 2002 Development Regulations of City of
Sugar Hill, Georgia," and may be referred to generally as "The Development Regulations," or, as
used herein, "these Regulations."
Section 1.2 Purpose.
1.2.1 These regulations are intended to serve the following purposes:
a. To protect and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
b. To provide a system for the subdividing of lands and the accurate recording of land titles.
c. To provide assurance that lots shown on recorded subdivision plats are usable by the
purchasers for their intended and permitted functions.
d. To encourage economically sound and orderly land development in accordance with the
policies and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan of City of Sugar Hill.
e. To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to
new land developments in conformance with public improvement policies of the City.
f. To assure adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both
vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments.
g. To assure the provision of needed open spaces and public facility sites in new land
developments through the dedication or reservation for purchase of land for public
purposes.
h. To assure equitable review and approval of all subdivision and site plans by providing
uniform procedures and standards for the developer.
Section 1.3 Intent and Application.
It is the intent of these regulations that they apply to and provide guidance for the
development of any lands within the incorporated area of City of Sugar Hill, whether the
development involves the subdivision of the land for sale to individual users or pertains only to
the construction of buildings or other improvements on a single parcel.
Section 1.4 Agricultural Exemption.
Clearly agricultural uses, limited to the cultivation of the land, dairying or animal
husbandry, are not intended to be governed by these regulations, provided that land proposed to
be converted to a new agricultural use must be zoned AF to be exempt from the provisions
herein.
Development Regulations Definitions
City of Sugar Hill 2.5
Article 2. Definitions.
Section 2.1 Use of Words and Interpretation.
2.1.1 For the purposes of these Regulations, the following shall apply to the use of all words:
a. When appropriate to the context, words used in the singular shall include the plural, and
the plural the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense,
and vice versa.
b. Words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine.
c. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
d. The word "may" is permissive.
e. Use of the word "and" is inclusive and requires that all of the component phrases so
connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency.
f. Use of the word "or" is not exclusive (as in "either ... or"), and requires that at least one
of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency. The
word "or" may allow more than one component phrase to be present or fulfilled, as is
implied by the common term "and/or."
2.1.2 The following shall control the interpretation of words and phrases as used in these
Regulations:
a. Words and phrases defined in this Article shall be interpreted as defined herein.
b. Words or phrases not defined herein shall be interpreted as defined in the adopted
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, as amended from time to time; or as defined
in the City's Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance; Buffer, Landscape, and Tree
Ordinance; or Mobile Home Park Regulations, as applicable to the use of the word within
the context of these Regulations.
Section 2.2 Definitions of Words and Phrase
Certain words or phrases in these Regulations are defined for their use herein as follows:
Alley or Service Drive - A minor, permanent, public service-way which is used primarily
for vehicular service access to the back or the side for properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Applicant - A person, either the owner or the bona fide representative of the owner of
land or structures governed by these Regulations, who seeks authority to use, develop, construct
upon or otherwise enjoy the use of property through any of the procedures established under
these Regulations.
Arterial - A Principal Arterial, Major Arterial, or Minor Arterial street as defined and
designated in the Comprehensive Plan of City of Sugar Hill.
"As-Built" Survey - See Record Drawing.
"Base Flood" - The flood which has a one percent probability of occurring in any calendar
year (i.e., the 100 year frequency flood).
Base Flood Elevation - The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point
during the base flood.
Block - A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets, other than alleys.
Development Regulations Definitions
City of Sugar Hill 2.6
Board of Commissioners - The Board of Commissioners of Gwinnett County, Georgia.
Buildable Lot of Record - A lot or parcel of land which existed as a single parcel of
ownership, recorded as such in its entirety and present boundaries with the Clerk to Superior Court
prior to June 2, 1970, or which is shown in its entirety and present boundaries on a Final Plat or
Exemption Plat duly approved under these or any previously applicable regulations providing for
the subdivision of land in City of Sugar Hill and recorded with the Clerk to Superior Court of
Gwinnett County.
Building Setback Line - A line across a lot parallel to a street right-of-way or other property
line establishing the minimum open space to be provided between any principal building and the
street or other property line. All building setback lines shall be at least as restrictive as the
corresponding minimum yard setbacks required in the Zoning Resolution. On corner lots, the
minimum required front yard setback shall be provided along all abutting streets.
Certificate of Development Conformance - Final approval issued by the City for completion
of land development activities for a subdivision or project for which a Development Permit was
issued.
Certificate of Occupancy - Final approval by the Department for the use or occupancy of a
structure for which a Building Permit was issued.
City - City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, or the City Manager of the City or his designee to
administer these regulations.
City Council - The City Council of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
City Manager - City Manager of the City of Sugar Hill or his designee.
Clearing - The removal of trees or other vegetation, but not including grubbing activities.
Comprehensive Plan - A plan summarizing and illustrating the adopted goals and objectives
of the City Council regarding the future location and character of anticipated land uses,
transportation, and other public facilities in City of Sugar Hill. The term "Comprehensive Plan"
includes component or functional plans for the City, including but not limited to a plan for land use
(i.e., Land Use Plan) or a plan for transportation facilities, and includes the classification of streets
and thoroughfares as shown on the adopted Long Range Road Classification Map.
Concept Plan - A drawing which shows the overall concept (e.g., a concept plan) of a
proposed development, and which may include lots and streets in a subdivision or the general
location of buildings and improvements for a multi-family or non-residential project, and which
may be drawn to approximate dimensions in a freehand style.
Condominium - A form of property ownership in which the buildings or portions of the
buildings, whether residential or non-residential in use, are owned by individuals separate from the
lands which surround the buildings, said lands held in common ownership by the owners of the
several buildings.
County - Gwinnett County or the appropriate Gwinnett County Department affected.
Cul-De-Sac - A street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated
within the development by a vehicular turnaround. For the purpose of designation, a cul-de-sac
street shall be interpreted to begin at the intersection of two or more streets nearest to the vehicular
turnaround.
Department - The Department of Planning and Development of City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
Department of Transportation - The Gwinnett County or State of Georgia Department of
Transportation.
Developer - Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust,
or any other group or combination acting as a unit who directs the undertaking or purposes to
Development Regulations Definitions
City of Sugar Hill 2.7
undertake development activities as herein defined, whether the development involves the
subdivision of the land for sale to individual users, the construction of buildings or other
improvements on a single land ownership, or both.
Development - 1. (verb) All activities associated with the conversion of land or the
expansion or replacement of an existing use to any new use intended for human operation,
occupancy or habitation, other than for agricultural purposes devoted strictly to the cultivation of the
land, dairying or animal husbandry. Such activities include land disturbance (clearing and grubbing
the land of vegetation and stumps, and grading) and the construction of improvements such as but
not limited to streets, driveways or parking areas, water or sewer mains, storm water drainage
facilities, sidewalks or other structures permanently placed on or in the property. 2. (noun) Where
appropriate to the context, the term "development" also may be used to denote a specific
subdivision or project which is a single entity or intended to be constructed as in interrelated whole,
whether simultaneously or in phases.
Development Agreement - A written contract between City of Sugar Hill and a property
owner or developer that specifies the System Improvements to be provided by the developer for a
specific project.
Development Permit - An official authorization issued by the City permitting clearing,
grubbing, grading, or construction of storm drainage facilities, access drives, streets, parking or
other improvements exclusive of buildings.
Development Plans - The detailed and professional plans showing the layout and design, site
work and construction activities proposed for a project (other than architectural building plans) and
including the Preliminary Plat or Site Plan (as applicable), Grading Plan, Tree
Preservation/Replacement Plan, Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Buffer and Landscape Plan,
and construction drawings for streets, storm water drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, water supply
facilities, and other site improvements.
Diameter Breast Height (dbh) - The diameter of a tree measured at a point 4 and 1/2 feet
above the ground.
Director - City Manager of the City of Sugar Hill, or . his designee.
Director of Planning & Development - City Manager of the City of Sugar Hill or his
designee.
Drainage Improvements - Those facilities and structures intended to control and direct the
passage of storm waters and other surface water flows from and across a property; including, but not
limited to, swales and ditches, cross drains and other piping systems, catch basins, detention ponds,
and velocity dissipation devices.
Dripline - A line on the ground established by a vertical plane extending from a tree's
outermost branch tips down to the ground; i.e., the line enclosing the area directly beneath the tree's
crown from which rainfall would drip.
Driveway - A vehicular access way in private ownership, other than a Private Street, which
provides access primarily to only one property, or to no more than 2 single-family detached
residences.
Easement - Recorded authorization for a specified purpose by a property owner for the use
of any designated part of the real property by another entity.
Erosion Control Regulations - The City of Sugar Hill Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Ordinance.
Exemption Plat - A subdivision plat drawn to Final Plat standards, as contained herein,
prepared in accordance with one of the exemptions provided under Article 3 of these Regulations.
Development Regulations Definitions
City of Sugar Hill 2.8
Fee Simple - A form of property ownership in which the buildings and surrounding lands
are owned by the same person.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) - The Federal Agency which administers
the National Flood Insurance Program. This Agency prepares, revises and distributes the maps and
studies referenced in these Regulations.
Final Plat - A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal
and boundary information and certifications required by these Regulations.
Fire Marshall's Office - A section of the City of Sugar Hill Department of Fire and
Emergency Services charged with the responsibility of enforcing the City's Fire Prevention and
Protection Code, the Standard Fire Prevention Code, the National Fire Prevention Code and Georgia
Handicap Laws.
Fire Services Division - A division of the City of Sugar Hill Department of Public Safety
charged with the responsibility of enforcing the City's Fire Prevention and Life Safety Codes, and
Gwinnett Handicap Ordinance.
Flood or Flooding - A general and temporary condition or partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas.
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map - The official map issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, where the boundaries of the floodways are shown and the areas of Special
Flood Hazard have been defined as Zone "A".
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - An official map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the areas of Special Flood Hazard and the applicable risk
premium zones.
Flood Insurance Study - The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot.
Flood Prone Area - See the Floodplain Management Ordinance of City of Sugar Hill.
Flood Hazard Area - See Floodplain.
Floodplain - Those lands subject to flooding, which have at least a one percent probability of
flooding occurrence in any calendar year; i.e., the 100-year frequency or base flood. See Flood
Management Ordinance for ancillary terms.
Flood Related Definitions - See the Floodplain Management Ordinance, for specific
definitions of terms used in relation to flooding, alteration of floodplains, construction of structures
in or adjacent to floodplains, etc.,
Freeboard - The distance between the base flood elevation and the top of a storm water
detention structure.
Georgia DOT - The Department of Transportation of the State of Georgia.
Grading - The movement, removal or addition of earth on a site by the use of mechanical
equipment.
Grading Permit - An official authorization issued by the City permitting grading of a site,
and may include installation of attendant storm water drainage facilities.
Grubbing - The removal of stumps or roots from a property.
Health Department - The Environmental Health Services Division of the Georgia
Department of Human Resources for City of Sugar Hill and Gwinnett County.
Development Regulations Definitions
City of Sugar Hill 2.9
Hotspot – An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in storm
water or to violate water quality standards.
House Location Plan (HLP) - A drawing showing lot information and all improvements, as
outlined in Article 6.
Land Disturbance Permit - Any permit other than a Building Permit issued by City of Sugar
Hill that authorizes clearing or grading activities on a site or portion of a site. Said permit may be a
Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, Grading, or Development Permit as defined and authorized
herein.
Lot - A portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of
ownership or for development or both. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of
the right-of-way of a road or crosswalk may be included.
Lot, Corner - A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection.
Lot, Double Frontage - A lot other than a corner lot abutting upon two or more streets.
Major Intersection - The intersection of two or more public streets in which at least one of
the streets is an arterial or major collector as designated by the Comprehensive Plan.
Major Thoroughfare - Any public street, existing or proposed, which is shown in the
Comprehensive plan as an arterial or major collector.
Mean Sea Level - The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a
reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of these
Regulations, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).
Minor Collector - A through street having the primary function of connecting subdivisions
or other areas to Major Collector streets or other major thoroughfares, or functioning as a central
route within a subdivision channeling traffic from the local streets to an abutting major thoroughfare
or another Minor Collector street. For the purposes of these Regulations, a central but non-through
route within a subdivision or other project will be considered as a Minor Collector, if the Average
Daily Traffic generated by the development on the route will exceed 2000 trips.
Owner - A person having a majority fee simple interest in real property, or a majority
interest through any other form of ownership.
Pedestrian Way - A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily
for pedestrians and from which motor propelled vehicles are excluded.
Person - An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, social club,
fraternal organization, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or other group or combination
acting singularly or collectively for a common purpose, and the duly authorized agents thereof.
Planning Commission - The Municipal-City of Sugar Hill Planning Commission.
Plat - A map indicating the subdivision, resubdivision, or recombination of land.
Preliminary Plat - A drawing which shows the perimeter boundary, topography, lotting
arrangements, street layout, and other features of a proposed subdivision, as specified in these
Regulations.
Project - A principal building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, planned and
designed as an interdependent unit together with all accessory uses or structures, utilities, drainage,
access, and circulation facilities, whether built in whole or in phases. Examples include: a principal
building on a lot, a residential subdivision, a multi-family development, a shopping center or an
office park.
Project Access Improvement - Any improvement or facility that is planned and designed to
provide service or access for a particular project and which is necessary for the use and convenience
Development Regulations Definitions
City of Sugar Hill
2.1
0
of the occupants or users of the project and is not a System Improvement. A Project Access
Improvement includes but is not limited to: pedestrian access improvements; site driveways; new
streets; median cuts; right turn lanes, left turn lanes, acceleration lanes, and deceleration lanes made
necessary to serve site driveways or new streets leading to or from the project; traffic control
measures made necessary to serve site driveways or new streets; intersection improvements whose
primary purpose at the time of construction is to provide access to the Project; and, necessary rightof-
way dedications required for any Project Access Improvement.
Public Utilities Department - The Gwinnett County Department of Public Utilities, which
includes the Water Pollution Control Division and the Water System Division.
Record Drawing - A survey or other drawing based on a field survey which shows existing
features or components and horizontal or vertical information (grades or location of improvements).
Redevelopment – Development on a previously developed site; but excludes ordinary
maintenance activities, remodeling of existing building interiors, resurfacing of paved areas, and
exterior building changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate storm
water runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution.
Responsible Party - In the context of enforcement procedures, a person (as defined above)
who is alleged to have committed, caused, continued or created a violation of the terms,
requirements, regulations, or provisions of these Regulations whether as a direct act, through lack of
action or neglect, or at the direction of or on behalf of others. A responsible party may be the owner
of a premises where a violation has occurred; an occupant whether through ownership, lease or
other tenancy; a contractor, builder or developer; an agent of or person otherwise acting on behalf of
the aforementioned parties; or other person acting in violation of these regulations.
"Road" - See "Street, Public".
Roadway - The paved portion of a street from back of curb to back of curb (or edge to edge
of pavement for streets not having curbs) but excluding driveway aprons, bridges, and large single
and multi-cell culverts which in a hydrologic sense can be considered to function as a bridge.
Sheet Flow - Diffused water running overland to a defined watercourse.
Site Work - Development activity to prepare a property for construction of buildings or
finished structures, including clearing, grubbing, grading, and installation of soil sedimentation and
erosion control facilities.
Sketch Plan - See Concept Plan.
Street, Private - An access way similar to and having the same function as a public street,
providing access to more than one property, but held in private ownership (as distinct from a
"driveway").
Street, Public - A right-of-way dedicated to and accepted by City of Sugar Hill for vehicular
traffic or over which City of Sugar Hill may hold a prescriptive easement for public access, and
including designated and numbered U. S. and State Highways. For the purposes of these
Regulations, the term "public street" shall be limited to those which afford or could afford a direct
means of vehicular access to abutting property, and exclude limited access roadways which abut a
property but from which direct access may not be allowed under any circumstances.
Street, Local Nonresidential - A surface street intended primarily to provide local access to
adjacent existing or planned commercial or industrial development and not for through traffic.
Street, Local Residential - A surface street intended primarily to provide local access to
adjacent residential development and not for through traffic.
Development Regulations Definitions
City of Sugar Hill
2.1
1
Street, Marginal Access - A local street which is parallel to and adjacent to a major
thoroughfare and which provides access to adjacent properties and protection from through traffic.
Structure - Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the
ground.
Subdivider - Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust,
or any other group or combination acting as a unit dividing or proposing to divide land so as to
constitute a subdivision as herein defined, including an agent of the subdivider.
Subdivision - 1. (verb) Any division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel, regardless of its
existing or future use, into 2 or more lots, tracts or parcels. The term, "subdivision" shall mean the
act or process of dividing property. 2. (noun) Where appropriate to the context, the term
"subdivision" also may be used in reference to the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership
at the time of division.
System Improvement - Any improvement or facility such as streets, bridges, or rights-ofway
identified on the Long Range Road Classification Map (i.e."the System"), and any traffic
control measures, landscaping or other features to same, that is included in the Comprehensive Plan
and which is further designed to provide service to the community at large.
Tie Point - The point of reference for a boundary survey. Said point of reference shall be an
established, monumented position which can be identified or relocated from maps, plats, or other
documents on public record.
Traffic Engineer - The designated head of the Traffic and Operations Division of the
Gwinnett County Department of Transportation, or his/her designee.
Tree - Any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually having a main stem or trunk and
many branches, and at maturity normally attaining a trunk diameter greater than three inches at any
point and a height of over ten feet.
Tree Diameter - The widest cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at diameter
breast height (dbh) or at any point below dbh for new trees or multi-trunked species, but in no case
less than 6 inches from the ground.
Tree Protection Area - Any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees which are
proposed to be retained in order to comply with the buffer requirements of the Zoning Resolution or
the requirements of the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance.
Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan - A plan that identifies Tree Protection Areas, existing
trees to be preserved and proposed replacement trees to be planted on a property to meet minimum
requirements of the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance, as well as methods of tree protection to
be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information.
Water Pollution Control Division - A division of the Gwinnett County Department of Public
Utilities charged with the responsibility for design, installation, inspection, approval, and
maintenance of the public sanitary sewer system and wastewater treatment in unincorporated City
of Sugar Hill.
Water System Division - A division of the Gwinnett County Department of Public Utilities
charged with the responsibility for the design, installation, and maintenance of the public water
supply and distribution system in unincorporated City of Sugar Hill.
Watercourse - A channel with a defined bed and banks, including lakes, ponds, and marshes.
Zoning Ordinance - The adopted Zoning Ordinance of City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, as
amended from time-to-time.
Development Regulations Application of the Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 3.12
Article 3. Application of the Regulations.
Section 3.1 Application.
Any land disturbance activity or any development activity must first comply with these
Regulations.
Section 3.2 Dedication of Public Lands and Facilities.
3.2.1 No land dedicated as a public street or other public purpose shall be opened or accepted
as a public street or for any other public purpose, and no subdivision of land shall be made, nor
subdivision plat, nor part thereof, shall be recorded before obtaining final approval from the City
of Sugar Hill City Manager. Said approval shall be entered in writing on the Final Plat by the
City Manager or his designee. Said City Manager is hereby authorized to accept such
dedications of lands and public facilities on behalf of City of Sugar Hill and to cause such
dedications to be recorded by the Clerk to Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
Section 3.3 Transfer of Land Ownership.
3.3.1 No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, developer, subdivider
or any other owner or agent shall transfer title or attempt to record the title to any land in the City
of Sugar Hill, and no building permit may be issued on said land, unless:
a. Said land existed as parcel of ownership, recorded as such in its entirety and present
boundaries with the Clerk to Superior Court of Gwinnett County prior to 1970.
b. Said land is shown in its entirety a single and present boundaries on a Final Plat as
approved (under these or any previous applicable regulations) and duly recorded with
the Clerk to Superior Court of Gwinnett County; or,
c. Said land is shown in its entirety and present boundaries on a plat authorized by the City
Manager and recorded with the Clerk to Superior Court of Gwinnett County pursuant to
the regulations governing Subdivision Exemptions contained herein; or,
d. Said land is an aggregation of properties for land assembly purposes, and no building
permit will be requested prior to the filing of an application for an issuance of a
development permit, pursuant to these Regulations.
3.3.2 No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, developer, subdivider
or any other owner or agent shall transfer title to any property by reference to, exhibition of, or
any other use of any map of plat illustrating the subdivision of land without a Final Plat of said
land showing said property first having been duly approved under the procedures of these
regulations or any previously applicable Regulations and recorded with the Clerk of the Superior
Court of Gwinnett County.
Section 3.4 Subdivision Exemptions.
3.4.1 General Requirements
For the purpose of these Regulations the types of activities contained in this Section shall
be considered subdivisions but exempt from the "procedures" and "required public
Development Regulations Application of the Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 3.13
improvements" portions of these Regulations, except as noted. Each such subdivision shall be
drawn as an Exemption Plat in accordance with Final Plat standards pursuant to the requirements
of these Regulations and shall be submitted in an appropriate number of copies together with the
appropriate fees to the City for review and approval. Upon approval, the City Manager, shall
authorize the recording of the Exemption Plat with the Clerk of Superior Court of Gwinnett
County and grant the issuance of building permits pursuant to the Codes and Ordinances of The
City of Sugar Hill.
3.4.2 Recombinations
The combination or recombination of all of two or more buildable lots of record, where
the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots or parcels are in compliance with
the Zoning Ordinance. An Exemption Plat shall not be required for aggregations of properties
for land assembly purposes where no building permit will be requested prior to issuance of a
development permit.
3.4.3 Minor Subdivision
The division of a buildable lot of record into five (5) or fewer lots, provided:
a. Each proposed lot complies with all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and is limited
to single family detached residential use.
b. Each proposed lot abuts upon an existing Public Street.
c. All Project related slope and utility easements as well as necessary street right-of-way as
determined by the City based on the Comprehensive Plan are provided at no cost to the
City.
d. Each lot thus created may not be resubdivided pursuant to the provisions of this
subparagraph. Such resubdivision shall be accomplished only through the procedures
contained in Article 11 of these Regulations.
e. Each proposed lot shall comply with the requirements of the Gwinnett County
Department of Public Utilities and the Gwinnett County Environmental Health
Department, as appropriate, whose certification of approval shall be required prior to
approval of the Exemption Plat by the City.
3.4.4 Estate Subdivisions
a. The division of land in any single family detached residential zoning district into lots
having a minimum lot area of at least five acres, provided:
(1) Each proposed lot abuts upon an existing Public Street which contains the necessary
right-of-way width required by these Regulations as determined by the Comprehensive
Plan.
(2) Each proposed lot shall provide at least 100 feet of frontage upon the street, shall
provide at least 200 feet of lot width measured in accordance with the requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance, and shall meet or exceed all other minimum requirements of the
applicable single family detached residential zoning district.
Development Regulations Application of the Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 3.14
(3) All Project related slope and utility easements as well as necessary street right-of way
shall be provided at no cost to the City as determined by the City based upon the
Comprehensive Plan.
(4) No lot thus created may be resubdivided to less than 5 acres as an exemption to these
Regulations.
(5) Each proposed lot shall comply with the requirements of the Gwinnett County
Department of Public Utilities and the Gwinnett County Environmental Health
Department, as appropriate, whose certification of approval shall be required prior to
approval of the Exemption Plat by the City.
b. The division of land in any single family detached residential zoning district into lots
having a minimum lot area of at least ten acres, provided:
(1) Each proposed lot abuts upon an existing public street.
(2) Each proposed lot shall provide at least 100 feet of frontage upon the street, shall
provide at least 200 feet of lot width measured in accordance with the requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance, and shall meet or exceed all other minimum requirements of the
applicable single family detached residential zoning district.
(3) No lot thus created may be resubdivided to less than 5 acres as an exemption to these
Regulations.
(4) A Record Survey certified by a Land Surveyor currently registered in the State of Georgia
shall be submitted to and approved by the City showing all lots.
3.4.5 Nonresidential Project Management
The creation of a lot for recording within an overall nonresidential development being
undertaken as a single multi-phase or multi-use project under the unified control of a single
developer, provided:
a. The subject property is zoned for such use or development, and an overall Concept Plan
for the entire project has been approved by the City Manager.
b. The proposed subdivision is clearly intended to transfer title for financing or building
management purposes and not for the sale of the property for future development, to
the satisfaction of the City Manager.
c. The proposed lot has been approved by the City to be provided permanent vehicular
access by private drive. Said access shall be established by easement or acceptable
covenant prior to or concurrently with recording of the Exemption Plat.
d. The proposed lot must encompass a principal structure which has been granted a
building permit and which is under construction or has been completed.
e. The Exemption Plat shall be drawn to include the entirety of the overall development and
shall clearly identify those lots to be recorded, those lots previously recorded and the
remainder of the development which shall be labeled "not included." All easements,
dedications, etc., shall be shown as appropriate or as required. Each lot shall be
consistent with the zoning approved for the overall development and the applicable
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
Development Regulations Application of the Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 3.15
f. The proposed subdivision shall provide the required public improvements.
3.4.6 Amnesty Lots
The designation of a lot as a buildable lot of record if the lot was recorded between June
2, 1970, and the effective date of these Regulations but not reviewed and approved under the
provisions of the Subdivision Regulations in effect at that time, provided:
a. The Exemption Plat is limited to one (1) individual lot and no property which adjoins the
lot is or has been owned by the applicant in whole or in part.
b. The lot meets all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, and the applicant demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the City Manager that approval of the lot will not create
nonconformity to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance on any other portion of the
original property from which the lot was subdivided.
c. The lot abuts upon an existing public street.
d. All Project related slope and utility easements as well as necessary street right-of-way as
determined by the City Manager based on the Comprehensive Plan is provided at no cost
to the City.
e. The lot shall comply with the requirements of the Gwinnett County Department of Public
Utilities and the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department, as appropriate,
whose certification of approval shall be required prior to approval of the Exemption Plat
by the City Manager.
f. A Record Survey certified by a Land Surveyor currently registered in the State of Georgia
shall be submitted to and approved by the City showing the lot.
Development Regulations Permits Required for Development or Construction
City of Sugar Hill 4.16
Article 4. Permits Required for Development or Construction.
Section 4.1. Authorization Required for Land Disturbance or Development
Activities.
4.1.1 Permit Required; Exemptions
No disturbance of the land, including clearing, grubbing, or grading activities, shall
commence or proceed except in accordance with the provisions of these Development
Regulations, unless the activity is exempt as an agricultural activity in the AF zoning district, or
is for the construction of an individual single-family detached or duplex residence on a buildable
lot of record, that has been platted for said subdivision and approved by the City of Sugar Hill or
by Gwinnett County within the previous ten (10) years of the date of said permit application, and
only then shall a maximum of 10,000 square feet be graded and the remainder of the lot may be
landscaped. Permits for subdivision lots that are not platted within the previous ten years are
addressed in Section 4.1.7 of this Article. Clearing and grading of more than one lot in a
subdivision development shall be required to be approved by the City prior to construction.
Mass lot clearing and grading may require drainage systems for individual lots to be approved by
the City (see Section 8.4.1)..
4.1.2 Plan Review and Approval
Any developer of land within the City shall first submit to the City such plans, plats, or
construction drawings as may be required by these Regulations and shall have been granted a
permit consistent with these Regulations and approved by the City prior to the initiation of
development activities. Approval of plans by the City officials or employees shall not imply nor
transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering,
architecture, landscape architecture, or any other profession, from the professional corporation or
individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared and sealed. Article 10 of
these Regulations details the elements of the required plans.
4.1.3 Chattahoochee River Corridor Certificate
If any portion of a property included within a proposed project is located within 2,000
feet of the bank of the Chattahoochee River, the project shall first obtain a Certificate authorizing
the development under the provisions of the Metropolitan River Protection Act before any
clearing, grading, or construction activity may be granted a permit by the City or any other
agency. All permits issued by the City pursuant to such authorization shall be consistent with the
requirements and provisions of the Certificate. Any violation of the provisions of the
Metropolitan River Protection Act Certificate shall be considered as though a violation of these
Development Regulations, and shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions
hereunder.
4.1.4 Interdepartmental Review and Approval
The City shall not issue a permit for any development activities until the plans, plats, or
construction drawings, as applicable, have been approved by such other departments or agencies
as may have authority or jurisdiction over said activities in whole or in part.
Development Regulations Permits Required for Development or Construction
City of Sugar Hill 4.17
4.1.5 Activities Limited to Permit Authorization
Development activities shall be limited to those as authorized by the applicable permit and as
may be further restricted by conditions of approval pertaining thereto attached by the City or
other department or agency as may have authority or jurisdiction over said activities in whole
or in part.
4.1.6 Developer's Responsibility for Compliance
No permit shall be interpreted to relieve any developer or subdivider of the responsibility
of maintaining full compliance with all codes, ordinances, and other regulations of the City
except as amended by an approved Waiver, Variance, or other relief granted through applicable
formal appeal procedures for a specific property or application. Any permit issued in error or in
contradiction to the provisions of an adopted code, ordinance, or regulation of the City shall be
considered to have been null and void upon its issuance.
4.1.7 Permit for Lots Platted Ten Years Previous to Permit Application
No building permit shall be issued for any lot located in a platted subdivision if the final
plat for said subdivision was approved by the City of Sugar Hill or by Gwinnett County more
than ten years prior to the date of the application for the building permit until the applicant has
prepared and submitted a residential drainage plan in accordance with the provisions of Section
10.5 of these development regulations.
The residential drainage plan required for these lots shall be prepared by a professional
engineer approved by the City, and all costs for such plan shall be paid by the applicant.
In addition to requiring the submittal and removal of a residential drainage plan, the City may
also condition the issuance of any building permit and any certificate of occupancy on said lot
upon such conditions as the City Manager or his designee determines to be reasonable and
appropriate to insure compliance with findings of the residential drainage plan and to protect
the future lot owner and adjacent owners from any potential drainage problems identified from
the residential drainage plan.
Development Regulations Permits Required for Development or Construction
City of Sugar Hill 4.18
Section 4.2 Land Disturbance Permits.
4.2.1 Clearing Permit, Clearing and Grubbing Permit, and Grading Permit.
The following permits covering portions of the land development process may be
issued in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations and the provisions of
any Metropolitan River Protection Act Certificate, if applicable:
a. Clearing Permit:
(1) A permit limited to clearing only with no grubbing or other land disturbance except for
such activities necessary to install and maintain erosion and sediment control practices
(as defined in the Georgia Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act) may be issued upon
identification of the property, the limits of the area to be cleared and the type of
activities to be undertaken, an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan unless exempt under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance, a hydrology study if an Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan is required, and approval of a Tree Preservation and/or
Replacement Plan as may be required under the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance.
All clearing activities are to be consistent with the provisions of these regulations, the
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance, the Zoning Resolution and any conditions
of zoning approval.
(2) A clearing permit shall expire unless activities are commenced within 60 consecutive
calendar days of issuance of the permit or if activities lapse and are abandoned for a
period exceeding 30 consecutive calendar days.
(3) A clearing permit shall not be construed as approval of or authorization to construct any
improvements, buildings, or other structures on the property.
b. Clearing and Grubbing Permit:
(1) A clearing and grubbing permit may be approved based on approval of a Concept Plan,
Tree Preservation and/or Replacement Plan (if required) for the development, Erosion
and Sediment Control Plan, and hydrology study. Appropriate soil erosion and
sedimentation controls and tree protection measures shall be placed and maintained as
required.
(2) A permit for clearing and grubbing shall expire unless activities are commenced within
60 consecutive calendar days of issuance of the permit or if activities lapse and the
project is abandoned for a period exceeding 30 consecutive calendar days.
(3) A clearing and grubbing permit shall be limited to the removal of vegetation and stumps
and the placement of required tree protection measures and soil erosion and
sedimentation facilities, and may authorize the removal of existing structures on the
property at the option of the developer. No grading or construction activities may be
started under a clearing and grubbing permit except for such activities necessary to
install and maintain erosion and sediment control practices. The approval of a clearing
and grubbing permit shall not imply the approval of or authorization to construct any
improvements, buildings, or other structures on the property.
Development Regulations Permits Required for Development or Construction
City of Sugar Hill 4.19
c. Grading Permit:
(1) A grading permit, which may include clearing and grubbing, may be issued prior to
approval of a development permit, as provided under Article 10 of these Regulations. A
grading permit may also be issued for earth borrow or storage, where no development
or construction is proposed or imminent, based on approval of a grading plan, Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, and hydrology study, consistent with the
requirements of the Buffer, Landscape and Tree Ordinance, the zoning category of the
site, and the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan (as applicable).
(2) A permit authorizing but limited to grading (and clearing and grubbing) shall expire
unless activities are commenced within 60 consecutive calendar days of issuance of the
permit or if activities lapse and the project is abandoned for a period exceeding 30
consecutive calendar days. Any site for which the grading permit expires shall
immediately be stabilized to prevent erosion.
(3) A grading permit shall be limited in its authorization to land grading activities along with
associated tree protection, clearing and grubbing, and demolition activities, and may
authorize the construction of storm drainage improvements and soil erosion and
sedimentation facilities as allowed by the permit itself.
4.2.2 Development Permit
a. Development Activities Authorized
A Development Permit shall be issued to authorize all activities associated with the land
development process, including clearing and grubbing, grading, and the construction of
such improvements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, sewer systems, storm
water drainage facilities, sidewalks, or other structures permanently placed on or in the
property except for buildings or other structures requiring the issuance of a building
permit. Water system improvements shall be authorized solely by the Gwinnett County
Public Utilities Department.
b. Development Permit Approval
A development permit (which may include grading, clearing, and grubbing) shall be
issued at the developer's request following approval of a Metropolitan River Protection
Act Certificate, if applicable, and upon approval of a Preliminary Plat for a subdivision or a
Site Plan for a non-subdivision project, along with approval of all other development
plans and documents required to be submitted under Article 5 of these Regulations. All
plans approved for a development permit shall expire after six months if no permit is
issued within said time period.
Development Regulations Permits Required for Development or Construction
City of Sugar Hill 4.20
c. Expiration of Development Permit
A development permit shall expire 12 consecutive calendar months after issuance unless
development activity as authorized by the permit is initiated within the twelve-month
period or if such authorized activities lapse and the project is abandoned for a period
exceeding 60 consecutive calendar days. The City Manager or his/her designee may
approve on extension not exceeding three consecutive calendar months within which
time development activity must commence or the permit shall expire. Said extension
shall be applied for within the first twelve consecutive calendar months after the permit’s
issuance.
d. Lapse in Construction Activity
For the purposes of these Regulations, a lapse in or suspension of development activity
as authorized by a development permit, as a direct result of action or inaction on the part
of the City completely beyond the control of the developer, shall not be considered as a
lapse in activity causing the development permit to expire. The twelve months within
which development activity must begin shall exclude any such time period during which
the activity is prohibited or has been caused to lapse by said City action or inaction.
Section 4.3 Building Permits
4.3.1 Applicable Codes
Building permits for all structures or interior finishes are issued after meeting the
applicable requirements of the fire prevention and life safety codes, and the various health,
water, sewer, and building codes of the City, as well as the provisions of any Certificate
approved under the Metropolitan River Protection Act, if applicable.
4.3.2 Health Department: On-Site Sewage Disposal
For any structure for which on-site sewage disposal will be provided, a permit issued by
the Gwinnett County Health Department shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit.
Said permit may first require approval by the Gwinnett County Health Department of a plan
showing the location of the sewage disposal system and other site improvements, in accordance
with their regulations.
4.3.3 Single-Family and Duplex Residences
a. A building permit for a single or two-family residence may be issued after the recording
of a Final Plat or after the lot upon which the building is to be located has otherwise
become a buildable lot of record.
b. The approval by the City of a House Location Plan (HLP), Residential Drainage Plan (RDP),
or Residential Drainage Study (RDS), may be required prior to issuance of the building
permit, as noted and conditioned on the Final Plat or as may be required for compliance
with the Georgia Metropolitan River Protection Act. For such lots, a Certificate of
Occupancy shall not be issued until conformance to the HLP, RDP, or RDS has been field
verified by the City as shown on a certified foundation survey prepared by Registered
Land Surveyor. (See Article 6 for plan and study specifications.)
Development Regulations Permits Required for Development or Construction
City of Sugar Hill 4.21
4.3.4 Swimming Pools
Issuance of a building permit for a swimming pool as an accessory use to a single of twofamily
residence, whether to be issued at the same time as or subsequent to the permitting or
construction of the house or duplex, shall first require approval of a Swimming Pool Location
Plan (see example in Appendix A). The plan shall show the proposed location of the swimming
pool and enclosing fence relative to the residence, the property boundaries, setback lines, septic
tank and septic tank drain field (if any), and any easements on the site, and shall comply with all
requirements of the Zoning Resolution and Swimming Pool Code. Based on site conditions, a
Residential Drainage Study (RDS) may also be required prior to issuance of the building permit.
A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued until conformance to the Swimming Pool
Location Plan (and to provisions of the RDS, if applicable) has been field verified by the City.
4.3.5 Multi-Family and Nonresidential Structures
a. Issuance of a building permit for any principal building other than a single-family
detached or duplex residence (and associated accessory structure) shall first require
issuance of a Development Permit for the building site, and the building permit shall be
consistent with said Development Permit.
b. Building plans must be reviewed and approved by the Gwinnett County Fire Services
Division, Gwinnett County Public Utilities Departments, and the Planning and
Development Department, prior to permitting for all structures, except for one and twofamily
residences or accessory structures. Building Plan approval shall expire after one
year, after which rereview and approval by the City shall be required prior to issuance of
a building permit for the building or additional buildings.
4.3.6 Issuance on Buildable Lots of Record; Exceptions
Building permits shall only be issued on buildable lots of record, as defined in these
Regulations, except under special circumstances limited to and as specifically described in this
Section, below.
a. In single-family detached and duplex residential subdivision, building permits for no more
than two model home buildings, except by approval of a Modification application, on
specific lots may be issued by the City on the basis of an approved Preliminary Plat after
the approval of the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department or Gwinnett
County Department of Public Utilities, as appropriate, and subject to all limitations or
requirements as may be established by the City Manager. A Certificate of Occupancy
shall not be issued for the completed model home until the Final Plat encompassing the
model home building lots has been approved and recorded.
b. In nonresidential subdivisions, building permits may be issued by the City on the basis of
an approved Preliminary Plat and after a Development Permit has been approved
reflecting the site plan and construction drawings for specific buildings and associated
site improvements. Issuance of the building permits shall be conditioned on the
following:
Development Regulations Permits Required for Development or Construction
City of Sugar Hill 4.22
(1) A performance bond or other approved surety shall have been received in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney, drawn in favor of the City and in an amount not less
than 110 percent of the cost of completing all public improvements as authorized and
required by the Preliminary Plat.
(2) The performance bond or other approved surety shall not exceed an aggregate total for
all required public improvements of $12,000 per acre for the total acreage included
within the subdivision or portion of the subdivision wherein the improvements are
proposed, except by approval of the City Council.
(3) Gwinnett County Fire Services Division approval shall be required prior to issuance of
any building permit, which may include approval of acceptable access and water under
pressure for combustible construction.
(4) Approval of the Gwinnett County Health Department for on-site sewage disposal or by
the Gwinnett County Water Pollution Control Division for a building to be served by
public sewer shall be required prior to issuance of any building permit.
(5) Construction of the required public improvements shall proceed concurrently with
construction of the buildings.
(6) No Certificate of Occupancy shall be approved for any structure within the subdivision
prior to recording of the Final Plat without the express approval of the City Manager.
(7) The City Manager shall have found that the public interest is best served and that a
public purpose is involved in the acceptance of the performance bond.
c. In fee-simple townhouse subdivisions, a building permit may be issued on a buildable lot
of record established for each building (containing any number of townhouse dwelling
units) through recording of a Final Plat following completion of all required public
improvements. Upon completion of the buildings, the Final Plat shall be rerecorded to
establish individual lots for the townhouse units, based on their actual locations, prior to
issuance of Certificates of Occupancy.
Development Regulations General Requirements
City of Sugar Hill
5.2
3
Amended 6/13/16 KL
Article 5. General Requirements.
Section 5.1 Suitability of the Land.
5.1.1 Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, and any land deemed to be
unsuitable for development due to steep slope, unsuitable soils or subsurface conditions, etc.,
shall not be subjected to development for any uses as may continue such conditions or increase
danger to health, safety, life, or property, unless steps are taken to eliminate or abate these
conditions.
5.1.2 Land within a proposed subdivision or development which is unsuitable for development
shall be incorporated into the buildable lots as excess land. Lots which do not comply with the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance are prohibited.
Section 5.2 Offers of Land Dedication.
5.2.1 Whenever a developer proposes the dedication of land to public use, and the City
Manager or the appropriate agency finds that such land is neither required nor is it suitable for
public use, the City Manager shall require the rearrangement of lots to include such land in
private ownership.
Section 5.3 Zoning and Other Regulations.
5.3.1 Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions required
herein and those contained in zoning regulations, building codes, or other official ordinances,
regulations or resolutions, the most restrictive shall apply. In those instances where the required
right-of-way width or roadway improvements for a specific project have been established as a
condition of zoning approval, the requirements of the zoning condition shall control, whether
more or less restrictive than the requirements of these Regulations.
5.3.2 Building setback lines shall at least conform to the minimum yard requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance. Building setback lines along all public streets shall be no less than the front
yard setback required on the property by the applicable zoning district in the Zoning Ordinance.
Section 5.4 Required Public Improvements.
5.4.1 General Requirements
Every developer of lands within the jurisdiction of these Regulations shall provide the
project access improvements, utilities, drainage improvements and landscaping included in these
Regulations as shall be appropriate to serve the project, in accordance with these Development
Regulations and other pertinent Codes, Ordinances, and regulations of City of Sugar Hill. Said
improvements and associated lands shall be provided at no cost to City of Sugar Hill, and shall
be dedicated or otherwise transferred, as required, to the public in perpetuity and without
covenant or reservation, except as otherwise provided herein.
5.4.2 Public Utilities
Every developer of lands within the jurisdiction of these Regulations shall provide for
adequate domestic water supply, sewage disposal and natural gas supply in accordance with
pertinent Codes, Ordinances and Regulations of the City of Sugar Hill or Gwinnett County.
Development Regulations General Requirements
City of Sugar Hill
5.2
4
Amended 6/13/16 KL
Streetlights and underground electrical utilities shall be provided for all residential subdivisions
in accordance with City of Sugar Hill requirements and approval. It shall be the responsibility of
the developer to coordinate with the proper utility providers to obtain the necessary permits and
approvals to install the required public utilities.
Section 5.5 Lots.
5.5.1 Lots shall at least conform to requirements of the City of Sugar Hill Zoning Ordinance.
5.5.2 Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be required for residential subdivisions
along major thoroughfares where internal access can be provided. A no-access easement of at
least ten feet in width, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the
line of lots abutting such a traffic artery. When located along a major thoroughfare, the noaccess
easement shall be planted and/or screened as required by the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree
Ordinance.
In no-access easements along minor collectors or local streets, planting or other screening
treatments shall be at the sole option of the developer.
Section 5.6 Survey Monuments.
5.6.1 All corners shall be marked with an iron rebar or pin, at least one-half inch in diameter
and 18 inches long and driven so as to extend no less than one inch above the finished grade.
5.6.2 On subdivisions containing floodplains, flood elevation references shall be set in
accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain Management Ordinance.
Section 5.7 Standard Drawings.
5.7.1 The City shall maintain on file for consultation and distribution a set of Standard
Drawings illustrating details of construction and design of streets, storm water drainage facilities,
site improvements and other elements related to the development of land in accordance with
these Regulations and under the jurisdiction of the City.
5.7.2 The Standard Drawings shall illustrate minimum acceptable standards for land
development activities authorized under these Regulations, but shall not supersede more
restrictive prudent design requirements or good engineering practice as applied to specific
situations on a case-by-case basis.
5.7.3 The Standard Drawings shall be treated as though a part of these Regulations for
application to the minimum standards for design and construction of improvements required
herein and subject to the modification and appeal provisions of Article 13.
Section 5.8 Buffers, Landscaping, Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement.
5.8.1 General Applicability
The standards and requirements contained in this Section shall apply only to tree
preservation and replacement, buffers, and landscape areas specifically required by City code,
ordinance or resolution, and shall not apply to general or voluntary landscaping or to open space
otherwise voluntarily provided on a property.
Development Regulations General Requirements
City of Sugar Hill
5.2
5
Amended 6/13/16 KL
5.8.2 General Requirements
Any property required by the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance; the Zoning
Ordinance; or conditions of zoning, special use, or variance approval; to provide a buffer or other
specific landscaping shall do so in compliance with the standards included in the Buffer,
Landscape, and Tree Ordinance and this Section.
a. For any such property, a Buffer and Landscape Plan shall be prepared by those individuals
as required and authorized by the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance, and shall be
approved by the City prior to issuance of a Development Permit on the subject site.
b. At the discretion and option of the applicant, a required Buffer and Landscape Plan and a
required Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan may be combined into a single document,
as long as the details and elements of the plans can be clearly and easily identified.
c. Buffer areas or portions of buffer areas where natural vegetation provides an adequate
visual screen as required by the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance, shall remain
natural and undisturbed by any clearing, grading or other construction activity except as
authorized by the Development Permit.
d. In buffer areas where natural vegetation is non-existent or inadequate to provide a visual
screen, replanting or supplemental planting shall be required in accordance with the
Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance. The City may also approve additional or
alternative screening elements such as planted earthen berms or solid fences where
appropriate to the intent of the requirements of the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree
Ordinance.
e. New plantings in buffers shall be selected for natural survival expectancy for the City of
Sugar Hill environment and for their ability to meet the screening standards established
in the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance.
f. Landscape areas or strips shall include trees and shrubs to the extent required by the
Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance or conditions of zoning,
special use or variance approval. Plant materials may be grouped or arranged so as to
achieve aesthetic results following professional landscaping standards, provided sight
distances as required by these Regulations are preserved.
g. Tree plantings required by the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance for parking lots
may be grouped or arranged so as to achieve aesthetic results, or may be located in
landscape islands within the parking lot.
5.8.3 Tree Preservation and Replacement Requirements
a. Any property required to preserve and protect existing trees or to plant replacement
trees under the provisions of the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance shall do so in
compliance with said Ordinance.
b. Areas set aside for the preservation of existing trees or the planting of new replacement
trees, in fulfillment of any portion of the tree density standard of a property other than
Development Regulations General Requirements
City of Sugar Hill
5.2
6
Amended 6/13/16 KL
the property upon which the areas are located, shall be established within an easement
drawn in favor of the other property, and appropriately recorded.
5.8.4 Landscape Performance Surety
In the event that the requirements of this Section have not been met at the time that a
Certificate of Development Conformance has been submitted and approval requested, the City
Manager shall require a Landscaping Performance Bond. The owner/developer or the contractor
employed by the owner/developer shall post a Landscaping Performance Bond or other City
approved surety in an amount equal to 110 percent of the cost of materials, labor, and other
attendant costs, incidental to the installation of the required landscaping as part of the owner's
Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement with the City. The surety shall:
a. Be drawn in favor of City of Sugar Hill.
b. Be in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney.
c. Specify the time for the completion of the landscaping, which shall not be longer than 3
months following Approval of the Certificate of Development Conformance or be in
accordance with such other time table for completion acceptable to the City.
Section 5.9 Recreation Areas.
5.9.1 Recreation Areas
Land for use as Project open space or recreation shall be provided in single-family
detached subdivisions or multi-family having a gross area of 10 acres or more
a. For each development, 6 percent of the gross land areas shall be provided for the
recreational use, but in no case shall the area required exceed 6 acres. Not over 60
percent of the area many be within the 100-year floodplain.
(1) If recreation facilities are not proposed to be constructed, the land so provided shall be
contiguous or separated only by parking areas and private drives, and of suitable shape
and condition for construction of recreation facilities.
(2) If the developer constructs at least a swimming pool and tennis court, or other
acceptable active recreation facilities, as part of the project, then the land so provided
need not be a single contiguous parcel and the total set-aside area required remains as
stated in 5.9.1.
b. In subdivisions, land provided for recreational use in accordance with a (1), above, and
not proposed for improvement by the developer shall be deeded to a qualified Property
Owners Association upon the approval of the final plat containing said land and shall be
used exclusively for recreational purposes. The qualified Property Owners Association
shall provide for the membership of all the owners of property within the subdivision,
and shall be established under the laws of Georgia; it shall be responsible for the
perpetuation, maintenance and function of the recreation areas and all uses or facilities
therein. The association shall have the authority and duty to assess its members for such
Development Regulations General Requirements
City of Sugar Hill
5.2
7
Amended 6/13/16 KL
maintenance and improvements as set forth in the instrument creating the association.
All covenants shall be recorded simultaneously with the final subdivision plat.
c. If the developer constructs recreational facilities as approved under Section 5.9.1 a.(2),
above, on the recreational land in a subdivision, the land area shall be deeded to a
Homeowner's Association or other legal entity incorporated under the laws of Georgia.
The lands shall be deeded to said organization with a restriction that the land shall be
used exclusively for recreational purposes and shall be made available to all residents of
the subdivision project on an equal basis. The deed shall be filed with the City
simultaneously with the final plat, and shall be held by the City until a Certificate of
Occupancy is issued for the recreational improvements, whereupon the deed shall be
recorded
d. In multi-family rental or condominium projects, land provided for recreational use in
accordance with these requirements shall be held in the ownership of the owner of the
development.
5.9.3 Size of Swimming Pools
The minimum size for a swimming pool and deck area is outlined below. The
minimum deck required shall be equal in size to the pool surface area. The size of
constructing new swimming pools shall be determined by Tables 5A or 5B as
appropriate.
Multiplying Factors of Pool Size: The factor used for pool size shall be calculated on
the basis of one person for each ten (10) square feet in that portion of pool surface
where the depth is less than five (5) feet, plus one person for each thirty (30) square feet
of pool surface in that portion exceeding five (5) feet.
Dwelling/ Living Units - Size of Pool
TABLE 5A. Swimming Pools with Transient Bathers (1)
Number of Units Pool Size Factor/Unit
0-100 75
101-250 50
251-500 15
501+ 05
TABLE 5B. Swimming Pools with Non-Transient Bathers (2)
Number of Units Pool Size Factor/Unit
0-100 75
101-200 60
201-300 40
301-500 15
500+ 10
Development Regulations General Requirements
City of Sugar Hill
5.2
8
Amended 6/13/16 KL
(1) Motels and Hotels – Non residential.
(2) Apartment Complexes, Condominiums, Subdivision Pools and Clubs.
How to Calculate the Size of a Pool. Based the number of dwelling units cumulatively
add the pool size factor per unit. Example: A subdivision has 252 dwelling units then
add 75 + 60 + 40 = 175. The number 175 represents the Pool size Factor. Then based
on the depth of the pool and percentage of the pool greater or less than five (5) feet
multiply the cooresponding percent of Pool Size Factor/unit by either 10 for a depth of
less than five (5) feet or 30 for a depth of greater than five (5) feet (See Multiplying
Factors of Pool Size- above).
Example: A subdivision has 252 units, then add 75 + 60 + 40 = 175. If 100 percent of the
pool depth is 5 feet or less then multiple 175 X 10 = 1,750. The total pool surface area of the
pool will be a minimum 1,750 feet. Note: The surrounding deck area will be a minimum of
1,750 feet.
If 70 percent of the proposed pool depth was 5 feet or less and 30 percent greater than 5
feet deep. Then based on 252 dwelling units and a pool size factor of 175, figure 30 percent of
175 which is 52.5 and multiply by 30 = 1,575 square feet. The 30 percent portion of the pool
greater than a depth of 5 feet would have to be at least 1,575 square feet. To calculate the
minimum remaining area less than 5 feet in depth. Figure 70 percent of 175 which is 122.5 and
multiply by 10 = 1,225 square feet. The 70 percent portion of the pool less than a depth of 5 feet
would have to be at least 1,225 square feet. The total minimum surface area of the pool is 1,575
sq ft + 1,225 sq ft = 2,800 sq ft.
5.9.3 Open Space.
Open space provided in projects shall meet the following requirements:
a. Open Space Shall be Natural and Undisturbed
Open space shall be permanent and shall remain in its natural state, undisturbed and
unoccupied by any structures or impervious surfaces to include septic tanks and septic
tank drain fields and except for approved utility crossings. Pedestrian access in open
space shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Manager. Buffers,
floodplains, and wetlands may be utilized as open space.
b. Ownership Requirements
Open space provided in a development shall be owned and maintained by the property
owner, or in the case of a subdivision, by a property owner’s association. The association
shall be established by the developer prior to or concurrent with the recording of the
Final Plat of the subdivision. The association bylaws shall include the following provisions:
(1) Automatic (mandatory) membership of all purchasers of lots therein and their
successors: and,
(2) Conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the developer to
the lot owners shall be specified which shall not exceed four (4) years from the date of
recording of the Final Plat of the subdivision; and,
(3) Responsibility for maintenance, insurance, and taxes; and,
Development Regulations General Requirements
City of Sugar Hill
5.2
9
Amended 6/13/16 KL
(4) Sharing of the costs of maintenance among the lot owners with shares defined by the
association bylaws; and,
(5) Authority to place liens on the real property of members who fail to pay their dues or
assessments; and
(6) Prohibition on the dissolution of the association without the approval of the City of Sugar
Hill
c. Maintenance
The property owner, or the property owner’s association, shall be responsible for
the maintenance of open space. Open space shall be kept in reasonable order and
condition and shall be maintained free from refuse, junk and debris.
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.30
ARTICLE 6. Access and Right of Way Requirements and Street
Improvement and Construction Requirements.
Section 6.1 Access
6.1.1 When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall
be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to
those areas not presently served by streets.
6.1.2 No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining
parcels of land. Every development shall be designed to facilitate access to adjoining properties
which are developed or anticipated to be developed in a manner substantially similar to the
subject property. Locations of interparcel access shall be as required by and subject to the
approval of the City.
6.1.3 Any lot required to provide minimum frontage by the zoning district in which the lot is
located shall provide vehicular access directly from a public street along the frontage or along
any other property line which abuts a public street, except as provided in Section 6.1.5.
6.1.4 Private streets as may be approved under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and
shall be constructed to the roadway construction standards of the City of Sugar Hill, as contained
herein.
6.1.5 Vehicular access easements may be provided from a public street indirectly via easement
in any one or more of the following circumstances:
a. The property is not required to provide a minimum frontage by the applicable zoning
district, provided that the easement shall be in a location and the access driveway shall
have a width and alignment acceptable to the Gwinnett County Fire Services Division and
the City.
b. The property is a buildable lot of record, as defined herein, but does not meet the
minimum frontage requirement of the applicable zoning district. The property must be
served by an exclusive access easement which shall be limited to the provision of access
to only one principal use or structure.
c. The access easement serves a single-family residence on a lot which is otherwise a
buildable lot of record, and which is sharing a common driveway with no more than one
other single-family residence.
d. The access easement was lawfully established as such under the code, ordinances, or
regulations of the City of Sugar Hill prior to the adoption of these Development
Regulations.
e. The access easement coincides with a private roadway approved under the code,
ordinances, or regulations of the City of Sugar Hill. All new private roadways must be
constructed to the roadway standards of these Development Regulations, and their
ownership and maintenance responsibility by private party(s) must be clearly established
on the Final Plat of the development.
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.31
f. The access easement serves a buildable lot of record which meets the minimum frontage
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, but at which point the access is not achieved.
Section 6.2 Streets.
6.2.1 Dedication of Street Right-of-Way
Right-of-Way for all Project Public streets, existing and proposed, shall be dedicated in
accordance with the street classifications as shown on the Long-Range Road Classification Map
of the Comprehensive Plan.
6.2.2 Street Improvements
Streets, whether existing or new, shall be constructed or improved under those
circumstances and to the standards as established in these Regulations. Roadway improvements
shall be in accordance with the street classifications as shown on the Long-Range Road
Classification Map of the Comprehensive Plan, or the Zoning Ordinance, as applicable, or as
otherwise required by the City Council.
Section 6.3 Minimum Right-of-Way and Street Improvements.
6.3.1 Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths
Minimum widths for new construction (new streets or Project Access Improvements)
shall be as shown on the following Table 6-A.
TABLE 6-A. Minimum Right-of-Way and Roadway Widths for New Streets and Project Access
Improvements.
Street Category Minimum Right-of-Way (1) Minimum Roadway (2)
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL 120' TO 150' 6 THROUGH LANES
MAJOR ARTERIAL 100' TO 120' UNDIVIDED 67'
100' DIVIDED 2 X 29'
6 LANES
MINOR ARTERIAL 80' TO 100' 52' TO 67'
MAJOR COLLECTOR 80' 52'
MINOR COLLECTOR 60 TO 80' 28'
LOCAL STREET
NONRESIDENTIAL 60' (3) 32'
NONRESIDENTIAL CUL-DE-SAC 60' RADIUS 50' RADIUS
RESIDENTIAL - URBAN 50' 27'
RESIDENTIAL - URBAN CUL-DE-SAC 50' RADIUS 40' RADIUS
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.32
RESIDENTIAL - RURAL (4) 60' 24'
RESIDENTIAL - RURAL CUL-DE-SAC (4) 60' (4) RADIUS 40' RADIUS
RESIDENTIAL – CONSERVATION (5) 44’(5) 22’(5)
RESIDENTIAL – CONSERVATION CUL-DE-SAC (5) 50’ RADIUS (5) 40’ RADIUS (5)
FOOTNOTES:
(1) The greater right-of-way width shall apply under circumstances as described in Section 6.3.2 (c.).
(2) Roadway width dimensions are back-of-curb to back-of-curb except where noted.
(3) Utility easement shall be provided in a location and size as required by the Gwinnett County Department of Public
Utilities.
(4) May be reduced to 50 feet if curb, gutter, and piped drainage system is provided.
(5) Only allowed for new local streets in a single family residential subdivision under the Agricultural and Forest (AF)
zoning classification. The first 300 feet upon entering from a street with a more restrictive category shall have a
right-of-way width of at least 50 feet and pavement width of at least 24 feet. Sidewalk width may be reduced to four
(4) feet and is only required on one side of the street as long as continuous accessibility is provided along the entire
length of the street.
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.33
6.3.2 Street Rights-of-Way
a. The minimum width of street right-of-way shall be dedicated based upon the street
categories as shown on the Long-Range Road Classification Map in the Comprehensive
Plan and as contained in these Regulations.
b. Additional street right-of-way width shall be required to be dedicated at intersections or
other locations which the property abuts upon where deceleration lanes, turning lanes,
storage lanes, medians, or realignments are required for traffic safety and minimum
right-of-way standards would be inadequate to accommodate the improvements.
c. If a new street or thoroughfare is proposed by the Comprehensive Plan, Gwinnett
County. or the State of Georgia to adjoin or traverse the property, permits shall not be
issued until the City Manager has submitted the project to the City Council for review in
order to seek a determination if the City of Sugar Hill should acquire the right-of-way or if
a study of alternate routes should be undertaken. The review period by the City of Sugar
Hill shall not exceed 90 days from the date of permit application. If, after the 90 day
review, the City Council is unable to reach a decision, there shall not be any further delay
of a requested permit for this situation.
6.3.3 Project Access Improvements - Single Family Detached Single Family Attached, and
Duplex Residential Subdivisions.
a. When property that abuts upon an existing or proposed City road is to be developed or
redeveloped as a single family detached or duplex subdivision and the City street will
provide access to the property, Project Access Improvements to the City road
(deceleration lanes, turn lanes, etc.) shall be provided by the developer as required
herein.
b. A deceleration lane shall be required to be provided at each subdivision street entrance
that is provided street access to a Minor Collector Street or Major Thoroughfare. In the
event a street has an existing or proposed median, and the developer desires to
construct a median break to serve the subdivision, a left turn lane leading to the median
break shall be required to be provided by the developer and shall meet the standards
contained herein.
c. Deceleration lanes shall have a length of 200 feet, with an additional 50 foot taper length,
a pavement width of 12 feet (exclusive of curb and gutter) and shall be provided with
curb and gutter. Additional right-of-way to accommodate the deceleration lane and an
11 foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to the City of Sugar Hill at no cost.
Associated drainage improvements as deemed necessary by the construction of the
deceleration lane shall also be required.
d. Other Project Access Improvements may be required by the City upon the
recommendation of the Department of Transportation in order to ensure adequate site
access, pedestrian access, convenience and safety to the motoring public.
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.34
e. The developer shall be responsible for the relocation of public or private utilities and
drainage structures, as may be occasioned by the required Project Access Improvements.
6.3.4 Project Access Improvements - Multi-Family and Nonresidential Developments
a. When property that abuts upon an existing or proposed City road is to be developed or
redeveloped for multi-family or nonresidential uses and the City road will provide access
to the property, access improvements to the City road (deceleration lanes, turn lanes,
etc.) shall be provided by the developer.
b. A deceleration lane shall be required to be provided at each project driveway or
subdivision street entrance, as applicable, that is provided street access to a Minor
Collector Street or Major Thoroughfare. In the event a street has an existing or proposed
median, and the developer desires to construct a median break to serve the project, a
left turn lane leading to the median break shall be required to be provided by the
developer and shall meet the standards contained herein.
c. Deceleration lanes shall have a length of 200 feet, with an additional 50 foot taper length,
pavement width of 12 feet (exclusive of curb and gutter) and shall be provided with curb
and gutter. Additional right-of-way to accommodate the deceleration lane and an 11
foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to the City of Sugar Hill at no cost.
Associated drainage improvements as deemed necessary by the construction of the
deceleration lane shall also be required.
d. When a multi-family and non-residential property adjoining GA State Route 20, GA State
Route 23 and Peachtree Industrial Boulevard is developed or redeveloped interparcel
access improvements shall be required to facilitate vehicular movement to neighboring
properties without accessing a public road. Required interparcel access improvements shall
include a driveway designed in accordance with these Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Sugar Hill as well as any applicable State or County Department of Transportation
requirements. This driveway shall be contained entirely within an associated access
easement of sufficient dimension to include all paving as well as curb and gutter necessary
for construction of the driveway.
e. Other Project Access Improvements may be required by the City upon the
recommendation of the Department of Transportation in order to ensure adequate site
access, pedestrian access, convenience and safety to the motoring public.
f. The Developer shall be responsible for the relocation of public or private utilities and
drainage structures as may be occasioned by the required Project Access Improvements.
6.3.5 New Streets
a. All new streets proposed to be constructed in a subdivision or other development,
whether to be public or private, shall be designed and constructed at least to the
standards contained in these Regulations in accordance with the category of said streets.
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.35
b. In residential subdivisions, a dead end ("stub") street required under Section 6.4.4 to
provide access to an abutting property may be exempted from construction of roadway
improvements and public utilities under the following circumstances:
(1) No lot within the proposed subdivision will gain access from the "stub" street.
(2) A Concept Plan has not been submitted or approved on the neighboring tract.
(3) The "stub" street shall be fully designed as part of the Development Plans. However,
the right-of-way shall only be cleared and rough graded in accordance with the
approved plans, and all disturbed areas grassed.
(4) Connections for future extension of all public utilities shall be constructed as part of the
subdivision. Curb returns shall be constructed as part of the subdivision. Curb returns
shall be provided to the future "stub" street roadway location, and curb and gutter shall
be installed across the roadway stub at the right-of-way line (extended).
(5) The right-of-way for the "stub" street shall be dedicated as part of the Final Plat. Slope
easements or construction easements, if required by the street design, shall be shown
on the Final Plat.
(6) The designs for new streets shall discourage cul-de-sacs. The designs for new streets
shall encourage contiguous streets, connected streets, grid pattern etc. Innovative
street designs shall be encouraged to create conservation and walkable communities.
6.3.6 Substandard Streets
a. In the event that a development has access to a substandard street (i.e., a dirt or gravel
road), the following Project Access Improvements shall be required:
(1) If the abutting substandard street provides access to the development and is dirt or
gravel, the street shall be upgraded by the developer to a paved roadway from the
project entrance to the nearest standard paved road along the route of access.
b. Off-site Project Access Improvements required under a.(1), above, shall at a minimum,
result in a full-section roadway meeting the requirements of a Local Residential Rural
roadway (24 feet edge to edge of pavement, with drainage swale ditches as needed).
Responsibilities shall be as follows:
(1) The Developer shall design the road and provide the labor, equipment, and materials
required for roadway improvements and necessary drainage improvements.
(2) If the City desires the roadway to be improved to a standard greater than that for a
Local Residential Rural roadway, the City shall provide or pay the cost of the additional
materials and labor.
(3) All right-of-way required for these off-site improvements shall be acquired by the
developer at no expense to the City. If the developer is unable to acquire the right-ofway,
the City Attorney shall initiate acquisition proceedings, at the expense of the
developer, after authorization by the City Council.
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.36
6.3.7 Improvements Along State Highways
For any development which abuts a state highway or other right-of-way controlled by the
State of Georgia, improvements to the roadway and the location and design of any street or
driveway providing access from the state highway shall comply with the standards and
requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation. A permit for the proposed access or
improvements shall be required to have been approved by the Georgia D.O.T. and incorporated
into the construction drawings for the project prior to issuance of a development permit by the
City.
Section 6.4 General Layout Requirements.
6.4.1 Conformance
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform
at a minimum to the Comprehensive Plan and these Regulations.
6.4.2 Local Streets and Minor Collectors
Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
Minor collectors shall be provided to channel through traffic movements within a
development, where appropriate to the design and a major thoroughfare is not proposed
by the Comprehensive Plan. Minor collectors also may be provided as central routes
within large residential subdivisions, where appropriate to the design, based on project
traffic demands exceeding 2000 trips per day (ADT).
6.4.3 Cul-de-sac Streets
a. Dead end streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall provide a cul-de-sac
turnaround and may be no more than 2000' in length. Additional length necessitated by
topography or property configuration may be approved by the City Manager.
b. The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the center of the cul-de-sac to
the center of the intersection with another street, whether a through street or another
cul-de-sac or dead-end street.
c. Eyebrow cul-de-sac (half cul-de-sacs) will be allowed only at "right-angled" intersections
having an interior angle between 80 degrees and 100 degrees.
d. Cul-de-sacs shall conform to the layout and dimensional requirements as shown in the
Standard Drawings.
6.4.4 Other Dead End Streets
a. A dead end street shall be provided to the boundary of a subdivision where necessary to
provide access to a land-locked abutting property, for planned continuity of future
circulation, for improved access for public safety vehicles, or for the extension of public
water or other utilities to neighboring lands. Such dead end streets shall be designed so
as to allow their reasonable extension, and shall be located so as to be reasonably
incorporated into a street design for the neighboring property. The stub street
requirement may be waived by the City Manager.
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.37
b. Dead end streets on abutting property shall be extended into a proposed subdivision and
incorporated into the street design of the development. This requirement may be
modified by the City Manager in cases of serious topographical hardship or dissimilar
zoning which would create unacceptable land use conflicts between the two
developments. This modification may be conditioned on the provision of easements
necessary for the extension of public utilities, the provision of cul-de-sac or other
permanent turnaround on the dead end street, or the removal of the dead end street
back to its nearest intersection.
c. A dead end street may be required to provide a temporary vehicular turnaround within
the right-of-way. This requirement may be waived if extension of the dead end street is
approved and under construction prior to its inclusion in a Final Plat.
d. Where a street dead ends at the property boundary and the street exceeds 1000' in
length, a permanent cul-de-sac shall be required. In this situation, right-of-way to the
property boundary shall be required, but the pavement shall not be extended to the
property boundary beyond the edge of the paved cul-de-sac turnaround. In no case shall
a dead end street exceed 2000' in length unless approved by the City due to unusual
topographic conditions or property configuration.
6.4.5 Service Roads
Where a development borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or limited access
highway right-of-way or major thoroughfare, a public street may be required to be constructed
and dedicated within the development approximately parallel to and on each side of such rightof-
way.
6.4.6 Half-Streets
Half-streets (new boundary streets having one-half of the minimum required right-of-way
or pavement width) shall not be allowed nor access to same be permitted should it exist.
6.4.7 Reserve Strips
Land in private ownership adjacent to public rights-of-way which could control or are
intended to control access to streets, alleys, or public lands shall not be permitted unless their
control is given to the City under ownership, dedication, or easement conditions approved by the
City Attorney or acceptable to the City Manager. No development shall be designed so as to
deny access to abutting properties.
6.4.8 Alleys
Alleys shall not be provided except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory
to the City Manager of the need for same. In the event the City Manager approves a design
which proposes alleys, the alley shall be constructed as though it were a local street pursuant to
the standards contained in these Regulations.
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.38
6.4.9 Street Jogs
a. Street jogs shall either directly align or have offsets of a minimum of 125 feet for
residential subdivision streets and a minimum of 200 feet for nonresidential subdivision
streets, as measured between centerlines of said streets.
b. All major thoroughfares shall provide offsets as required by the City, where alignment is
not desirable or feasible, but in no case be spaced less than 600 feet apart as measured
between centerlines of said streets.
Section 6.5 Traffic Control Devices
6.5.1 Traffic Control Signs
Street signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization, shall be
provided through payment of fees to the Gwinnett County Department of Transportation for the
installation thereof.
6.5.2 Street Name Signs
Street name signs shall have a green background with white legends mounted on
channelized posts. Alternate post material shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Gwinnett County Traffic Engineer. The posts and signs will be furnished and installed by the
County at all street intersections. The developer (or homeowners association in the event an
alternate signpost is chosen at a later date) shall pay the County's costs.
6.5.3 Traffic Signals and Signs
All traffic signals and signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (no decorative traffic control devices will be allowed).
6.5.4 Striping Requirements
All newly constructed streets having 4 or more lanes (including auxiliary lanes) and
existing streets being widened with one or more additional lanes shall be striped or the payment
of said striping costs shall be required from the Developer by the Gwinnett County Department
of Transportation prior to the Approval of Development Conformance for the project. Striping
shall be accomplished with paint meeting Georgia DOT standards conforming to the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
6.5.5 Payment of Fees
Payment for materials and installation of street name and traffic control signs in new
developments shall be required by the Gwinnett County Department of Transportation prior to
the Approval of Development Conformance.
6.5.6 Street Lights
The installation of all street lighting fixtures within City right-of-way must be approved
by the City or the Gwinnett County Department of Transportation prior to such installation.
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.39
Section 6.6 Specifications.
Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of
construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction shall
conform to the latest specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation (Georgia DOT).
Section 6.7 Subgrade Preparation for All Streets.
6.7.1 Subgrade preparation shall be in accordance with Georgia DOT specifications and these
Regulations.
6.7.2 If any sections of the subgrade are composed of topsoil, organic, or other unsuitable or
unstable material, such material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material and then
thoroughly compacted as specified for fill or stabilized with stone or a geo-textile or geo-grid.
6.7.3 Fill shall be placed in uniform, horizontal layers not more than 8" thick (loose
measurement). Moisture content shall be adjusted as necessary to compact material to 95% of
maximum dry density except for the top 12" which shall be compacted to 100% of maximum dry
density.
6.7.4 After the earthwork has been completed, all storm drainage, water, and sanitary sewer
utilities have been installed within the right-of-way as appropriate, and the backfill in all such
ditches thoroughly compacted, the subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grades, and typical
roadway section shown on the plans.
6.7.5 Utility trenches cut in the subgrade shall be backfilled as specified herein. Compaction
tests at the rate of one per 150 feet of trench shall be provided to verify compaction.
6.7.6 The subgrade must pass roll testing prior to placement of the base material. With the
approval of the City, a geo-textile or grid may be used to stabilized a subgrade that does not pass
proofrolling.
6.7.7 When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed,
a layer of stone (except crusher run) shall be laid as a traffic surface. This material shall not be
used as a part of the base material. It may be worked into the subgrade, or it shall be removed
before the base course is set up for paving.
6.7.8 Provisions shall be made to drain low points in the road construction when the final
paving is delayed. A break in the berm section is required when the curbing has not been
constructed. After installation, drainage under the curb to side slopes is required, using minimum
4 inch diameter pipe sections.
Section 6.8 Project Access Improvement Standards.
6.8.1 For sections 4 feet or greater in width, the section shall comply with the construction
standards for new streets, in accordance with the street's category as shown on the
Comprehensive Plan. The base course must pass roll testing prior to paving. If a delay in paving
is reasonably expected by the Developer or the City, the base shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of
R.C. 70 per square yard and cured for 78 days before paving.
6.8.2 For sections less than 4 feet wide, 7 inches of Class "A" concrete base (5 inches on local
and minor collector streets) and 1 1/2 inches of "E" or "F" topping shall be required.
Section 6.9 New Local and Minor Collector Streets.
6.9.1 Local and Minor Collector Streets Within a Residential Subdivision shall be a 'Two-Pass
Sreet'. The following types of base materials may be used:
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.40
(a) Crushed Stone Base
The base course shall consist of at least 8 inches of graded aggregate base. After being
thoroughly compacted and brought to proper section 2 inches of "B" binder shall be
applied. If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the Developer or the City, the base
shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard the same day it is compacted,
and cured for 7 days prior to paving. The final 1 inch of type "E" or "F" wearing course
shall be applied after 90% of the houses on the street have been built, or prior to the
18th month of the maintenance period, whichever occurs first. Prior to applying wearing
course, a tack coat shall be applied to the binder course at a rate of no less than 0.05
gallons per square yard. Type of tack shall be approved by the City prior to placement.
6.9.2 Local Residential-Rural Streets
Where allowed (upgrading off-site substandard streets), Local Residential-Rural Streets
do not require curb and gutter. The road base shall be extended 1 foot beyond the edge of
pavement, and the shoulders shall extend 8 feet from the edge of pavement to a standard ditch
section on each side (see Standard Drawings). Otherwise, the roadway shall comply with the
standards for new residential subdivision streets, above.
6.9.3 Nonresidential Subdivision or Development Streets
The following standards shall apply to new local and minor collector streets in
nonresidential subdivision and other nonresidential projects. The following types of base
materials may be used:
(a) Two-Pass Street (Crushed Stone Base):
The base course shall consist of at least 8 inches of graded aggregate base. After being
thoroughly compacted and brought to proper section 2 inches of "B" binder shall be
applied. If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the Developer or the City, the base
shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard the same day it is compacted,
and cured for 7 days prior to paving. The final 1 inch of type "E" or "F" wearing course
shall be applied after 90% of the buildings on the street have been built, or prior to 18th
month of the maintenance period (but after the 11th month), whichever occurs first.
Prior to applying wearing course, a tack coat shall be applied to the binder course at a
rate of no less than 0.05 gallons per square yard. Type of tack shall be approved by the
City prior to placement.
Section 6.10 New Major Thoroughfares.
6.10.1 Minor collectors shall be constructed in accordance with designs prepared by the City,
Gwinnett County, or Georgia DOT, or, if no design has been prepared, to the following standards
as indicated by Table 6-B:
Table 6-B. Construction Standards for Major Thoroughfares.
STREET CATEGORY BASE BINDER TOPPING
Principal Arterial 10" GAB 5"* 1 1/2" E or F
Major Arterial 10" GAB 4" B 1 1/2" E or F
Minor Arterial 10" GAB 3" B 1 1/2" E or F
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.41
Major Collector 10" GAB 3" B 1 1/2" E or F
Minor Collector 8" GAB 2" B 1 1/2" E or F
*2 1/2" type "B" binder and 2 1/2" asphaltic concrete base.
Section 6.11 Curb and Gutter.
6.11.1 All new streets and Project Access Improvements shall be provided with curb and gutter
except in improvements to substandard streets, where swale ditches may be provided in lieu of
curb and gutter. All gutters shall drain smoothly with no areas of ponding.
6.11.2 Residential Curbing
Residential curbing shall meet the following requirements:
a. Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by Georgia D.O.T.) and have a minimum strength
of 3,000 PSI at 28 days.
b. Typical minimum section shall be 6" x 24" X 12".
c. Vertical curbing only.
6.11.3 Industrial or Commercial Curbing
Industrial or commercial curbing shall meet the following requirements:
a. Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by Georgia D.O.T.) and have a minimum strength
of 3,000 PSI at 28 days.
b. Typical minimum section shall be 8" X 24" X 14".
c. Vertical curbing only.
6.11.4 Principal Arterial and Major Arterial Curbing
Principal Arterial and Major Arterial curbing shall meet the following requirements:
a. Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by Georgia D.O.T.) and have a minimum strength
of 3,000 PSI at 28 days.
b. Typical minimum section shall be 8" X 30" X 14".
c. Vertical curbing only.
6.11.5 Construction Methods:
a. Curb and gutter shall be set true to line and grade, horizontal be field staked, and
finished to the section shown on the plans. Along the Project Access Improvements of a
road which the Department of Transportation has identified for resurfacing within 1 year
of the new construction, the grade of the new gutter shall be placed 1" above the Project
Access Improvement pavement grade in areas where drainage will not be adversely
affected.
b. Line and grade shall be set by developer's engineer or surveyor on grade less than 2% and
over 12%, and within 100 feet in both directions from all low points.
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.42
c. One-half inch expansion joints or premolded bituminous expansion joint material shall be
provided at all structures and radius points and at intervals not to exceed 250 feet in the
remainder of the curb and gutter.
d. Inferior workmanship or unprofessional construction methods resulting in unacceptable
curb and gutter will be cause for rejection of the finished work.
e. Disturbed areas along all curbing shall be backfilled, stabilized, and grassed.
Section 6.12 Underground Utilities.
6.12.1 All water and sanitary sewer utilities and storm drain facilities within the curbs shall be
installed and the ditches backfilled and thoroughly compacted before any pavement or base is
installed.
6.12.2 Once the base has been placed, all further installation of utilities under the roadway shall
be bored or other wise comply with Section 7.5, Street Cuts.
6.12.3 All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought flush to the finished grade within
the roadway section.
6.12.4 All utility locations shall adhere to the details found in the Standard Drawings.
Section 6.13 Sidewalks.
6.13.1 Required Sidewalks
a. Sidewalks shall be provided adjacent to both sides of streets within all single family
subdivisions, multi-family developments and non-residential subdivisions.
b. Sidewalks shall be provided along the street from which a multi-family development has
access.
c. Every site development, subdivision development or building project shall provide
sidewalks along the entire length of all property frontage.
6.13.2 Design Standards
Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the Design Standards contained in
this Subsection unless a Modification is granted by the City Manager.
a. Sidewalks shall be located 2 feet from the back of curb. Where no curbing exists or
proposed road improvements are anticipated, sidewalks shall be placed in a location
acceptable to the appropriate City, County and State agencies.
b. All new sidewalks shall match and provide a smooth transition to any existing sidewalks
with no steps.
c. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete and shall be a minimum of five (5’) feet in
width and 4 inches thick. Concrete shall be Class "B" (as defined by Georgia DOT) and
have a strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days.
d. Curb ramps shall be provided at all curb termini and shall be a minimum of five (5’) feet in
width exclusive of flared sides.
e. Expansion joints shall be provided at all property lines (extended), driveway crossings and
storm drain catch basins. Control joints shall be provided every 10 feet, at the edge of
Development Regulations Access and Right-of-Way Requirements
Street Improvement and Construction Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 6.43
every driveway apron and along the entire width of the driveway where it crosses the
property line.
f. Disturbed areas resulting from sidewalk construction shall be backfilled, stabilized, and
grassed.
6.13.3 Installation Deadlines
Sidewalks shall be installed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or Final
Plat approval in accordance with this Subsection unless a performance bond is posted. The cost
of sidewalk installation may be set aside in escrow where proposed road improvements may
impact the location of the sidewalk.
a. Sidewalks required on residential building lots shall be installed prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy for each individual dwelling.
b. Sidewalks required on common or recreation areas shall be installed prior to Final Plat
approval.
c. Sidewalks required on other projects shall be installed prior to issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy or Certificate of Completion, as appropriate.
Development Regulations Utilities and Easement
City of Sugar Hill
7.4
4
Article 7. Utilities and Easements.
Section 7.1 Placement of Utilities.
7.1.1 All authorized public underground utilities shall be located within the right-of-way of a
public street or within an easement designated for such use. Within public street right-of-way,
placement of the various authorized utilities (power, gas, cable TV, water and sewer) shall
conform to the specific locations designated for such use by the City of Sugar Hill, as illustrated
in the Standard Drawings or the Gwinnett County Standard Drawings.
7.1.2 No other underground utilities, such as private lawn sprinkler systems, yard lighting, etc.,
shall be installed within a public right-of-way or easement except by authorization of the City.
Such authorization, if issued, shall require the applicant to assume all repair costs of the
applicant's facilities should they be damaged during the course of installation, maintenance or
repair of any of the public utilities authorized to occupy said right-of-way or easement.
Section 7.2 Water System and Fire Hydrants.
7.2.1 The developer shall install or have installed a system of water mains connected to a
public water supply system in accordance with the requirements of the authority having
jurisdiction.
7.2.2 All water mains, fire hydrants and appurtenances shall be designed in accordance with
the policies, standards, plans and specifications of the Gwinnett County Fire Prevention
Ordinance and the water system having jurisdiction. Where jurisdiction resides with the
Gwinnett County Water System, the public watermains and appurtenances shall be designed by
the County Water System upon submittal of the Development Plans for the project.
7.2.3 Within the Gwinnett County Water System jurisdiction, water mains and appurtenances
shall be installed after installation of the curbs and gutters and before paving, or after staking of
the curb line and submission to the Water System of an as-graded survey of the street profile
accompanied by a certification executed by the owner as required by the Water System that the
subgrade will not change. Water mains shall be relocated as necessary to meet Water System
regulations prior to Approval of Development Conformance, if improperly located to final curb
line or grade.
Section 7.3 Sanitary Sewer Disposal.
7.3.1 Connection to an approved sewage disposal system shall be made, which may require the
construction of an on-site system or the extension of public sanitary sewerage and associated
appurtenances, as required under the Water Pollution Control Regulations of Gwinnett County or
as required by the Gwinnett County Health Department.
7.3.2 No septic tanks shall be allowed if public sewer is available. All structures shall connect
to public sewer when such sewer is available, in accordance with the Sewer Regulations of
Gwinnett County. Sewer availability shall be determined by the Gwinnett County Water
Pollution Control Division.
Development Regulations Utilities and Easement
City of Sugar Hill
7.4
5
7.3.3 Lots with septic tanks and tile drain-field sewerage disposal systems shall contain the
contiguous area outside of the 100-year floodplain as required by the Health Department.
7.3.4 The Health Department may require notation that certain lots must meet additional
requirements prior to issuance of a building permit, or other wise limit development relative to
Health Department regulations.
a. Such lots may include lots upon which adequate depth to water table must be
demonstrated during the appropriate season of the year, adequate percolation tests
must be performed, limitations upon the number of bedrooms in a dwelling, etc.,
b. No lot shall be included on a Final Plat which the Health Department is not confident will
meet all Health Department regulations at a reasonable cost or within a reasonable
period of time, except lots proposed to be served by sanitary sewer in subdivision where
"dry" sewer has been installed. Such lots shall be noted: “Approval by Water Pollution
Control for connection to sanitary sewer required prior to issuance of a building permit."
Section 7.4 Easements.
7.4.1 Temporary construction easements and permanent easements for public utilities, drainage
or other public facilities shall be dedicated to the City of Sugar Hill or Gwinnett County in
accordance with City or County Requirements. All easements shall be stabilized in accordance
with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.
7.4.2 Drainage easements are required for any part of the drainage system which is designed to
carry storm water runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed. Drainage easements
for improved ditches, pipe construction, and detention facilities shall be cleared, opened, and
stabilized at the time of development to control surface water run-off (See also Article 8). Runoff
slope and side slopes to be specified by the Developer's Engineer, according to good
engineering practice. Drainage easements shall be provided according to the minimum
requirements found in TABLE 7-A below, and shall conform to City or County Standards. The
minimum easement width shall be rounded up to the nearest 5 feet. For pipes exceeding 16 feet
in depth, a pre-submittal conference shall be held with the City to determine what additional
requirements may be required. If concrete pipe is used, the minimum easement width shall be 20
feet and the widths in Table 7-A shall be used as building setback limits. The setback shall be
shown on the plans.
TABLE 7-A. Easements for Storm Drain Pipes.
Pipe
Size
(FT)
MAXIMUM PIPE INVERT DEPTH (FT)
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
MINIMUM EASEMENT WIDTH (FT)
1.25 20 20 20 20 20 25 25 30 30 30 35 35 40
1.5 20 20 20 20 20 25 25 30 30 30 35 35 40
Development Regulations Utilities and Easement
City of Sugar Hill
7.4
6
2.0 20 20 20 20 25 25 25 30 30 30 35 35 40
2.5 20 20 20 20 25 25 25 30 30 35 35 35 40
3.0 20 20 20 20 25 25 30 30 30 35 35 35 40
3.5 20 20 20 25 25 30 30 30 35 35 40 40
4.0 20 20 20 25 25 30 30 30 35 35 40 40
4.5 20 25 25 25 30 30 35 35 35 40 40
5.0 20 25 25 25 30 30 35 35 35 40 40
5.5 25 25 30 30 30 35 35 40 40 40
6.0 25 25 30 30 30 35 35 40 40 40
7.4.3 Permanent sanitary sewer easements shall be no less than 20 feet in width when no other
parallel utilities are located therein. When warranted, temporary construction easement widths
shall be determined by the Gwinnett County Public Utilities Dept., Water Pollution Control
Division.
7.4.4 A common 30-foot wide easement for sanitary sewer and drainage purposes may be
allowed if the pipes are parallel and at least 10 feet is provided between pipes (on center).
7.4.5 Drainage easements shall be provided where a development is traversed by or contains a
water course, impoundment, detention facility, floodplain, natural stream or channel. It shall
conform substantially to the limits of such natural drainage feature, but shall be no less than 20
feet in width.
7.4.6 Drainage easements off the street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the Final Plat.
The property owner will be required to keep the easement free of obstruction in such a way as to
assure the maximum designed flow at all times. The property owner shall not alter any drainage
improvements without the prior written approval from the City. Structures, except driveways,
shall not be constructed or erected in an easement without the prior written approval from the
City. Driveways shall cross an easement as close to perpendicular as practical. Property owners
may plant landscaping in an easement that is piped; however, the City is not responsible for
replacing the landscape material located in the easement when it is removed to maintain the
drainage system.
7.4.7 All drainage, sewer, access or other easements which were required to be cleared shall be
fine graded and grassed within 10 days of completing construction work. The use of sediment
control measures may be required to protect the area until a comprehensive vegetative cover is
obtained.
Section 7.5 Street Cuts.
7.5.1 All utility construction plans within City or County right-of-way shall be reviewed and
approved by the City or the Gwinnett County Dept. of Transportation before construction begins.
Street cuts shall not be allowed unless deemed absolutely necessary due to the presence of rock,
the need to tap into an existing line beneath the road surface, or other circumstance which makes
boring impossible or infeasible.
7.5.2 No street cut shall be authorized until such Street Cut Fees have been paid.
Development Regulations Utilities and Easement
City of Sugar Hill
7.4
7
7.5.3 If approved, all trenches shall be backfilled and compacted the same day the trench is
opened.
a. Trenches under the paving shall be returned to 95% compaction.
b. Trenches elsewhere shall be returned to 90% compaction.
c. See Section 6.7 for trench compaction and test requirements.
7.5.4 All trenches under paving shall be concreted with 8" of Class "A" concrete base and 1 1/2
inch of type "E" or "F" wearing course asphalt is to be spread.
a. The paving cut shall be widened to a minimum of 9" beyond the edges of the trench.
b. The edges of the paving cut shall be smooth.
7.5.5 Contact the City or Gwinnett County Public Utilities Department for public utility
extension information from the existing to the proposed development. Contact the City and/or
the Gwinnett County Traffic Engineer at least 24 hours in advance of closure of traffic lanes.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.48
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
Article 8. Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts and Piped
Drainage Systems and Soil Sediment Control Requirements.
Section 8.1 Site Grading.
8.1.1 Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades shown on the approved
Grading Plan.
8.1.2 Grading plans shall show existing and proposed contour lines at an interval of no more
than 2 feet. Grading plans shall outline the areas which are required to remain undisturbed (i.e.,
Tree Protection Areas, buffer, etc.) and shall indicate protective fencing or staking to be placed
surrounding such areas.
8.1.3 If the property is within the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan River Protection Act, the
grading shall be consistent with the River Corridor Certificate approved for the project.
8.1.4 Embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed a compacted thickness of 6
inches per layer and shall be compacted to a density of 95 percent of the maximum laboratory
dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99 in all areas where structure,
parking lots and drives, streets, and utilities are to be placed. All other embankments are to be
compacted to at least 85 percent.
8.1.5 The maximum slopes for cut or fill shall be 2:1 (two feet of horizontal run for each foot
of rise or fall), except as discussed in Section 8.1.6 below. The depth of cut referred to herein
shall be the maximum cut or fill occurring in any one section of cut or fill. The slope of cut or fill
shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or fill except when benching is approved by
the City. Cut or fill greater than or equal to 2.5:1 (two and a half feet of horizontal run for each
foot of vertical rise or fall) shall incorporate a slope drainage bench at every fifteen (15) feet of
slope length. Each slope drainage bench shall incorporate a permanent down drain system and
be constructed in accordance with the approved standard drawing. When a cut is made in rock
that requires blasting, the slope may be steeper if pre-splitting is employed and upon submission
of a geotechnical report which substantiates the integrity of the rock in the steeper condition,
subject to the review and approval of the City Manager. (Note: No blasting shall occur without a
valid permit issued by the Fire Services Division.) Refer to the Standard Plans for grading
section and retaining wall details.
8.1.6 While most soils in the area can be safely stabilized at a 2:1 slope, some soils exhibit a
low shearing resistance and a low cohesiveness. These soils typically are micaceous silts and
sandy soils with little or no clay. If the 2:1 slope shows evidence of shearing, non-cohesiveness,
sliding, or inability to maintain compaction, the slope shall be stabilized at 3:1 or by using such
mechanical methods as needed (such as retaining walls or "grow mats" stapled in place) to
maintain slope, height, and integrity.
8.1.7 Slopes greater than four (4) percent shall have a storm water collection system to convey
water from the top of a slope to the lowest point of a slope. Sheet flow drainage shall not be
allowed to traverse a graded slope.
8.1.8 A grading plan showing building pad locations shall be submitted for residential
subdivisions, unless a modification application is approved, zoned for a lot size of less than
12,000 square feet or density of 4 units per acre or more. The intent of this regulation is to
ensure adequate lot to lot drainage. Granting a modification will not nullify the intent of these
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.49
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
regulations when the layout has a minimum lot area of 14,520 square feet and minimum lot
width of 90 feet. The grading plan may be used as a construction document prior to approval of
the Final Plat or as a guidance document for individual lot grading after approval of the Final
Plat.
8.1.9 Grading for roads and improved ditches shall be shown.
Section 8.2 Stormwater Detention.
8.2.1 Stormwater Management Report Required
a. A Stormwater Management Report shall be prepared for every project. The purpose of
this report shall be to formulate a plan to manage stormwater runoff so that stormwater
runoff hazards are not created and existing runoff-related problems are not
exacerbated, either upstream or downstream from or within the boundaries of the
property being developed. The engineer shall be responsible for obtaining all
information necessary for the report. Hydrologic analysis and detention pond hydraulics
(excluding dams as defined in section 8.6 of these regulations), pipe and open channel
hydraulics, culvert hydraulics and water quality best management practices shall be
certified by either a professional engineer or landscape architect registered in the State
of Georgia. Flood studies for any floodplain or flood prone areas, and hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis and design calculations which are performed for the design of a dam as
defined in Section 8.6 of these regulations, shall be certified by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Georgia.
The Storm Water Management Report shall identify the locations and quantities of
storm water runoff entering and exiting the site for both pre- and post-developed
conditions. Analysis of the off-site properties shall anticipate future development in
addition to addressing existing conditions.
All culverts, pipe systems, and open channel flow systems shall be sized based on all
on-site upstream areas being developed in accordance with the development plans
and the off-site upstream areas being fully developed in accordance with the Land
Use Plan with no detention. Upstream detention may be included when determining
flows, provided the engineer calculates the reduced flows by routing the developed
flows through any storm water facility included in the analysis rather than assuming
the reduction will occur. The engineer shall show that detention facilities used in the
analysis will remain, be properly maintained and the storage volume and outlet
structure is based on current conditions.
Detention facilities shall be designed using pre-development flows based on existing
conditions for all upstream areas including existing on-site lakes and detention. Postdevelopment
flows, except the 100-year flow, shall be based on on-site upstream
areas being developed per the development plans and existing conditions for off-site
upstream areas. The 100-year flow shall be based on on-site areas being developed
per the development plans and the off-site upstream areas being developed per the
Land Use Plan with no detention. Upstream detention may be included if it meets the
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.50
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
conditions as described for culverts and pipe systems. Existing conditions shall be
defined as the conditions of the site at the time of application for a land disturbance
permit. The existing condition includes on-site lakes and ponds. Pre-development
flows shall be determined by routing the pre-development flows through these storm
water facilities. Flows used to size the outlet structures for detention facilities that
exceed the 25-year design flow, shall be sized as described for culverts and pipe
systems.
When more than 50% of the property of a developed project site is disturbed for
either redevelopment or improvement, the Storm Water Management Report shall
be prepared for the entire site and existing impervious areas shall be treated as
forest in the pre-developed analysis. When 50% or less of the property is disturbed,
detention shall be provided as required by these regulations for the disturbed area
and existing impervious areas which are disturbed shall be treated as forest in the
pre-developed analysis.
The report shall contain drainage area delineation maps and other exhibits at
satisfactory scale and sufficient in quantity and scope to define the boundaries of the
site, and off-site areas, relative to watercourses, drainage divides, drainage structures
and other pertinent features. The City’s Geographical Information System (GIS)
mapping information shall be used where appropriate.
b. For the purposes of these regulations, the works “downstream” and “analysis” shall have
the following meanings. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall
address each and every point or area along the project site’s boundaries at which runoff
will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainageway
“immediately” downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from
the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is 10 percent of the
total basin area.
(1) The report shall examine the conditions downstream from the project to a point where
the project area is 10 percent of the total drainage basin.
(a) The analysis shall include all culverts, obstructions, existing and potential erosion
problems, elevations of existing improvements, existing drainage complaints and any
other existing modifications to natural conditions. The downstream water courses and
receiving conveyance shall be analyzed to ensure that the channel velocities do not
exceed values recommended in the Gwinnett County Storm Water Design Manual nor
does the pipe system exceed current design criteria of these regulations; and,
(b) If the existing downstream conditions are overburdened by the pre-developed flows in
the stream, then the developer and the City shall jointly participate to resolve the
problem. The meaning of “overburdened” shall include but not be limited to situations
where 25-year velocities exceed the non-erosive velocity of the stream, habitable
structures are shown to be subject to flooding for any frequency up to and including the
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.51
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
regulatory flood and storm water facilities that can not carry the design storm in
accordance with these regulations; and,
(c) If there are any problems identified downstream that are a result of the development,
then the developer shall eliminate the conditions causing the problem.
(2) Hydrographs shall be analyzed at least at two points. One study point shall be at the
downstream property line where the watercourse crosses the project site’s downstream
property line. The second study point shall be downstream of the project at the point
where the project area is 10 percent of the total drainage basin.
(a) The study will compare the pre-developed hydrographs with post-developed
hydrographs for the 2, 5, 10, 25, 50, and 100-year flood frequencies; and,
(b) Comparison of peak flows shall include the timing of hydrographs; and
(c) Hydrographs shall be based on a 24-hour storm.
(d) The analysis shall be in accordance with the Storm Water Design Manual
(d) The following criteria shall be evaluated by the authorized registered professional (refer
to Subsection 8.2.1. Paragraph a.) preparing the Storm Water Management Report, and
in determining whether or not detention should be required for any portion of any site:
(1) Existing land uses downstream;
(2) Anticipated future land uses downstream;
(3) Magnitude of increase in peak flows due to development;
(4) Presence of existing drainage problems;
(5) Capacity of existing and anticipated drainage systems;
(6) Creation of concentrated flows where none had occurred previously;
(7) Availability of feasible locations for detention facilities;
(8) Existing flows generated off-site which pass through the project site; and
(9) The nature of the receiving watercourse.
e. Where detention for a proposed project is provided in a regional detention facility that
was permitted prior to September 1, 2002, the developer shall provide a copy of the
original study that met the regulations at the time the facility was permitted. If the
approved study can not be found, then the engineer shall provide a recreated study. The
project shall be exempt from restudy and any modifications required to meet regulations
effective after January 1, 2001, provided the proposed project is in keeping with the
intent of the original detention study and the detention facility is maintained.
f. When a development uses an existing facility where the last approved certification
and record drawing of the facility was over 18 months prior to the new
development’s submittal, the engineer shall provide one of the following.
(a) A new survey, drawing and certification showing that the outlet structure is constructed
as approved and the flood storage and water quality volume of the facility is equal to or
greater than the volume required when the facility was approved.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.52
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
(b) Construction plans and calculations showing that the outlet structure will function as
designed and the flood storage and water quality volume of the facility will be equal to
or greater than the volume required when the facility was approved once the proposed
maintenance has been performed.
(c) A new record survey, drawing, study and certification showing that the facility meets
the development requirements when the facility was approved.
g. Design Criteria – General
All design related to storm water shall be in accordance with the Gwinnett County Storm
Water Design Manual.
h. Evidence of Acquisition of Applicable Non-Local Permits
The applicant shall certify and provide documentation that all other applicable
environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the Storm
Water Management Report.
8.2.2 Stormwater Detention Required
a. Whenever a Storm Water Management Report indicates that an adverse impact from
storm water runoff is expected to result from the development of a property, that
project shall be provided with storm water detention facilities. The meaning of "adverse
impact" shall apply when pre-development flows did not cause difficulties and postdevelopment
flows do. Difficulties shall include, but not be limited to, situations where
25-year velocities exceed the non-erosive velocity of the stream, habitable structures are
shown to be subject to increased depth of flooding for any frequency up to and including
the regulatory flood, and storm water facilities that can not carry the design storm in
accordance with these regulations.
b. Storm water detention facilities required in Subsection 8.2.2.a shall be provided, unless
the authorized registered professional (refer to Subsection 8.2.1. Paragraph a.) certifies
and provides certified documentation supporting the conclusion to the City Manager or
his/her designee that at least one of the following is true and correct as applicable:
(1) The non-detained, post-development runoff will leave the project site as sheet flow, and
will not have an adverse impact upon downstream properties. The increase for a 25-
year storm should not exceed 1 cfs over a length perpendicular to the flow of 100 feet.
(2) The effect of detention would be to concentrate flows where sheet flow had occurred
under pre-developed conditions, and any impact of increase sheet flow upon
downstream properties would be less adverse than that which would result form the
concentrated flows from a detention facility even if energy dissipation devices were
employed.
(3) The undetained flow will pass through downstream properties, in drainage easements
obtained by the developer, to an existing detention facility that has been designed to
manage the upstream property’s runoff or to the point in the downstream analysis (see
8.2.1.c) which shows that detention is not required.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.53
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
(4) Where the site runoff will flow directly into a stream or lake without crossing off-site
properties:
a. 24-hour detention of the 1-year storm is required if water quality protection is
required for the project. In this case, the post-development peak flows in the
receiving channel may exceed pre-development flows by the smaller value of up to
0.1% of the pre-development flows or 3 cfs in the downstream analysis.
b. Only peak detention for the 2-year though the 25-year storm is not required if the
downstream analysis using timing of the hydrographs shows no adverse impact
from the exit of the site to the point immediately downstream from the project in
the drainage basin where the project area is 10 percent of the total drainage basin
area.
c. Should the authorized registered professional conclude that stormwater detention
may not be necessary because of anticipated compliance with Section 8.2.2.b., rigid
compliance with all of the following criteria is mandatory:
(1) A Stormwater Management Report shall always be required whether or not
stormwater detention is required.
(2) If the applicant proposes to show that the detention requirement may be
eliminated for all or a portion of a project, then a pre-submittal conference
with the City staff is required prior to preparation and submittal of
construction plans for the project.
(3) At the pre-submittal conference with the staff, the consultant shall be
prepared to discuss the downstream analysis findings as follows:
(a) The affected stream must be analyzed downstream from the project to a
point where the project area is 10 percent of the total drainage basin. The
analysis must include all culverts, obstructions, existing and potential
erosion problems, elevations of existing improvements, and any other
existing modifications to natural conditions; and,
(b) If the existing downstream conditions are overburdened by the predeveloped
flows in the stream, then detention shall be required unless the
developer elects to eliminate the downstream overburdened conditions at
his or her expense when the development occurs; and,
(c) If there are any existing drainage complaints downstream, then detention
shall be required unless the developer elects to minimize the conditions
causing the complaint at his or her expense when the development occurs.
8.2.3 Detention Design Criteria - General
a. All storm water detention pond hydrologic and hydraulic analysis and design calculations
shall be certified by the authorized registered professional (refer to Subsection 8.2.1.
Paragraph a.).
b. All storm water detention facilities shall be designed to detain the 1-year storm runoff,
for the area draining to the pond, for 24 hours. For the project, this volume called the
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.54
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
channel protection volume, shall be equal to or greater than the 1-year storm runoff
volume from the project. In addition, these facilities shall control the peak flow rates
associated with storms having 2-year, 5-year, 10-year, and 25-year return frequencies so
that flows from the developed site do not exceed those associated with pre-development
conditions at the project boundary nor increase the peak flows by more than 5 percent at
the point downstream from the project in the drainage basin where the project area is 10
percent of the total basin. Where adverse impacts, as defined in section 8.2.2.a, occur
during the 100-year storm, the 100-year storm shall also be regulated.
c. A variety of methods of achieving stormwater management goals shall be acceptable in
providing detention facilities. The type of facility provided shall be based on the
following criteria:
(1) The type of development which the detention facility is being provided,
(2) The type of development which the detention facility is intended to protect,
(3) Volume of stormwater to be stored,
(4) Origin and magnitude of the flows to be managed,
(5) Topographic opportunities and limitations,
(6) Safety Considerations, but not limited to, installation of fence (solid or other types),
berm, vegetation/landscaping, etc. approved by the Director, Department of Planning
and Development,
(7) Maintenance requirements,
(8) Aesthetic considerations,
(9) Likelihood of facility operation interfering with access to public or private facilities,
(10) Proximity of facility to property lines, utilities, buffers, etc., and;
(11) Similar site-specific constraints.
d. Detention facilities may be of any of the following types, and two or more types may be
used in combination with one another:
(1) Normally-dry basins, whether excavated or created by damming a natural drainage
feature, or a combination of both methods,
(2) Lakes and ponds, whether excavated or created by damming a natural drainage feature,
or a combination of both methods,
(3) Parking lot facilities,
(4) Underground facilities, and
(5) Roof top facilities.
e. Reservoir routing methods shall be used for all detention facility design.
f. The hydrologic methodology used for any given project shall conform to the Gwinnett
County Storm Water Design Manual.
g. Runoff coefficients and runoff Curve Numbers used for pre- and post-development
conditions shall be consistent with those shown in the Gwinnett County Storm Water
Design Manual. The USGS Method shall be used where applicable to check the
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.55
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
magnitude of peak flows when other hydrologic methods recommended in the manual
are used.
h. Calculations shall be provided showing how all times of concentration or lag times were
computed, both for pre- and post-developed conditions. Likewise, adequate support
must be provided for all composite runoff coefficients or curve numbers used.
i. If a computer program is used for hydrologic and hydraulic analysis and design, including
generating and routing hydrographs, the output from the program shall be summarized
in the Storm Water Management Report, and the name and version of the program shall
be indicated. Computer output sheets may be attached to the report if desired by the
authorized registered professional (refer to Subsection 8.2.1. Paragraph a.) or if
requested by the City.
j. The design of every detention facility of any types shall consider the effects both of
inflows in excess of those the facility is designed to accommodate and of malfunctioning
of the primary outlet system. A safe path for overflow condition flows shall be provided.
k. Weirs shaped like a “V” (“V” notch weirs) shall be used where practical, considering
structural or hydrological concerns.
l. In residential subdivisions, no more than 50% of the basin parameter may be a wall of
any type unless the drive is provided to the bottom of the pond. The drive shall be a
minimum of 15 feet wide with a maximum slope of 20%.
8.2.4 Detention Facility Location Criteria
a. For purposes of these Regulations, a detention facility shall be deemed to consist of the
area within the maximum design ponding limits, unless a modification application is
approved, the dam (if one) including all embankment slopes and wall footings (if
applicable), primary and emergency outlet works, any drainage and access easements,
and any energy dissipation devices. The intent of these regulations is to ensure that the
extent of the facility is defined to allow flooding, access and maintenance. Granting of a
modification will not nullify these regulations when the facility is a wet pond or lake, the
area within the maximum design ponding limits is reduced to a few feet inside the
normal pool elevation, and easements are provided on the perimeter properties to allow
for flooding, access and maintenance around the lake. In addition, granting of the
modification shall only be considered when the wet pond is an amenity and under no
circumstances shall the dam and outlet structure lie on private property.
b. Detention facilities, to the greatest extent feasible, shall be located so as to minimize the
amount of flow generated on the project site that bypasses the facility.
c. No portion of any detention facility shall disturb any required (as opposed to voluntary)
buffer, landscape strip, or tree protection area, except that natural bottom detention
ponds and their appurtenant structures, which require no grading and removal of trees,
may encroach into a required construction buffer.
d. The 100-year ponding limits of a detention facility shall not encroach upon a public rightof-
way.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.56
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
e. Detention facilities may be located within utility easements or rights-of-way, or encroach
upon utility easements or rights-of-way, upon receipt by the City of written permission
from both the property and utility owners.
f. Detention facilities may be constructed within recreation areas required under Section
5.9 of these Regulations, if the following criteria are met:
(1) Ownership of the area will be held by a Qualified Property Owners Association,
Homeowners Association, or other private parties.
(2) Permanent structures, such as buildings and swimming pools, will not be constructed
within the boundaries of the detention facility.
(3) Detention facilities within recreation areas will be approved only if the design of the
area includes recreation amenities such as ball fields, tennis courts, grassed open areas
or other similar improvements. The intent is to provide recreation facilities with
detention as a secondary feature.
(4) Permanent detention features shall not interfere with the intended used of the
recreation amenity, (i.e., a ditch or large swale shall not traverse a ball field, an inlet
structure shall not be in a tennis court, etc.).
g. If a residential subdivision is provided within an on-site detention facility not located
within a recreation area as specified in 8.2.4.f above, a mandatory property owners’
association shall be established for its ownership and maintenance. The facility shall be
located on a single lot within the development and owned by the property owners’
association. The lot shall have a minimum of 30 feet of public road frontage and a
minimum lot width of 30 feet. Access to the facility shall be located on this lot. If the
project is provided with an off-site detention facility, a mandatory property owners’
association shall be established for its maintenance. The association’s bylaws shall be
recorded concurrently with the recording of a final subdivision plat. The association’s
bylaws shall include the same provisions as specified in subsection 5.9.3, Paragraph b. of
this regulation.
h. A non-residential subdivision is not required to locate an on-site detention facility on a
separate lot. The property owners served by a detention facility that provides detention
for more than one property owner or is located off-site shall enter into a maintenance
agreement with the city for the facility's maintenance. However, if desired by the
developer, the facility may be located on a separate lot if it is owned and maintained by a
mandatory property owners’ association.
8.2.5 Detention Facility Easement Requirements
a. In a non-residential subdivision or project, an easement at least 20 feet in width shall be
required so as to provide access to all detention facilities from a public street
b. In a residential subdivision, an easement at least 30 feet in width shall be required so as
to provide access to all detention facilities from a public street.
c. Access Easement
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.57
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
1. The access easement shall be cleared, grubbed and graded so that it can be utilized by
rubber-tired construction vehicles.
2. The minimum drive width shall be 15 feet.
3. The drive shall be grassed or paved.
4. The maximum slope shall be 20% (5H:1V).
5. Access easements may be combined with drainage easements containing an open
channel; however, the combined easement shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width and
shall be wide enough for the drainage channel and the drive.
d. Every normally-dry detention basin, lake, or parking lot detention facility shall be
completely enclosed within a drainage easement. The drainage easement shall extend at
least 10 feet beyond the 100-year flooding limits of the detention facility.
8.2.6 Detention Facility Maintenance
a. The detention storage capacity or function of any detention basin, pond or other
impoundment, whether natural or man-made, shall not be removed or diminished
without the express approval of the City.
b. In a residential subdivision, it shall be the responsibility of the mandatory property
owners’ association to maintain the operational characteristics of any facility constructed
on their property for storm water detention pursuant to City requirements, to keep the
access drive free of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of obstruction, silt or
debris.
c. In a non-residential subdivision or project served by a detention facility that provides
detention for more than one property or by an off-site facility, the property owners shall
enter into a maintenance agreement with the City for maintenance of the operational
characteristics of the facility pursuant to City requirements, to keep the access drive free
of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of obstruction, silt or debris.
d. In a non-residential project with an on-site detention facility which serves only that
project, the property owner shall be responsible to maintain the operational
characteristics of the facility pursuant to City requirements, to keep the access drive free
of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of obstruction, silt or debris.
e. Prior to the issuance of a Development Permit, the owner shall submit a detailed
schedule of long-term maintenance and inspection activities. This schedule of activities
shall be incorporated into a maintenance agreement to be entered into between the City
and the owner. The schedule shall describe all maintenance and inspection activities and
the parties responsible. The maintenance agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the
City Manager and shall be recorded in the deed records of the Clerk of Superior Court of
Gwinnett County prior to final plat approval or issuance of a certificate of occupancy as
appropriate.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.58
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
8.2.7 Detention Facility Construction Standards
a. Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed in accordance with plans reviewed
and approved by the City, and shall be in place and inspected prior to the initiation of
other improvements. If the detention facility is planned to be a lake, temporary
detention facilities shall be provided and shall remain in place until such time as the lake
has become effective in providing stormwater management.
b. Within a detention basin, all stumps are to be cut flush with the ground or removed and
all debris is to be removed below the 10-year ponding elevation. Trees or shrubs may be
allowed to remain below the 10-year ponding elevation only upon certification of the
survivability of the vegetation.
c. Detention slopes which are disturbed are to be grassed. The ground cover within the
basin shall be well established with all exposed areas covered prior to the end of the
maintenance period.
d. If the developer desires to place a fence around a detention facility, it shall be a minimum
4 foot high fence of durable material, with a 12 foot wide access gate. The fence shall be
contained within an easement at least 20 feet wide, shall not encroach upon the
detention facility (although their easements may overlap by up to 10 feet), and shall
comply with the locational requirements of the Zoning Resolution.
8.2.8 Detention Facility Engineer's Certification and Record Drawings
a. The survey shall be performed after substantial completion and stabilization of the
project has occurred. The record drawing and addendum to the Storm Water
Management Report shall be submitted to the City with the certificate of development
conformance and approved prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat
approval as appropriate.
.b When a development uses an existing facility without an existing storm water
maintenance bond, the facility shall be cleaned out if necessary and a new record survey,
drawing, and certification showing that the outlet structure exists as approved and the
flood storage and water quality volume of the facility is equal to or greater that the
volume required when the facility was approved. As an alternative, a new record survey,
drawing, study and certification showing that the facility meets the development
requirements when the facility was approved shall be submitted. The survey shall be
performed after substantial completion and stabilization of the project has occurred. The
certification and supporting data shall be submitted to the City with the certificate of
development conformance and approved prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy
or final plat approval as appropriate.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.59
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
Section 8.3 Culverts and Piped Drainage Systems.
8.3.1 Drainage Improvements Required.
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts,
storm drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales,
channels, and ditches, shall be provided for the protection of public right-of-way and private
properties adjoining projects' sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance
facilities, which are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed,
shall meet the requirements of these regulations.
8.3.2 Standard Specifications
Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein or in the City of Sugar Hill Standard
Drawings, all of the materials, methods of the construction, and workmanship for the work
covered in reference to stormwater conveyance facility construction shall conform to the most
recent Standard Specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation (Georgia DOT).
For roads constructed with public funds, either wholly or in part, or roads classified as Major
Thoroughfares, materials which meet the Georgia DOT design standards shall be used unless an
alternative is specifically approved by the Gwinnett Department of Transportation.
8.3.3 Design Criteria - General
a. All stormwater conveyance facility design calculations shall be certified by the authorized
registered professional (refer to Subsection 8.2.1. Paragraph a.).
b. Methods to calculate storm water flows shall be in accordance with the Gwinnett County
Storm Water Design Manual. The USGS Method shall be used where applicable to check
the magnitude of peak flows when other hydrologic methods recommended in the
manual are used.
c. All portions of a stormwater conveyance system which drain areas falling within the same
size category above shall be analyzed using the same methodology.
d. Run-off coefficients used for the Rational Method and runoff Curve Numbers used for the
SCS Method shall be consistent with those shown in Gwinnett County Storm Water
Design Manual.
e. Smooth interior corrugated polyethylene (PE) pipe shall not be used or installed under
the road surface of existing or proposed to be dedicated public streets except where
authorized for use by the Georgia DOT.
f. Any pipe or culvert located within a public right of way (R/W) or crossing any street shall
be reinforced concrete pipe (RCP).
8.3.4 Design Criteria - Culverts
a. Culverts or pipe systems designed to convey water from one side of a public right-of-way
to the other shall be designed to pass the fully developed peak flow associated with a
100-year storm with at least 1.5 feet of freeboard between the 100-year ponding
elevation and the centerline of the road, without raising the 100-year flood elevation on
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.60
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
upstream properties, and in accordance with Floodplain Management Ordinance. Fully
developed flows shall be based on the Land Use Plan adopted by the City of Sugar Hill.
b. The 100-year ponding limits at and upstream of the culvert shall be shown on the
Development Plans and on the Final Plat (if applicable).
c. The minimum allowable culvert diameter shall be 18 inches.
d. Culvert design is to be in accordance with the methods contained in the Gwinnett County
Storm Water Design Manual and shall include a thorough analysis of both inlet and outlet
control conditions.
8.3.5 Piped Collection Systems
a. The preliminary design (initial pipe sizing and profile design) of piped collection systems
required under 8.3.1 herein shall be based upon conveyance of the peak flows associated
with a fully developed 25-year storm with the hydraulic grade line (HGL) being one foot
or more below the top of each structure, gutter line or proposed final ground surface
elevation, whichever is lowest.
b. Once the preliminary design of a piped collection system has been prepared, it shall be
analyzed for its behavior during conditions of 100-year flow, with the objective of this
analysis being to ascertain the quantities of flow and flowpaths followed by flows
exceeding the capacity of the system, whether these pond at inlets or flow along the
ground's surface.
c. Based on the analysis of 100-year conditions, the preliminary design shall be revised
where necessary to produce a final design for which the likelihood of dwelling flooding,
major property damage, or substantial public access and/or utility interruption shall be
less than one chance in 100 years.
d. The minimum allowable pipe diameter shall be 15 inches.
e. Catch basins shall be spaced so that the spread in the street for a 10-year design flow
shall not exceed the following, as measured from the face of the curb:
(1) 8 feet if the street is classified as a Minor Collector or Major Thoroughfare;
(2) 16 feet at any given section, but in no case greater than 10 feet on one side of the
street, if the street is classified as a Local Street.
Gutter spread calculations shall be submitted to the City for review and approval prior to
issuance of a Development Permit.
f. Complete flow, velocity, and hydraulic grade line computations, shall be provided for all
portions of a piped collection system. Hydraulic grade lines shall be shown on the storm
drainage profiles contained with the Development Plans for the 25-year storm.
8.3.6 Energy Dissipation - Piped Systems and Culverts
a. Energy dissipation devices, such as splash pads, rip-rap, stilling basins, etc., shall be
provided at the outlet of every culvert and piped collection system. (Please refer to the
Standard Drawings.) Velocity protection shall be in accordance with the Gwinnett County
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.61
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
Storm Water Design Manual. Velocities for the fully developed 25-year flow shall not
exceed the non-erosive velocity as shown in the design manual for the receiving
conveyance.
b. Energy dissipation devices shall be located entirely within the project site, and shall not
encroach upon any required buffer.
c. When uniform, graded stone rip-rap is used for energy dissipation, ultraviolet resistant
filter fabric (200-pound test) shall be used between the stone layers.
8.3.7 Minimum Pipe and Pipe Coating Requirements
a. Galvanized corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches shall conform to the requirements of
Type I or II pipe per AASHTO M-36 for the specified dimensions and thicknesses.
Corrugated steel pipe shall have a minimum of 2 ounces per square foot of zinc coating,
complying with AASHTO M-218.
(1) All corrugated galvanized pipe not carrying a live stream located within a street right-ofway,
drainage easement, or detention facility shall be asphalt coated only. Except for
culverts under driveways, all corrugated galvanized pipe which will carry a live stream,
within a street right-of-way, drainage easement, or in a detention facility shall be either
1) asphalt coated with a paved invert per AASHTO M-190, Type C; or 2) asphalt coated
with a concrete lining. The lining shall be plant applied so as to produce a homogeneous
non-segregated lining throughout. The lining shall have a nominal thickness of 1/4 inch
above the crest of the corrugations.
(2) See the Standard Drawings for minimum acceptable combinations of gauges, diameters,
and corrugation configurations for corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches.
(3) Each end of each pipe section, to be joined by a coupling band, shall have a minimum of
two annular corrugations. Coupling bands shall be so constructed as to lap on an equal
portion of each of the pipe sections to be connected. The connecting bands shall have a
minimum of two annular corrugations and shall fully engage, over the entire pipe
periphery, one corrugation on each pipe end. Bands shall be fabricated from the same
material as is the pipe, and the gauges shall be as specified in Section 9.2 of AASHTO M-
36.
(4) Gaskets may be required as determined by the City in the field and shall be either sleeve
type or O-ring type, and shall meet the requirements for gaskets as specified in Section
9.3 of AASHTO M-36.
b. Reinforced concrete pipe shall be in not less that 8' joint lengths. All joints shall be bell
and spigot type, using an O-ring gasket conforming to ASTM C-443. Pipe shall be
manufactured in accordance with AASHTO M-170 and/or ASTM C-76. Class of pipe and
wall thickness shall be in accordance with 1030-D, Georgia D.O.T. specification, Table No.
1.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.62
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
c. Aluminized steel coated pipe shall comply with ASSHTO M-274 for the coating and
AASHTO M-36 for the pipe fabrication. Aluminum alloy pipe shall comply with AASHTO
M-196 for material and fabrication.
(1) All corrugated aluminized or aluminum pipe not carrying a live stream located within a
street right-of-way, drainage easement, or detention facility may be plain. All
corrugated aluminized or aluminum pipe which will carry a live stream within a street
right-of-way, drainage easement, or in a detention facility shall have paved inverts
pursuant to AASHTO M-190, Type C, except that the pipe need not be fully coated.
(2) See the Standard Drawings for the minimum acceptable combinations of gages,
diameters, and corrugation configurations for corrugated aluminum pipe and pipe
arches, and for corrugated aluminized steel pipe and pipe arches.
(3) Each end of each pipe section, to be joined by a coupling band, shall have a minimum of
two annular corrugations. Coupling bands shall be so constructed to lap on an equal
portion of each of the pipe sections to be joined. The connecting bands shall have a
minimum of two annular corrugations and fully engage, over the entire pipe periphery,
one corrugation on each pipe. Bands shall be fabricated from the same material as the
pipe. The minimum band gauges for aluminum pipe and aluminized pipe shall be as
specified in AASHTO M-196, Section 19, and AASHTO M-36, Section 9, respectively.
(4) Gaskets may be required as determined by the City in the field, and shall be either
sleeve type or O-ring type and shall meet the requirements for gaskets as specified in
AASHTO M-36, Section 9.3.
d. Structural plate drainage structures shall conform to the following specifications:
(1) Corrugated steel structural plate pipe, pipe arches, and arches shall consist of galvanized
plates, bolts and nuts of the size, shape and thickness as shown on the approved plans.
These structures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M-167.
(2) Corrugated aluminum alloy structural plate pipe, pipe arches and arches shall consist of
aluminum plates and galvanized bolts and nuts of the size, shape and thickness as
shown on the approved plans. These structures shall conform to the requirements of
AASHTO M-219.
e. Smooth Interior Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe
(1) This specification applies to high density polyethylene corrugated pipe with an integrally
formed smooth interior. PE pipe manufacturers shall be approved by the Department of
Transportation.
(2) This specification is applicable to nominal sizes 15" through 48" diameter.
Requirements for test methods, dimensions, and markings of pipe sizes 15" through 36"
diameter are those found in AASHTO Designation M-294.
(3) Pipe and fittings shall be made of polyethylene compounds which meet or exceed the
requirements of Type III, Category 4 or 5, Grade P33 or P34, Class C per ASTM D-1248
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.63
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
with the applicable requirements defined in ASTM D-1248. Clean reworked material
may be used.
(4) The pipe and fittings shall be free of foreign inclusions and visible defects. For pipe sizes
15" diameter and greater, designed drainage perforations shall be permitted in
corrugation valleys only. All holes of any kind in the corrugation crests or sidewalls shall
be considered unacceptable. The ends of the pipe shall be cut and connected as
recommended by the manufacturer.
(5) The normal size for the pipe and fittings is based on the nominal inside diameter of the
pipe. Corrugated fittings may be either molded or fabricated by the manufacturer.
Fittings supplied by manufacturers other than the supplier of the pipe shall not be
permitted without prior approval from City of Sugar Hill.
(6) Joints shall be made with split couplings, corrugated to engage the pipe corrugations,
and shall engage a minimum of 4 corrugations, 2 on each side of the pipe joint. Where
required by City of Sugar Hill, a neoprene gasket shall be utilized with the coupling to
provide a soil tight joint. Gaskets shall conform to ASTM F-477.
(7) Installation shall be in accordance with ASTM Recommended Practice D-2321 or as
specified by City of Sugar Hill.
(8) Certification from the manufacturer that the product was manufactured, tested, and
supplied in accordance with this specification shall be furnished to City of Sugar Hill
upon request.
8.3.8 Pipe Length
a. Culverts carrying live streams shall extend to where the crown of the pipe intersects the
roadway slope.
b. Pipes that do not carry live streams shall extend at least 50 feet beyond the front building
setback lines, and may be required to extend farther where necessary to provide an
adequately protected building site on the property. In nonresidential subdivisions, these
pipes may temporarily end at the right-of-way line, but shall be extended as part of a
subsequent development permit approved for the individual site.
c. The length requirement, however, shall be subject to requirements for maintaining
stream buffers in accordance with Georgia law or County regulations.
8.3.9 Pipe Installation
Reinforced concrete pipe, corrugated steel pipe, corrugated aluminum pipe and corrugated
aluminized steel pipe shall be bedded and backfilled in the same manner. Smooth interior
corrugated polyethylene pipe shall be bedded and backfilled in accordance with the Georgia
DOT Standard Specifications or the Gwinnett County Standard Drawings; in addition, prior to
approval of a Final Plat, the City may require the submittal of certification from a mandrel
testing agency indicating that all such installed pipe does not exceed 7.5% deflection.
a. Bedding:
All pipe structures shall be placed on stable earth or fine granular foundation, the
characteristics of which would be expected to provide long-term stability. In all live
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.64
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
stream pipe installations, in areas of low bearing solid or non-uniform foundations, in
area where rock is encountered at the foundation level, or in other locations where
conditions warrant, a minimum of 6" of crushed stone bedding is required, (maximum
size of stone shall be 3/4"). Geotextiles or geogrids may also be required by the City in
problem areas.
b. Backfilling:
Backfill on all pipe installations shall be constructed using foundation backfill material
Type I or Type II, as specified in Section 812.01 and 812.02 respectively, in Georgia D.O.T.
Standard Specifications. These materials shall be placed in layers of not more than six
inches loose. Compaction of these materials shall be accomplished by hand tamping or
machine tamping. Required compaction levels are as follows:
(1) Backfill within all street rights-of-way shall be compacted to 95% maximum density,
tested using the AASHTO Method T-99.
(2) Backfill in all other areas shall be compacted to 95% maximum density, tested using the
AASHTO Method T-99.
c. Construction loads and minimum covers:
If drainage pipe is installed prior to the completion of grading, a minimum of 4 feet of fill
should be provided where needed to adequately protect the drainage structure during
the land development phase, unless the structure itself is designed to withstand the
anticipated live load during construction.
8.3.10 End Finish
Headwalls or other end treatments are required on all culverts (except under residential
driveways) and at the outlet of all piped collection systems.
a. Headwalls are to be precast concrete, stone masonry with reinforced concrete footings,
or poured-in-place, reinforced concrete with reinforced concrete footings.
b. End treatments that conform to the slope may be masonry, pre-cast concrete end
sections, metal end sections, PE end sections, reinforced poured-in-place slope collars, or
grouted rip-rap. Concrete and metal flared end sections shall conform to Georgia DOT
Specifications 1120.
8.3.11 Junction Boxes and Catch Basins
a. Junction boxes and catch basins shall have metal manhole frames and lids for access.
b. Lids for storm drainage facilities shall be engraved in accordance with the Gwinnett
County Standard Drawings.
8.3.12 Other Structures
Natural bottom arches and box culverts may be used in accordance with the latest Standard
Specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.65
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
Section 8.4 Surface Drainage.
8.4.1 Design Standards
a. All new proposed channels shall be designed to carry at least the fully developed 25-year
storm with freeboard equal to 20% of the design flow depth.
b. Transition channels shall be provided at the inlet and outlet ends of all culverts and pipe
systems, unless otherwise provided herein.
c. The maximum flow velocity at the project site's downstream property line shall not
exceed the predeveloped velocity.
d. In cases of potential erosion due to irregular channel alignment, extreme velocities, or
excessive slopes, a paved ditch may be required. However, if, in the opinion of the City,
the expected long-term maintenance of a surface drainage system could prove
impractical, a pipe design may be required. In cases of residential and nonresidential
development where a slope exists greater than four percent, a collection system
consisting of pipes and pipe inlets shall be designed or a paved ditch with velocity
dissipation measures shall be required.
e. The cross-sectional shape of channels shall be as found in the Standard Drawings. "V"
shaped cross-sections are not permitted in grassed channels.
f. If the channel will be affected by backwater from culverts, bridges, other structures or
floodplains, backwater curves shall be shown in profiles of the channel.
g. All channels, must be capable of conveying flows sufficient to ensure that overflow of the
channel would not result in a likelihood of dwelling flooding, property damage, or public
access and/or utility interruption, shall be greater than one (1) chance in 100 years.
h. The piped collection system or drainage easements for the purpose of storm water
collection shall be provided to all lots within the proposed development.
i. Private piped collection systems may be utilized by a builder/property owner to connect
to the subdivision storm water collection system subject to the design being approved by
the City prior to construction. Maintenance of said systems shall be the responsibility of
the individual lot owner.
8.4.2 Construction Standards
a. The channel shall be shaped to the dimensions specified on the approved plans and shall
be free of overfalls, gullies, or other irregularities.
b. Channels in fills shall be lined.
c. Protective cover in grassed channels shall be installed as soon as the earthwork is
completed.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.66
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
Section 8.5 Erosion Control.
8.5.1 Design Standards
a. The procedures and requirements of the City of Sugar Hill Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Ordinance, as may be revised from time to time, shall be applicable whenever
any land disturbance is proposed to occur, and shall continue to apply until the project
has been completed. In those instances wherein these Regulations are silent, the
"Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" shall apply.
b. No permit shall be issued authorizing any land disturbing activity unless erosion and
sediment control plans have first been submitted to and approved by the City in
accordance with these Regulations.
8.5.2 Construction Standards
a. All erosion control structures and/or appurtenances as shown on the approved plans
shall be in place and operational, and inspected, prior to the beginning of construction,
and shall be maintained in operational condition until the phase or project has been
completed. (See also requirements for initiation of development activities under Article
11.4.)
b. Temporary and permanent ground covers are required.
c. Upon project completion, erosion control devices and temporary siltation facilities shall
be maintained in place while the individual lots are being developed, or until all disturbed
areas are fully stabilized.
d. Erosion controls and siltation facilities shall be installed and maintained on each building
lot during building construction and site development, as required by the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Ordinance and consistent with the provisions of the "Manual for
Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia".
8.5.3 Abandoned Projects
Any projects whose permit has lapsed under the terms expressed in Article 4, shall immediately
proceed to stabilize all disturbed areas. This responsibility shall fall upon the owner, developer,
contractor, or any and all other responsible parties involved in the land disturbance activity.
8.5.4 Stop Work Orders
Except for those activities directly related to compliance with the erosion and sedimentation
control ordinance all development activity shall cease while a project is under a stop work order
for erosion and sedimentation control violations.
Section 8.6 Dams
Any land disturbing activity that involves a property which is proposed to contain a dam shall
comply with the provisions of this Article as well as the provisions contained in Article 3,
Section 3.1 of these Regulations.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.67
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
8.6.1 New Dams Which Become Subject to the Requirements of the Georgia Safe Dams Act
and Rules for Dam Safety.
Dams proposed to be 25 feet or more in height or proposed to have an impounding capacity of
100 acre-feet or more at maximum water storage elevation shall be subject to the following:
a. The developer of any new dam in which development exists within the proposed breach
zone shall be subject to the requirements of the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for
Dam Safety adopted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. The developer
shall obtain necessary approvals and permits from the Environmental Protection Division
of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for the project and the dam prior to
securing a Development Permit from the City. The developer of any new dam as to
which development does not exist within the proposed breach zone shall submit
construction plans to City of Sugar Hill for review of the project and the dam prior to
securing a Development Permit from the City.
b. If the developer elects to construct the new dam in accordance with the design standards
for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then new development shall be
permitted within the dam breach zone. However, the dam shall meet the design
standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety if development
currently exists or is proposed in the dam breach zone.
c. If the developer elects not to construct the new dam to the design standards for new
dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then a dam breach analysis for the dam
shall be submitted along with the construction plans for review prior to securing a
Development Permit from the City. The design engineer shall utilize the computer model
entitled "DAMBRK" for the dam breach analysis.
d. Should the new dam not meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the
Rules for Dam Safety, then only the following uses and structures shall be permitted
within the dam breach easement:
(1) Agriculture which requires no structures for human habitation within the dam breach
zone including forestry, livestock raising, and agricultural and forestry access roads.
(2) Fences.
(3) Outdoor advertising signs provided they are located no closer than 100-feet from any
residence or place of business.
(4) Roads, driveways and parking areas.
(5) Utility poles, towers, pipelines, water treatment outfalls and facilities, or other similar
facilities and structures.
e. For any new dam that is proposed not to meet the design for new dams as contained in
the Rules for Dam Safety, the developer shall obtain a dam breach easement, recorded
with the Clerk of Superior Court, Gwinnett County from any offsite property owner where
it is proposed for the dam breach zone to extend off the property where the dam is being
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.68
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
constructed. The developer shall also cause a dam breach easement to be recorded
upon the property being developed.
f. Prior to recording of a Final Plat or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, as appropriate,
an as-built certification from a registered professional engineer shall be submitted to the
City. The certification shall state that the dam is constructed in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations as well as the authorized construction plans. If the project
is for the development on a subdivision, the developer shall also establish a legal entity,
acceptable to the City, such as a mandatory Property Owners Association, prior to
approval of the Final Plat, responsible for the maintenance of the dam and its
impoundment.
8.6.2 New Dams Subject to Regulation by City of Sugar Hill
Dams proposed to be 9 feet or more in height, but less than 25 feet in height, in combination with
an impounding capacity proposed to be 20 acre-feet or more at maximum water storage
elevation, but less than 100 acre-feet, shall be subject to the following:
a. If the developer elects not to construct the new dam to the design standards for new
dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then a dam breach analysis for the dam
shall be submitted with the construction plans for review and authorization prior to
securing a Development Permit from the City. The design engineer shall utilize the
computer model entitled "DAMBRK" for the dam breach analysis.
b. Should the new dam not meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the
Rules for Dam Safety, then only the following uses and structures shall be permitted
within the dam breach zone:
(1) Agriculture which requires no structures for human habitation within the dam breach
zone including forestry, livestock raising, and agricultural and forestry access roads.
(2) Fences.
(3) Outdoor advertising signs provided they are located no closer than 100-feet from any
residence or place of business.
(4) Roads, driveways and parking areas.
(5) Utility poles, towers, pipelines, water treatment outfalls and facilities, or similar facilities
and structures.
c. If the developer elects to construct the new dam in accordance with the design standards
for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then new development shall be
permitted within the dam breach zone. However, the dam shall meet the design
standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety if development
currently exists or is proposed in the dam breach zone.
d. Construction plans for new dams defined herein shall be submitted to City of Sugar Hill
for review for the project and the dam prior to securing a Development Permit from the
City.
e. For any dam that is proposed not to meet the design standards for new dams as
contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, the developer shall obtain a dam breach
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.69
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
easement, recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court, Gwinnett County from any offsite
property owner where it is proposed for the dam breach zone to extend off the property
where the dam is being constructed. The developer shall also cause a dam breach
easement to be recorded upon the property being developed.
f. Prior to recording of a Final Plat or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, as appropriate,
an as-built certification from a registered professional engineer shall be submitted to the
City. The certification shall state that the dam is constructed in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations as well as the authorized construction plans. If the project
is for the development of a subdivision, the developer shall also establish a legal entity,
acceptable to City of Sugar Hill, such as a mandatory Property Owners Association, at
time of recording of the Final Plat, responsible for the maintenance of the dam and its
impoundment.
8.6.3 Existing Dams
Existing dams that are located on a project site and will remain after construction is complete,
shall comply with the provisions of this article and all referenced articles as if they were new
dams.
8.6.4 Existing Category II Dams
When an existing Category II dam may be reclassified to a Category I dam because of a
proposed development downstream of the dam, the following shall be provided by the developer
for review by the Georgia Safe Dams Program.
(a) Location of the Category II dam and the proposed development; and,
(b) A surveyed cross-section of the stream valley at the location of the proposed
development including finished floor elevations; and,
(c) A dam breach analysis using the Dambreak computer model to establish the height of
the floodwave in the downstream floodplain. The Dambreak modeling shall be
completed in accordance with the Safe Dams Program Quality Assurance Program by a
qualified registered engineer.
Section 8.7 Extended Detention
8.7. 1 Wet Extended Detention Facility Design Requirements
Wet extended detention facilities shall be designed and constructed to meet the following
requirements:
a. Minimum and Maximum Drainage Area
The minimum drainage area for which a wet detention facility shall be allowed to be
constructed shall be at least 20 acres. The maximum drainage area shall be 100 to 300
acres. The maximum drainage area of highly impervious drainage areas shall be restricted
to the lower end of the range (100 acres) and low density residential watersheds shall be
restricted to a maximum of 300 acres.
b. Storage Volume of Permanent Pool
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.70
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
The permanent pool storage (Vb) shall be at least 50% of the Water Quality Volume
(WQV) defined in section 8.9.1. The part of the WQV (50% or less) not used in the
permanent pool shall be detained for 24 hours and the storage volume may be used as
part of the detention requirements. The WQV to be stored shall be based upon the
project area. The project area compensated for in a pond shall not exceed the total
drainage area draining to the pond. Off-site areas that do not drain through other water
quality BMP's may be used to compensate for areas that by-pass the pond. By-passed
areas shall be minimized as much as practical. Off-site areas exceeding the project site
area may bypass the pond.
c. Depth of Permanent Pool
(1) Mean Depth
The mean depth (Z) of the permanent pool shall be between 3 feet and 7 feet and is
calculated by dividing the permanent pool storage volume (Vb) by the surface area (As)
(Z = Vb / As).
(2) Maximum Depth
The maximum depth of the permanent pool shall be no greater than 12 feet unless a
modification is approved. The intent of these regulations is to ensure that the depth of
the facility is not out of proportion with the surface area of the facility. Granting of a
modification will not nullify these regulations when the depth and surface area of the
facility is based on existing natural topography.
d. Minimum Surface Area of Permanent Pool
The minimum surface area (As) of the permanent pool should be 0.25 acres. The
minimum ratio of surface area to drainage area used to calculate the permanent pool
(Aw) in residential watersheds shall be 1% unless a modification is approved. The intent
of these regulations is to ensure that the depth is minimized to increase removal
efficiencies. Granting of a modification will not nullify these regulations when the depth
and surface area of the facility is based on existing natural topography. As/Aw ratios in
excess of 3% are desirable for nonresidential watersheds with relatively high levels of
imperviousness.
e. Side Slopes Along the Shoreline
(1) Where existing slopes are 3H:1V (Horizontal: Vertical) or flatter, the minimum side slope
around the perimeter of the permanent pool shall be 5H:1V and is recommended to be
10H:1V. The slope shall extend from 10 to 20 horizontal feet into the permanent pool
and from 5 to 10 horizontal feet above the permanent pool. A flat bench at least 10 feet
in width shall be provided 1 foot above the permanent pool. The inside face of the dam,
however, shall have a slope 3H: 1V or flatter.
(2) Side slopes shall be topsoiled, nurtured or planted from 2 feet below to 1 foot above the
permanent pool control elevation to promote wetland vegetative growth. Below the
safety ledge, the pond side shall be sloped to meet topographic or volumetric
constraints.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.71
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
f. Length: Width Ratio of Permanent Pool
The minimum length: width ratio of the permanent pool shall be 2:1. The length shall be
measured at the shortest flow path from the inlet to the outlet. The width shall be shall
be calculated as the surface of the pond divided by the length. In addition, the location
of the outlet structure within the basin shall maximize travel time from the inlet to the
outlet. Baffles or islands may be installed within the permanent pool to increase the flow
path length and to minimize short-circuiting.
g. Soil Permeability
In cases where relatively permeable soils are encountered, water drawdown rates should
be minimized by either compacting the permanent pool soils during construction,
incorporating clay into the soil, or by installing an artificial liner.
h. Spillway and Dam Design
The principal spillway, emergency spillway, and dam shall be designed in accordance with
Sections 8.2, 8.6 and 9.8 of these regulations.
i. Forebay
(1) To facilitate major cleanout activities, a sediment forebay shall be constructed near
the inlet to the permanent pool to trap coarse sediment particles. The forebay volume
may be included in the permanent pool volume requirements. The forebay storage
capacity shall be 10 percent of the runoff from 1.2 inches of rainfall draining to the
facility to accommodate sediment accumulations. The forebay should not exceed 10
percent of the permanent pool. The volume shall be calculated as:
FBV = (0.1)1.2(Rv)AT/12 (ft3)
Where Rv = 0.05 +I(0.009)
I = Percent Impervious as a whole number
AT =Total area draining to facility (ft2)
(2) The facility shall be dredged to ensure that all of the permanent pool storage volume is
available after the upstream area has been stabilized. All temporary sediment control
measures employed during land disturbing activities to trap sediment shall be located
outside of state waters.
(3) The forebay shall be distinguished from the permanent pool. Options which may be
used include: a lateral sill with wetland vegetation; two (2) ponds in series; differential
pool depth; rock-filled gabions or a retaining wall; or a horizontal rock filter placed
laterally across the permanent pool.
j. Inlet and Outlet Structures
(1) The inlet design shall dissipate flow energy and diffuse the inflow plume where it enters
the forebay or permanent pool. Options that may be used include: drop manholes;
energy dissipaters at the bottom of paved ditches; a lateral bench with wetland
vegetation; and the placement of large rock deflectors at each inlet.
(2) The outlet design shall consist of a riser with a hood or trash rack to prevent clogging
and an adequate antivortex device for facilities serving large drainage areas. Anti-seep
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.72
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
collars shall be installed around all conduits that pass through the embankment of the
basin. The outlet may be sized to achieve the flood control performance standards
contained in Sections 8.2, 8.6 and 9.8 of these regulations. An emergency spillway shall
be provided no lower than the 25-year ponding elevation and its capacity shall be at
least equal to the full 100-year peak flow rate into the facility.
(3) The channel that receives the discharge from the basin’s outfall pipe shall be protected
from erosive discharge velocities. Options which may be used include: rip-rap lining of
the channel; or, the provision of stilling basins, check dams, rock deflectors or other
devices to reduce outfall discharge velocities to non-erosive levels.
(4) An orifice for any required extended detention volume shall be sized using the same
criteria as required in section 8.7.2.
k. Access requirements shall be as specified in Section 8.2.5 of these regulations.
l. Easement requirements shall be as specified in Section 8.2.5 of these regulations with the
change that the easement enclosing the facility shall be named a Best Management
Practice (BMP) easement.
8.7.2 Dry Extended Detention Facilities
Extended detention facilities with wetland plantings shall be designed and constructed to meet
the following requirements:
a. Maximum Drainage Area
The maximum drainage area for which the facility shall be allowed to be constructed
should be 20 acres (DA = drainage area in acres);
b. Storage Volume
The Water Quality Volume (WQV) to be stored is defined in section 8.9.1. Up to fifty
percent (50%) shall be detained for 24 hours and the storage volume may be used for
detention requirements. The remaining portion (50% or greater) shall be drained
through a filter drain in 24 hours.
S = BMP storage volume in cubic feet;
c. Minimum Surface Area
The facility should have a minimum surface area of one (1) percent of the total drainage
area when the volume contained in the facility equals the required BMP storage volume;
d. Side Slopes Along the Shoreline
Side slopes shall be no steeper than 3H: 1V (Horizontal: Vertical). A flat bench at least 10
feet in width shall be provided 1 foot above the ponding level used to determine the
minimum surface area.
e. Length: Width Ratio
The length: width ratio shall be maximized. The length shall be measured as the shortest
flow path from the inlet to the outlet. The width shall be calculated as the surface area of
the pond divided by the length.
f. Depth of Facility
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.73
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
The average cross-sectional area of the facility shall be calculated as the volume of the
pond divided by the length. The water velocity shall be determined by dividing the
maximum outflow rate by the average cross-sectional area. The maximum desired water
velocity shall be 0.5 feet per second.
g. Spillway and Dam Design
The principal spillway, emergency spillway and dam shall be designed in accordance with
Sections 8.2, 8.6 and 9.8 of these regulations.
h. Forebay
The forebay requirements are the same as for wet extended detention (section 8.7.1.i)
i. Inlet and Outlet Structures
(1) Inlet and outlet structures shall meet the same requirements as wet detention facilities.
(2) The size of the orifice for the facility shall be computed using the following orifice
equation with a 24 hour draw down time from the full pool BMP volume (S) and an
orifice coefficient of 0.60:
h = head measured in feet from the elevation at the required
BMP storage to the centroid of the orifice;
Qa= average BMP outflow rate in cfs;
Qa = S/ 3600 x 24;
A = required orifice area in square feet;
A = Qa/(0.6 x (64.4 x h/2)0.5).
(3) An allowance for base flow shall be provided. The designer either shall determine the
base flow using a factor of 1.6 cfs per square mile or may use another standard
engineering practice if warranted.
j. Access requirements shall be as specified in Section 8.2.5 of these regulations.
k. Easement requirements shall be as specified in Section 8.2.5 of these regulations with the
exception that the easement enclosing the facility shall be named a Best Management
Practice (BMP) easement.
l. Wetland Plantings
The facility bottom shall be planted with plantings indigenous to local wetlands.
8.7.3 Stream Buffers and Impervious Surface Setbacks
Refer to the Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill.
8.7.4 Wet and Extended Detention Facility Maintenance
Maintenance requirements shall be as specified in Section 8.2.6 of these regulations.
8.8 Reserved.
Section 8.9 Water Quality Best Management Practices.
8.9.1 Treatment Runoff
a. All projects, unless exempt pursuant to 8.9.1.d below, that need one or more of the
following criteria shall provide water quality treatment based on the modeled Total
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.74
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
Suspended Solids (TSS) load of the project for post construction conditions. The
determination of the TSS load shall be in accordance with the Storm Water Design
Manual. The modeled TSS load shall not exceed 850 pounds/acre/year.
i. New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious
cover, or that involves other land development activities of 1 acre or more;
ii. Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet
or more of impervious cover, or that involves other lad development activity of 1 acre or
more; or
iii. Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set
forth in items i and ii, above, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of
development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land of the men activities
may take place at different times on different schedules.
b. The water quality volume (WQV) shall be the runoff from 1.2 inches of rain from the
project site. The volume shall be calculated as:
WQV = 1.2(Rv)As/12(ft2)
Where Rv = 0.05 + I(0.009)
I = Percent Impervious as a whole number
As = On-site area to be treated (ft2)
c. Runoff from any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined
by the City Manager to be a hotspot land use or activity shall be adequately treated and
addressed through the use of structural storm water controls, nonstructural practices
and pollution prevention practices.
d. The following activities are exempt from the providing treatment:
i. Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or
phase development project;
ii. Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; and
iii. Repairs to any storm water management facility or practice deemed necessary by the
City Manager or his/her designee.
iv. Utility line projects such as electrical, gas, water and sanitary sewer line installations.
v. Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or
aquatic habitat, so long as mative vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used.
8.9.2 Facility Location Criteria
a. Facility location criteria shall be as specified for detention facilities in Section 8.2.4 of
these regulations.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.75
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
b. In a residential subdivision, the following Best Management Practices must be located on
a separate lot in accordance with Section 8.2.4.g if not located on a recreation area lot as
specified in 8.2.4.f:
(1) Extended detention ponds;
(2) Retention ponds;
(3) Sand filters;
(4) Constructed wetlands;
(5) Infiltration trenches;
(6) Oil/grit separators.
8.9.3 Easement Requirements
(a) Facility easement requirements shall be as specified in Section 8.2.5 of these regulations
with the exception that the easement with the exception that the easement enclosing
the facility shall be named a Best Management Practice (BMP) easement.
(b) Stream Buffer Easements shall be shown on the final plat for areas that are claimed in the
TSS model as Undisturbed Stream Buffers for the site. These areas shall be left in a
natural, undisturbed condition except for walking trails. Trails shall not be allowed within
25 feet of a stream bank without a state waters buffer variance.
(c) Upland Area Easements in non-residential subdivisions that are claimed as undisturbed
upland areas for the site, shall be recorded in an easement acceptable to the City. These
areas shall be left in a natural, undisturbed condition except for walking trails.
8.9.4 Facility Maintenance
a. Maintenance requirements shall be as specified in Section 8.2.6 of these regulations.
b. Prior to or concurrent with the recording of a Final Plat for a subdivision, or issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy for a non-subdivision project, the developer shall provide
acceptable surety such as a bond or letter of credit providing for the maintenance of the
facility for a period of not less than 18 months. The amount of the surety shall be the
greater of fifty (50) percent of construction costs of the facility or 100 percent of the cost
to clean out the facility. At the end of 18 months, the City may require the surety to be
renewed due to anticipated maintenance caused by such concerns as future construction
activity in the basin draining to the facility. A renewed surety may be required up to a
total maximum of ten (10) years. The surety for a facility shall be renewed during the
ten years until:
1) The surface water drainage area has undergone final stabilization and all planned
construction activity has been completed;
2) All storm water runoff in the surface water drainage area is coming from undisturbed or
stabilized areas;
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.76
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
3) At least 90% of the lots in that surface water drainage area of the common development
have been sold to an unrelated party, permanent structures completed and final
stabilization achieved;
4) The accumulation of acreage of undeveloped lots, lots with no completed permanent
structure and no final stabilization, within the surface water drainage area is less than
five acres or 10 percent of the total area of the common development draining to the
facility, whichever is greater; and
5) Within two (2) months of surety release, the facility shall be cleaned out and a new
record survey and certification showing that the facility complies with these regulations
as specified in section 8.2.8 shall be submitted.
8.9.5 Facility Certification and Record Drawings
Requirements for a certified record survey and addendum to the Storm Water Management
Report shall be the same for water quality facilities as for detention facilities in section 8.2.8.
8.9.6 Existing Subdivisions without Regional Water Quality
Where the drainage is treated in a regional water quality facility approved between April 27,
1999, and January 1, 2001, lots in non-residential subdivisions (or phases in residential
subdivisions) shall either conform to the permit and water quality regulations at the time of
approval or conform to the current water quality regulations as stated in section 8.8.
8.9.7 Existing Subdivisions without Regional Water Quality Facilities
Where drainage is treated in a regional detention facility approved before April 27, 1999, lots in
non-residential subdivisions (or phases in residential subdivisions) shall conform to the current
water quality regulations as stated in section 8.9.
8.9.8 Retrofitting of Existing Detention Facilities for Water Quality Treatment
If water quality treatment for a proposed development is to be provided in an existing detention
basin then treatment must be provided for the entire original project basin. A modification to the
25-year detention requirement may be granted for the purpose of retrofitting the detention pond
to meet current water quality regulations. Granting of a modification will meet the intent and
purpose of these regulations when:
1) The detention requirements of the current regulations are provided in the facility for the
1-year, 2-year, 5-year, and 10-year storm. For a retrofitted basin, the volume of the 1-
year storm shall be based on the original project area being detained instead of the total
area draining to the basin;
2) The water quality requirements of the current regulations as stated in Section 8.8 are
provided for the original project area in the facility;
3) The ponding limits create a hardship if no modification is granted; and
4) The outlet structure meets the requirements of the current regulations.
Site Grading, Stormwater Detention, Culverts,
Development Regulations Piped Drainage System, Soil Sediment Control Requirements
City of Sugar Hill 8.77
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
8.9.9 Retrofitting of Existing Water Quality Facilities
If water quality treatment for a proposed development is provided in an existing water quality
facility then water quality treatment conforming to the current regulations must be provided for
the entire original project basin.
8.9.10 Redevelopment
a. When 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area is created, added, or
replaced, or 1 acre or more of a developed project site is disturbed for redevelopment,
and the disturbed area is more than 50% of the property, the water quality requirements
of this section must be met for the entire site.
b. When less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface area is created, added, or
replaced, or less than 1 acre of land of a developed project site is disturbed for
redevelopment, the project is exempt from having to provide the water quality
requirements of this section for the project or for the rest of the site.
c. When 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area is created, added, or
replaced, or 1 acre or more of a develop project site is disturbed for redevelopment, and
the disturbed area is less than 50% of the property, the project shall provide water
quality treatment for just the improvements on the site.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.78
Article 9. Performance Guidelines.
Section 9.1 General
9.1.1 Purpose
The Sections enumerated in this Article are guidelines, and are intended to be benchmark
indicators of what standards could be acceptable. They are further intended to allow alternate
designs which could produce results similar to these performance standards and similar
protection to the public. The objective of these performance standards is not to suggest a single
methodological standard of acceptance exclusive of all others. Rather they establish what would
otherwise be allowed in the absence of an acceptable alternative.
9.1.2 Constraints
The alternative design solutions are constrained by the Design Requirements of Article 5, the
Access Requirements and Street and Right-of-Way Requirements and the Street Construction
Standards of Article 6, and the Grading, Detention, Drainage Requirements of Article 8, as well
as the Purpose and Intent of these Regulations.
9.1.3 Documentation Required
In the event that an alternative is suggested by the applicant, studies and reports conducted by
professionals currently certified in the State of Georgia will be required to be submitted to and
approved by the City. These studies and reports must clearly relate to the desired results and
purposes expressed or implied in the applicable performance standard. Once an alternative has
been approved by the City, it shall become a required standard applicable to the specific
approved Permit only.
Section 9.2 Lots
9.2.1 Lots should be designed generally such that they are no more than four times as deep as
they are wide at the building setback line, unless excepted by the City Manager.
a. The City may require notation that a House Location Plan (HLP) is required to be
approved prior to issuance of a building permit on certain lots when particular care
in locating the house or other improvements will be necessary. Such lots include,
but are not limited to:
(1) A lot which presents particular or unusual difficulties for a builder to meet minimum
required building setbacks;
(2) A lot upon which is located an easement of unusual configuration;
(3) A lot containing floodplain but upon which no fill or other encroachment into the
floodplain is anticipated at the time the Final Plat is filed;
(4) A lot upon which is located all or a part of a stormwater detention facility;
(5) A lot upon which is located a buffer which was required by the Zoning Resolution as a
condition of zoning approval;
(6) All duplex lots;
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.79
(7) All lots within, or partially within, the Chattahoochee River Corridor, or containing a
River Corridor Tributary Buffer Zone.
b. The City may require notation that a Residential Drainage Plan (RDP) is required to be
approved prior to issuance of a building permit o certain lots where additional (site
specific) engineering will be necessary to properly grade the lot or locate the building or
other improvements. Such lots include, but are not limited to:
(1) A lot containing floodplain where fill or other encroachment into the floodplain is
planned or reasonably expected;
(2) A lot containing severe topographic features interdicting the building site;
(3) A lot containing a drainage easement with a pipe discharge or other facilities, or flow
characteristics which may adversely affect the location of a building or other site
improvements.
c. The City may require notation that a Residential Drainage Study (RDS) is required to be
approved prior to issuance of a building permit on certain lots where particular attention
to site grading will be necessary, but formal engineering is not needed. Such an RDS is
conducted in the field where the effect of the site grading must be accomplished with
adequate care so as not to create a drainage problem on neighboring property.
9.2.2 Side lot lines generally should be at right angles (90 degrees) to straight street lines or
radial to curved street lines as much as practical. Side lot lines should be radial to the radius
points of all cul-de-sacs. Variations of more than 10 degrees shall require approval of the City,
but shall be approved when appropriate to the reasonable loading pattern of the subdivision,
efficient use of the land relative to topographic conditions, or provisions of improved building
sites over those which would result without variation of the side lot lines.
9.2.3 Corner lots shall be sufficiently larger so that they have the same width between
minimum side setback lines as an interior lot, but in no case shall more than 75 feet between side
setback lines on a corner lot be required.
Section 9.3 Blocks
9.3.1 The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with regard to:
a. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use
contemplated,
b. Applicable zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions,
c. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic,
d. Limitations and opportunities of topography.
9.3.2 In blocks over 1,000 feet long, the City Manager may, when existing or proposed
pedestrian circulation patterns or public gathering places so justify, require pedestrian ways or
pedestrian access easements, as appropriate, through the block.
Section 9.4 Access
A maximum number of 200 residential dwelling units shall be allowed to be constructed with
only one street outlet to an existing public street. If a second access to an existing public road is
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.80
not available or, in the opinion of the City Manager, could induce non-residential traffic through
the development, a single entrance may be allowed if designed with a traffic signal and/or
sufficient right-of-way and improvements to provide a protected left-turn lane.
Section 9.5 Roadway Design
9.5.1 Street Grades and Design Speeds
a. Minimum grade for all local and minor collector streets shall be 1.5%. Minimum grades
for all major collector and arterial streets shall conform to Georgia D.O.T. practice.
b. Minimum grade of less than 1.5% on a local street may be approved by the City, based on
adequate engineering designs, where at least 1.5% cannot reasonably be achieved due to
topographical limitations imposed by the land. In such cases, a Record Drawing and such
computations as necessary shall be provided after construction to establish that the
street will drain in accordance with these Regulations. Street sections where
unacceptable pooling, excessive spread at catch basins, or other hazardous conditions
occur shall be reconstructed or otherwise improved to eliminate such conditions.
c. Minimum vehicle design speeds and maximum grades allowable in City of Sugar Hill by
street classification shall be as shown in Table 9-A.
Table 9-A Minimum Design Speeds and Maximum Grades.
Street Category Maximum Grade Design Speed
Principal Arterial 6% 60 MPH
Major Arterial 8% 50 MPH
Minor Arterial 10% 50 MPH
Major Collector 10% 40 MPH
Minor Collector 10% 30 MPH
Local 15%* 20 MPH
* Grades between 12% and 14% shall not exceed a length of one hundred and fifty feet (150')
and shall require an "as graded" survey prior to the installation of the curb or utilities. The
distance shall be measured as the tangent length between points of curvature.
d. Maximum grade on any cul-de-sac turnaround shall be 6%.
9.5.2 Vertical Street Alignment
a. All changes in street profile grades having algebraic difference greater than 1% shall be
connected by a parabolic curve having a minimum length (L) equal to the product of the
algebraic difference between the grades in percent (A) and the design constant (K)
assigned to the street according to its category (i.e., L=KA).
b. Constant (K) values are shown in the Table 9-B for both desirable and minimum
acceptable ("hardship") conditions. In all cases, the "desirable" value shall be used,
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.81
unless it cannot be achieved due to topographic conditions beyond the developer's
control. In such hardship situations, the City may approve a lesser value to the extent
required by the hardship situation, but in no event less than the value shown in the Table
as "minimum."
Table 9-B. Constant (K) Values for Vertical Curves
CREST CURVES SAG CURVES
STREET
CATEGORY
MINIMUM DESIRABLE MINIMUM DESIRABLE
Principal Arterial 200 320 125 155
Major Arterial 100 170 80 110
Minor Arterial 55 80 55 70
Major Collector 55 80 55 70
Minor Collector 30 30 35 35
Local 10 10 20 20
9.5.3 Horizontal Street Alignment
a. All new streets shall adhere to the following standards governing horizontal curvature
and superelevation:
Table 9-C Horizontal Curves
Street Category Minimum Radius (FT) Maximum Superelevation
Principal Arterial 1333 0.06
Major Arterial 833 0.06
Minor Arterial 560 0.06
Major Collector 560 0.04
Minor Collector 300 0.04
Local 120 0.00
* No superelevation will be allowed on Minor Collectors internal to residential S/D
b. Superelevation for horizontal curves shall be calculated utilizing the following formula:
R = minimum radius curve v = vehicle design speed (MPH)
e = rate of superelevation 2 (decimal of a foot rise per foot of roadway)
R = v
15 (e + f) f = side friction factor, as follows:
Vehicle Design Speed (v) 30 40 50 60
Side Friction Factor (f) .16 .15 .14 .12
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.82
c. Widening section along existing streets shall be designed reflecting existing curvature and
superelevation, if any, unless the existing street has been included in a specific design by
Gwinnett County or Georgia D.O.T. which calls for different standards, in which case the
project will be coordinated with the overall design.
d. Superelevation Runoff
Roadway edge curves shall be provided for tangent runout (bringing edge from a normal
crown to centerline elevation) and superelevation runoff (from the end of tangent runout to
the point of design superelevation) in accordance with design standards of the Georgia
Department of Transportation or other professional engineering standards.
e. Tangents and Compound Curves
Between reverse horizontal curves there shall be not less than the minimum centerline
tangents shown in Table 9-D unless otherwise specified by the Georgia Department of
Transportation. Compound radii curves are prohibited. At least the "desirable" length shall
be provided unless hardship conditions of topography or property configuration will not allow
lengths greater than those shown as "minimum." For compound circular curves, the ratio of
the flatter radius to the sharper radius shall not exceed 1.5 to 1.
Table 9-D Tangents
Street Category Minimum Tangent Length Desireable Tangent Length
Principal Arterial 150 180 Feet
Major Arterial 125 150 Feet
Minor Arterial 100 120 Feet
Major Collector 100 120 Feet
Minor Collector 75 90 Feet
Local 50 60 Feet
NOTE: Minimum tangents are based on the distance traveled in 1.7 seconds at the design speed
for each category of street. Desirable length is based on distance travelled in 2.0 seconds.
9.5.4 Horizontal and Vertical Clearances
a. Horizontal Clearances
(1) A shoulder of no less than 11 feet from the back of curb or edge of pavement,
appropriately graded and having gentle slopes of not more than 1/2 inch per foot and
rounded cross-sectional design shall be maintained along all streets. Beyond the
shoulder but within the right-of-way, slopes shall not exceed one foot of rise for each
two feet of horizontal distance on a cut slope, and one foot of fall for each three feet of
horizontal distance on a fill slope.
(2) Along all public streets, a clear zone shall be provided for a minimum distance of six feet
from back of curb or edge of pavement wherein nothing may be located above ground
level except traffic/street signs, public utility structures, and mail boxes.
(3) At selected locations, such as the outside of a sharp curve a wider clear zone with
greater horizontal clearances provided to any roadside obstruction may be required.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.83
(4) The City of Sugar Hill or Gwinnett County Department of Transportation, in accordance
with Georgia Law 32-6-51, is authorized to remove or direct the removal of any sign,
signal, device, or other structure erected, placed, or maintained on the right-of-way of a
public road which because of its nature, construction, or operation, constitutes a danger
to, or interferes with the vision of, drivers of motor vehicles.
b. Vertical Clearances
Vertical clearance at underpasses shall be at least 14.5 feet over the entire roadway
width.
Section 9.6 Street Intersections.
9.6.1 Angle of Intersection
Intersections shall generally be at right angles and shall not be at an angle of less than 85 degrees
unless approved by the City, nor less than 80 degrees unless the intersection is signalized in
which case the angle of the intersection may be reduced subject to the review and approval of the
Gwinnett County Traffic Engineer.
9.6.2 Maximum Grade
Street intersections should be designed with a flat grade wherever possible, but in no case should
the grade exceed 2% in normal situations (or 4% in topographical hardship situations on local
streets).
9.6.3 Intersection Approaches: Horizontal Alignment
a. New local streets which approach an intersection with a street in a category higher than
itself on a horizontal curve having a centerline radius less than 240 feet shall provide a
tangent section of roadway at least 30 feet long. Minor collectors approaching an
intersection with a major thoroughfare on a horizontal curve having a centerline radius of
less than 550 feet shall also provide the 30 foot tangent section. The tangent length shall
be measured along the centerline of the street, from the right-of-way line of the
intersecting street, extended, to the point of tangency with the centerline of the curve
section.
b. New major thoroughfares shall provide tangent sections at intersections with streets in
equal or higher categories as needed to provide adequate stopping distances at their
design speeds.
9.6.4 Intersection Approaches: Vertical Alignment
a. For intersections with local or minor collector streets, a leveling of the street at a grade
not exceeding 2 percent shall be provided but no level approach distance is required for
streets approaching at less than 7 percent, and a minimum 25 foot level approach
distance shall be provided for streets approaching at a grade of 7 percent or more. (See
Standard Drawings).
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.84
b. As a street approaches an intersection with a major thoroughfare, there shall be a
suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding 2 percent and for a distance not
less than the following minimums:
TABLE 9-E
APPROACH DISTANCES AT MAJOR INTERSECTIONS
APPROACHING MINIMUM APPROACH
STREET CATEGORY DISTANCE
Principal Arterial 100 Feet
Major Arterial 100 Feet
Minor Arterial 100 Feet
Major Collector 75 Feet
Minor Collector 75 Feet
Local 50 Feet
* Distance of the approach is measured from edge of pavement
of the intersecting street to the point of curvature in the
approaching street.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.85
9.6.5 Intersection Radii
Intersection radii for roadways measured at back of curb and for the right-of-way lines shall
be as follows. For intersecting streets of difference classification, the larger radii shall be
provided. In all cases, adequate right-of-way shall be provided to maintain minimum of 11
feet from back-of-curb. Larger radii may be required for streets intersecting at angles less
than 90 degrees.
TABLE 9-F
INTERSECTION RADII
ROADWAY R-O-W
STREET CATEGORY RADII RADII*
Arterial 40 Feet 20 Feet
Major Collector 40 Feet 20 Feet
Minor Collector-Residential 25 Feet 9 Feet
Minor Collector-Nonresidential 40 Feet 20 Feet
Local-Residential 20 Feet 9 Feet
Local-Commercial or Office 25 Feet 11 Feet
Local-Industrial 40 Feet 25 Feet
* Intersecting right-of-way lines may be joined by an arc having the
minimum radius shown, or by a miter which cuts across right-of-way
lines connecting the points where the required radius would have
otherwise been tangent.
9.6.6 Islands
Islands in street intersections shall conform to the design requirements of the standard
drawings. In no case shall anything in an island extend more than 3 feet above the street
grade within the right-of-way, except traffic regulatory devices and other infrastructure
erected or approved by The City of Sugar Hill. No island shall be approved which contains
less than 100 square feet.
9.6.7 Intersection Corner Sight Distance
a. Intersections shall be designed with adequate corner sight distance for each street
which approaches a street in an equal or higher street category (except an
intersection of two local streets). Where necessary, backslopes shall be flattened and
horizontal or vertical curves lengthened to provide the minimum required sight
distance.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.86
b. The minimum corner sight distance from the approaching street shall be equal to or
exceed 10 times the regulated speed of the intersecting street, as measured from the
center of the approaching street in both directions along the right-of-way line of the
intersecting street. As an alternative, the minimum corner sight distance requirement
may be calculated using AASHTO "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and
Streets," Chapter 9 (at-grade intersections), latest edition. The sight distance shall
provide clear visibility of an object 4 feet above the intersecting street viewed from
the centerline of the approaching street at the right-of-way line of the intersecting
street, at a height of 3.5 feet above the ground.
9.6.8 Obstructing Visibility at Intersections
On any corner lot, within an area formed by the lot lines on the street sides of such lot and a
line (miter) joining points on such lot lines located at a distance of 20 feet from the point of
their intersection, the following shall apply:
a. There shall be no fence or wall or hedge higher than three feet.
b. Except standard street signs erected by Gwinnett County or the City of Sugar Hill,
there shall be no obstruction to vision, other than a post, column or tree exceeding
one (1) foot in greatest cross-sectional dimension, between a height of three (3) feet
and a height of fifteen (15) feet above the established grade of either of the
intersecting streets.
9.6.9 Turning Lanes at Intersections
Left turning lanes shall be provided on all new internal project streets, classified as a minor
collector or major thoroughfare, intersecting a major thoroughfare, and may be required in
other locations to meet traffic demand and safe operations. Right turning lanes may be
required to meet traffic demands or safety concerns. When provided, turning lanes shall
meet the following criteria:
a. Storage length - A minimum of 150 feet of storage length for turning lanes on any
arterial roadway shall be used. A minimum of 100 feet of storage length for turning
lanes on all collectors shall be used.
b. Taper Length - The minimum taper length shall be 50 feet.
c. Left turning lanes from arterial roads shall be subject to longer storage lengths and
tapers, as determined on a case by case basis.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.87
9.7 DRIVEWAY INTERSECTIONS
9.7.1 Angle and Improvements
Driveways shall generally intersect streets at right angles. The portion of a driveway located
within a public right-of-way shall be paved, if any. Driveways providing access to parking
lots which contain six or more spaces shall be paved in accordance with the parking lot
requirements of the Zoning Resolution.
9.7.2 Driveway Design Standards
a. Driveways serving single-family detached or duplex residences may be no less than
ten feet wide at the right-of-way line and shall provide a radius to the back of curb or
edge of pavement of the roadway of no less than five feet. All other driveway curb
cuts on public streets shall conform to the standards shown on the driveway details
contained in the Standard Drawings, by land use type as follows:
(1) Driveway Detail 1 (32' Width, 25' Radius) for:
(a) Service Stations;
(b) Commercial Sites (over 80,000 Square Feet);
(c) Office/Institutional Complexes (Over 100,000 Square Feet);
(d) Apartment/Condo Complexes (Over 200 Units); and;
(e) Mobile Home Complexes (Over 200 Lots).
(2) Driveway Detail 2 (28' Width, 25' Radius) for:
(a) Commercial Sites (80,000 Square Feet or Less);
(b) Office/Institutional Complexes (100,000 Square Feet or Less);
(c) Apartment/Condo Complexes (200 Units or Fewer); and,
(d) Mobile Home Complexes (200 Lots or Fewer)
(3) Driveway Detail 3 (32' Width, 40' Radius) for:
(a) Industrial Sites
(4) Driveway Detail 4 (Optional Design with Island) for:
(a) Private Commercial/Office Street Entrances;
(b) Private Entrances to Apartment/Condo Complexes (Over 200 Units);
and,
(c) Private Entrances to Mobile Home Complexes (Over 200 Lots).
b. All driveways and driveway curb cuts on State highways shall conform to Georgia
DOT standards.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.88
9.7.3 Auxiliary Lanes
Along any major thoroughfare, a deceleration lane, acceleration lane, larger turning radius,
traffic islands, or other devices or designs may be required to avoid specific traffic hazards
which would otherwise be created by the proposed driveway location.
9.7.4 Corner Sight Distance
All driveways approaching a minor collector or major thoroughfare shall provide adequate
corner sight distance. The minimum corner sight distance from the driveway shall be equal
to or exceed 10 times the regulated speed of the intersecting street, as measured from the
center of the driveway in both directions along the right-of-way line of the intersecting
street. As an alternative, the minimum corner sight distance requirement may be calculated
using AASHTO "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," Chapter (at-grade
intersections), latest edition. The sight distance shall provide clear visibility of an object 4
feet above the intersecting street viewed from the centerline of the driveway at the right-ofway
line of the intersecting street, at a height of 3.5 feet above the ground.
9.7.5 Separation, and Spacing
All driveways except those serving residential units on individual lots shall be
recommended to meet the following criteria:
a. Minimum separation from a street intersection: 100' from centerline of driveway to
nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street, extended. For any driveway on a
major thoroughfare having a centerline between 100' and 200' from the intersecting
street right-of-way line, access restriction may be imposed to avoid traffic hazards.
Greater separation may be required for safe operation of a free-right lane,
acceleration or deceleration lane, etc.
b. Minimum separation between driveways along the same side of a major
thoroughfare: 100' between centerline as measured along the roadway edge or back
of curb.
c. Whenever possible, proposed driveways along one side of a street shall coincide
with existing or proposed driveways on the opposite side of such street.
d. Maximum number of driveways serving a single project: one for each 400' of
property frontage, or fraction thereof per street, along a major thoroughfare. This is
not meant to be a spacing standard but only an expression of the total number of
driveways that are permitted serving a single project.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.89
9.8 STORMWATER DETENTION GUILDELINES
9.8.1 General
a. Stormwater detention facilities shall be designed so that their peak release rates,
when combined with those of all detention bypass areas in the same basin, produce
peak flowrates and flow velocities at the site's boundary line no greater than those
which occurred at the same location for pre-developed conditions.
b. The positive effects of stormwater management via on-site detention facilities
diminish rapidly as the distance downstream from the point of distance increases,
and the smaller the facility's contribution is, as a percentage of the total runoff
contributing to downstream flow, the shorter the distance downstream that the
benefits are realized. Because of these limitations, on-site detention is effective at
controlling flooding only when flow from the facility is a significant percentage of
the total flow at the point of interest, and only if the point of interest is
"immediately" downstream. The concepts of "immediately downstream" and
"significant percentage of total flow are inseparable." The portion of a receiving
watercourse (one which receives and conveys runoff from a site) which lies within a
flow distance of one-half mile (2,640 linear feet) downstream from the site, shall
generally be considered to constitute that portion of the watercourse which is
"immediately" downstream. However, the total flow in the receiving watercourse
may become very large, relative to the flow contributed by the project site, within a
much shorter distance For this reason, the "substantial percentage" test must also
always be applied. For purposes of these Regulations, the flow from a site
represents a "significant percentage" of the total flow in a watercourse only when the
ratio of the peak flow rate from the site to the peak flowrate in the watercourse
(including the contribution from the project site) is greater than 5 percent.
c. Peak flowrate control shall normally be provided only for the 2-year, 5-year, 10-
year, and 25-year frequency storm events. However, under certain conditions, the
100-year event must also be detained to the pre-developed rate. Such control of the
100-year event shall be provided when failure to do so would result in flooding of
other habitable dwellings, property damage, or public access and/or utility
interruption.
d. For any storm water analysis, the composite “C” (Rational Method) or CN (SCS
Method) used for analysis of pre-development conditions shall not exceed 0.15 or
55, respectively, unless prior approval has been obtained from the Department. A
pre-design conference between the design engineer and appropriate Department
personnel, which may in certain straightforward cases be conducted via the
telephone, is required.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.90
e. Rational Method runoff coefficients used for analysis of pre- and post-development
conditions shall be consistent with those shown in the Storm Water Design Manual..
9.8.2 Dam Design and Construction Criteria
a. Detention facilities which take the form of normally-dry basins, ponds, or lakes
usually are created by damming a drainageway or watercourse. Such dams can take
a variety of different forms, the most common being earthen embankments and
reinforced concrete walls. Each type of dam has different characteristics, and the
selection of the most appropriate type for a particular site should be made by a
Professional Engineer and based on the physical features of the dam site, the purpose
of the dam, the type of impoundment, safety, and maintenance requirements.
b. For purposes of these Regulations, dams will be addressed separately for each of the
three most frequently encountered types of detention facilities: normally-dry basins,
ponds, and lakes. A normally-dry basin is one designed to impound stormwater
runoff for only a brief period of time following a storm event. The vast majority of
the time the basin will be completely dry except for any normal stream flows which
pass through unimpeded. Lakes and ponds, on the other hand, are designed to
impound a body of water at least several feet in depth on a more-or-less permanent
basis. Lakes and ponds vary from one another only in terms of magnitude. The
magnitude of a lake is determined primarily from the height of its dam, the size of its
contributing drainage area, and the volume of water it is capable of impounding. For
purposes of these Regulation, a pond is any lake having a dam height of less than 20
feet, a drainage area of less than 100 acres, and which is incapable of impounding
more than 10 acre-feet of water.
c. All dam design is to be certified by a Professional Engineer currently registered in
the State of Georgia.
d. Dams for normally-dry detention basins shall conform to the following:
(1) Dams for normally-dry detention basins may be constructed of earth,
reinforced concrete, mortared rubble, or other suitable materials.
(2) The design of any concrete or rubble wall over 5 feet in height shall be
certified by a Structural Engineer currently registered as a Professional
Engineer in the State of Georgia, and the structural design shall be based on
soil tests certified by a Geotechnical Engineer currently registered as a
Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia.
(3) Any non-earthen structure shall be designed to prevent piping failure through
its subgrade and abutments.
(4) The construction of walls over 5 feet in height shall be monitored and
approved by a qualified materials testing company.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.91
(5) Earthen dams for normally-dry detention basins shall have a top width of no
less than 8 feet, and slopes on both faces no steeper than 2 (horizontal) to 1
(vertical).
(6) For earthen dams for normally-dry detention basins, there shall be at least 1
1/2 feet of vertical separation between the 100-year ponding elevation in the
basin and the low point on the top of the dam. One foot of this distance is to
provide a margin of safety against overtopping of the dam and the other 6
inches is to allow for settlement. No separation is required for a nonearthen
dam, if it has been designed to overtop safely.
(7) More stringent design and construction criteria shall be used for dams for
normally-dry detention basins whenever the probable consequences of dam
failure are severe.
e. Dams for ponds shall conform to the following:
(1) Any engineer responsible for the design of a dam for a pond is expected to
be knowledgeable of the criteria contained within the Georgia Safe Dams
Act, Georgia Department of Natural Resources "Rules for Dam Safety"
publication, and the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service's Technical Release
No. 60 "Earth Dams and Reservoirs." The provisions of each are to be
applied wherever applicable. Applicability shall be determined based upon
site-specific constraints and downstream conditions. Consultation with
appropriate City personnel both prior to and throughout the design process is
encouraged.
f. Dams for lakes shall conform to the following:
(1) Any engineer responsible for the design of a dam for a lake is expected to be
thoroughly familiar with the criteria contained within the Georgia Safe Dams
Act, Georgia Department of Natural Resources "Rules for Dam Safety"
publication, and the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service's Technical Release
No. 60 "Earth Dams and Reservoirs." All design is to be in accordance with
the applicable requirements contained in each of the above referenced
publications.
9.8.3. Detention Facility Outlet Devices
a. Because of the variables that may be associated with the choice of an outlet device
for any given condition, the design consultant is responsible for the selection of the
device, subject to the review and approval of the City.
b. The City will include in its consideration the ease of maintenance, longevity of the
system, freedom from congestion, practicality, and aesthetics in its review of the
outlet device. The consultant should be guided by the preference of vertical weir
designs since they have proven to generally meet most of the considerations
expressed herein.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.92
c. No orifice shall be smaller than 3 inches in diameter. An orifice smaller than 15
inches in diameter shall be protected by a trash rack. A trash rack protecting an
orifice shall have surface area of at least 10 square feet. Design shall be in
accordance with the Storm Water Design Manual. No opening in the trash rack
shall have an area more than one-half the size of the area of the orifice being
protected. Two-stage trash racks, or screens having progressively smaller openings
placed in series, are suggested. To facilitate outlet operation, curved or inclined
trash racks designed to allow debris to rise with the water level are preferred. In all
cases, trash racks shall be either hinged or removable to facilitate maintenance
operations.
d. If the primary detention facility outlet is a conduit through a dam, and there is not an
orifice, weir-box, or other flow-control device affixed to the upstream end, then the
conduit shall be analyzed for both inlet and outlet control conditions. If an orifice or
weir-box is affixed, then the conduit shall be analyzed to determine if any flows will
occur for which outlet control conditions of the conduit, rather than the hydraulic
characteristics of the flow-control structure, will determine the total flows occurring.
In any case where the conduit through the dam is less than 15 inches in diameter, the
trash rack provisions of "c" above shall be followed.
e. Unless the 100-year maximum flow velocity in a conduit through a dam forming a
pond or a lake is less than 10 feet per second, and the hydraulic grade line for the
100-year condition is at or below the crown of the conduit for at least 90 percent of
its length, the conduit must be equal or superior to Class V reinforced concrete pipe
in its structural characteristics.
9.8.4 Emergency Overflow Requirements
a. For every type of detention facility, a planned safe flowpath must be provided for
conveyance of flows of water in excess of those for which the detention facility was
designed. In many instances, this function can be provided through installation of an
emergency spillway. Emergency spillways are usually excavated open channels,
either vegetated or paved with reinforced concrete.
b. Every earthen dam shall be provided with an open-channel emergency spillway,
unless all of the following apply:
(1) The principal spillway is a closed conduit having a cross-sectional area that
can pass 125 percent of the 100-year storm routed peak discharge.
(2) The principal spillway is a closed conduit having a cross-sectional area of at
least one square foot per each three acres of drainage area, or a maximum of
twenty square feet of surface area, whichever is less.
(3) The inlet is a reinforced concrete box structure having an interior width
equal to the width of the conduit.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.93
(4) The principal spillway capacity is at least equal
to the capacity required for an open-channel
emergency spillway.
(5) The low point of the dam crest in not in a fill section.
(6) A trash rack or other debris protection is provided on the outlet control.
c. Any portion of any emergency spillway excavated into a dam embankment or other
fill section must be paved. Pavement material shall be either reinforced concrete or
asphalt, as dictated by the design life of the dam and the potential consequences of
its failure. Any portion of any emergency spillway excavated into natural ground
shall be vegetated in accordance with the practices described in the "Manual for
Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia."
d. In determining the necessary dimensions of an open-channel spillway for a
normally-dry basin, a pond, or a lake, either the methodology contained in the "Earth
Urgency Spillway Design Data" section of the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment
Control in Georgia".
e. Emergency spillway capacity for earthen dams shall be as follows:
(1) For normally-dry detention basins, ponds, and lakes, having a dam height of
less than 9 feet, a drainage area of less than 200 acres, and which are
incapable of impounding more than 20 acre-feet of water, and for which the
probable sequences of dam failure are not severe, the emergency spillway
shall be placed at the 25-year ponding elevation or higher. Its capacity shall
be at least equal to the difference between the 100-year peak flow into the
detention facility and the 25-year peak release rate from the facility.
(2) For normally-dry detention basins, pond, and lakes, which do not meet all of
the magnitude limitations in "1" above, the emergency spillway shall be
placed no lower than the 100-year ponding elevation, and its capacity shall
be at least equal to the lesser of either the full 100-year peak flowrate into the
facility, or the routed one-third PMF hydrography. In those cases where
State or Federal regulations may require greater spillway capacity, those
more stringent regulations shall govern.
f. Emergency overflow for non-earthen dams may take the form of planned structure
overtopping. In such cases, however, care must be taken to prevent flows from
eroding supporting soils along the toe of or immediately downstream from the dam
so as to cause it to be undermined. The profile of the top of the dam shall be so
designed as to prevent flows along the ends of the structure which might result in
abutment erosion.
9.8.5 Parking Lot Detention Facilities
a. Parking lot detention facilities shall generally be of one of the two following types:
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.94
(1) Depressed areas of pavement at drop inlet locations; and,
(2) Ponding areas along sections of raised curbing. The curbing in these areas is
usually higher than a standard curbed section.
b. The detention methodology utilized for all parking lot detention facility design shall
conform to the Storm Water Design Manual.
c. Parking lot detention areas shall be located so as to restrict ponding to areas other
than parking spaces near buildings, and to not encroach upon entrance drives.
d. The maximum depth of detention ponding in a parking lot, except at a flow control
structure, shall be 6 inches for a 10-year storm, and 9 inches for a 100-year storm.
The maximum depth of ponding at a flow control structure shall be 12 inches for a
100-year storm.
e. In truck parking areas, the maximum depth of ponding shall be 12 inches for the 10-
year storm.
f. Detention ponding areas are to be drained within 30 minutes after the peak inflow
occurs.
g. Parking lot detention areas shall have a minimum surface slope of 1 percent, and a
maximum slope of 5 percent.
9.8.6. Underground and Rooftop Detention Facilities
The design of underground or rooftop detention facilities shall be in accordance with current
engineering standard practice, and shall conform to the general spirit and intent of this
Article. In the case of rooftop detention, permissible structural loads and weatherproofing
shall be governed by the Georgia State Building Code.
9.8.7 Sediment Basins
a. Stormwater management and sediment trapping functions should be separated
whenever possible. Every erosion control design should seek to: first, prevent
erosion from occurring; second, trap sediments as close to their sources as possible,
and: third, provide a second-tier or backup line of defense against sediments leaving
the project site. This backup defense will usually consist of check dams/and or
sediment basins.
b. Whenever a sediment basin and a detention facility are both required on the same
watercourse, the sediment basin should be located immediately upstream of the
detention facility.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.95
c. In unusual cases where a normally-dry detention basin is planned to be used to trap
sediment as well as provide stormwater control, the basin may be undercut to
accommodate the sediment so that the required detention characteristics, particularly
volume, will be maintained.
d. The design of sediment basins shall be in accordance with Appendix C of the
"Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia."
9.8.8 Ponds and Lakes Not Used for Detention
In such cases where a pond or lake is provided as part of a development, but is not planned
to function as a stormwater detention facility, the same general and specific criteria
contained in these Regulations shall apply, but may be modified in instances where a
specific requirement is clearly detention oriented rather than safety-based.
9.9 CULVERTS AND PIPE COLLECTION SYSTEM GUIDELINES
9.9.1 Culverts
a. Single barrel or single cell culvert structures are less prone to clogging and require
less maintenance than multi-barrel or multi-cell installations and should therefore be
used whenever feasible.
b. The maximum velocity in a corrugated metal culvert for the 100-year flow shall be
15 fps (feet per second). Velocities over 10 fps shall be considered a special design
with particular attention required to pipe or structure invert protection and to fill
slope, stream bed, and stream bank stability.
c. The minimum allowable slope shall be in accordance with the Storm Water Design
Manual.
9.9.2 Piped Collection Systems
a. The maximum velocity in a corrugated metal piped system for the design flow shall
be 15 fps. Velocities over 10 fps shall be considered a special design with particular
attention required to pipe invert protection and the ability of the receiving waterway
or detention facility to accept the flow without damage.
b. The minimum allowable slope shall be in accordance with the Storm Water Design
Manual.
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.96
c. The maximum allowable slope for concrete pipe shall be 10 percent, corrugated
metal pipe shall be 14 percent, and for a HDPE pipe shall be 14. Greater slopes
may be approved if installation is in accordance with manufacturer's
recommendations. In cases where the slope is in excess of 10 percent, anchor collars
may be required.
d. A minimum pipe cover of one foot shall be required.
9.9.3 Outlet Location - Culverts and Pipe Systems
a. Outlet structures (such as headwalls) shall not be located closer to the project site's
property line with an adjoining property than a flow distance equal to 6 pipe
diameters. For non-circular conduits, this distance shall be six times the rise
dimension of the conduit.
b. The invert elevation of a culvert or pipe outlet shall be no more than 2 feet above the
elevation of the bottom of the receiving watercourse at the outlet.
9.9.4 Energy Dissipation
The maximum developed condition flow velocity at the project site's downstream property
line with an adjoining tract shall not exceed the maximum predeveloped condition velocity.
Calculations may be required to support this velocity standard on a case-by-case basis.
9.9.5 Discharge of Concentrated Flows
a. The discharge of concentrated flows of stormwater into public roadways shall be
avoided. In no case shall such concentrated flows, including flows from swales,
ditches, draws, driveways, or piped systems, exceed the allowable peak flowrates in
Table 9-G, below.
_________________________________________________________________________
TABLE 9-G
MAXIMUM FLOWS INTO STREETS
_________________________________________________________________________
ALLOWABLE PEAK FLOWRATE
STREET CLASSIFICATION FOR A 2-YEAR STORM
Local 2.0 cfs
Minor Collector 1.0 cfs
Other 0.5 cfs
Development Regulations Performance Guidelines
City of Sugar Hill 9.97
_________________________________________________________________________
b. In residential subdivisions, the drainage area contributing to the peak flow along
any property line between lots within 50 feet of the building setback line for either
lot shall not exceed 2 acres, unless contained within a piped drainage system or
maintained in a natural watercourse. The stormwater conveyance shall be in a
drainage easement.
9.10 Site Lighting Guidelines
All site lighing shall be designed and maintained to prevent light trespass onto nearby
residential properties in excess of two hundredths (.2) of a foot candle (fc) as
measured at a six (6’) foot height perpendicular to the ground. All lamps must be
shielded to prevent glare from any point along the property line so that no direct
light source is visible from a sight line established at a distance between four (4’)
feet and six (6’) feet perpendiculars from the ground. The lighting plan must be
approved by the City’s Planning Director prior to receiving any land disturbance and
building permit.
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill 10.98
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
Article 10. Plan and Plat Specifications.
10.1 CONCEPT PLAN SPECIFICATIONS
The following paragraphs outline the required elements of both the required and optional plans
and plats mentioned throughout these Regulations, and especially in Articles 4 and 11.
10.1.1 The Concept Plan for a subdivision or site development shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a
scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. Sheet size shall not exceed 42 inches by 30 inches.
The City Manager may approve other scales and sheet sizes as deemed appropriate.
10.1.2 The Concept Plan may be prepared as a freehand drawing to approximate scale of the proposed
improvements, right-of-way, lot lines, etc., shown on a boundary survey or other property
outline map of the property.
10.1.3 The Concept Plan shall contain the following:
a. Approximate total acreage.
b. Proposed total number of lots and minimum lot size.
c. Size and location of adjoining existing streets or access drives and proposed right-ofway,
roadways, and access drives.
d. For multi-family and nonresidential site developments (not subdivisions), the
approximate location and arrangement of buildings, parking areas, and other
improvements including stormwater detention areas, and all required buffers.
e. Topography with contour intervals no greater than 10 feet.
f. Proposed method of sewage disposal (expressed as a note).
g. Boundary lines of the overall property showing bearings and distances along all lines
and the bearings and distance to an existing street intersection or other recognized
permanent landmark. The source of said boundary information shall be indicated.
h. All contiguous property under the ownership or control of the developer, except those
lands of a dissimilar zoning category specifically approved to be excluded by the City.
Areas not planned at the time of the submittal shall be shown as "Future Development".
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill 10.99
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
i. Authorization statement on Concept Plan to read as follows:
I hereby submit this Concept Plan as authorized agent/owner of all property shown
thereon, and certify that all contiguous property under my ownership or control is
included within the boundaries of this Concept Plan, as required by the Development
Regulations.
______________________________________ _________________
Signature of Authorized Agent/Owner Date
j. Location sketch (vicinity map).
k. Lakes, ponds, and floodplains and the source of floodplain data including the panel
number of flood insurance rate maps.
l. Required recreation areas, and other public areas to be dedicated to the public or held in
common ownership by a homeowner association or other similar entity.
m. Existing zoning of the property and adjoining properties.
n. Land lot and district.
o. Subdivider's name, local, and permanent (if different) address and phone number.
p. Name of company or person who prepared plan, local and permanent River Tributary
Protection Areas, if applicable to the property.
q. Boundaries of the Chattahoochee River Corridor and Chattahoochee River Tributary
Protection Areas, if applicable to the property.
r. General development data (tabular form) for individual multi-family or nonresidential
site developments, such as number of residential units, number of gross square feet of
non-residential floor area by building, number of parking spaces, number of stories, etc.
s. General development data (in tabular form) for single family developments, such as
minimum lot size, floor area, and all relevant conditions of zoning.
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.10
0
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
t. Signature block to read as follows:
This Concept Plan has been reviewed and approved for general compliance, but not for
development purposes, with the Zoning Ordinance and Development Regulations of the
City of Sugar Hill, Georgia.
____________________________________ ___________
City Manager Date
City of Sugar Hill
CONCEPTUAL ONLY – NOT APPROVED FOR CONSTRUCTION
10.2 SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLANS
10.2.1 An application for a development permit for a subdivision shall consist of the Preliminary Plat, a
certified boundary survey, associated slope or construction easements (if any), and such other
Development Plans as may be required by these Regulations.
10.2.2 The Development Plans shall generally conform to the Concept Plan, if any, and may constitute
only that portion of the approved Concept Plan which the subdivider proposes to construct at
one time as a single unit, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of these rules
and regulations. If no Concept Plan was approved on the property, the Development Plans shall
include the entire property being developed within the same zoning category.
10.2.3 Scale
The Development Plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to
one inch. Sheet size shall not exceed 42 inches by30 inches. Plan and Profile sheets shall have a
horizontal scale of no less than 100 feet to one inch and a vertical scale of no less than 10 feet to
one inch.
10.2.4 Certified Boundary Survey
a. The Preliminary Plat shall be based on a certified boundary survey delineating the
entirety of the property contained within the Preliminary Plat, and tied to a point of
reference (tie point) with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary survey itself. The
survey shall have an accuracy of no less than 1 in 10,000, and shall meet all
requirements of Georgia Law regarding the recording of maps and plats.
b. Each Preliminary Plat shall be drawn on, accompanied by, or referenced to a boundary
survey which shall at least meet the requirements of 10.2.4,a above.
10.2.5 The Preliminary Plat shall contain the following:
a. Proposed name of subdivision.
b. Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of record, and of the subdivider (if
not the owner).
c. Name, address, and telephone number of each professional firm associated with the
Development Plans (engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, etc.).
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.10
1
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
d. Date of survey, north point, and graphic scale, source of vertical datum, date of plat
drawing, and space for revision dates.
e. Proposed use of the site, such as single-family detached residences, duplexes,
townhouses, office park, industrial subdivision, etc. For residential, indicate total
number of dwelling units within plat.
f. Location (Land District and Land Lot), acreage, and density (if applicable).
g. Location sketch locating the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area with regard
to well known landmarks such as major thoroughfares or railroads. Sketches may be
drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but
not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as
a reference guide for the location sketch.
h. Name of former subdivision if any or all of the land in the Preliminary Plat has been
previously subdivided, showing boundaries of same.
i. Boundary lines of the perimeter of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths in
feet and hundredths of a foot, and bearings in degrees, minutes, and seconds. Bearing
and distance to designated tie point.
j. Directional flow arrows for street drainage.
k. Contour lines based on sea level datum, or other datum acceptable to the City. These
shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet. Contour lines shall be based on
field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs. The basis for the
topographic contour shown shall be specified and dated.
l. Natural features within the proposed subdivision, including drainage channels, bodies of
water, and other known significant features such as extensive exposed rock. On all
water courses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year
floodplain shall be outlined and the source of the depicted floodplain information shall
be indicated. For those lots containing floodplain, a Floodplain Lot Chart shall be
provided showing the area (in square feet) of each lot lying inside and outside of the
floodplain as though the land disturbance activity were completed.
m. Man-made and cultural features existing within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision
including existing right-of-way measured from centerline, pavements widths, and names
of existing and platted streets; all easements, city, and County jurisdiction lines; existing
structures on the site and their disposition, Chattahoochee River Corridor information
and limits of Chattahoochee River Tributary protection Area (if applicable), and other
significant information. Location and dimensions of existing bridges; water, sewer, and
other existing utility lines and structures; culverts and other existing features should be
indicated.
n. Proposed layout including lot lines, lot numbers, and block letters; proposed street
names, roadway and right-of-way lines; and, sites reserved through covenants,
easement, dedication, or otherwise for public uses. Lots shall be numbered in numerical
order and blocks lettered alphabetically. The minimum building setback line from all
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.10
2
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
streets. Streets shall be dimensioned to show right-of-way and roadway widths, central
angles, intersection radii, and cul-de-sac roadway and right-of-way radii. Centerline
curve data shall be provided for all roadway curves [radius, length, amount of
superelevation (if any), point of curvature (P.C.), point of tangency (P.T.),etc.] if not
shown separately on construction drawings.
o. Identify unit number, division, or stage of development, if any, as proposed by the
subdivider.
p. Existing zoning of the property. Rezoning and variance case numbers, dates of approval
and conditions (as applicable). Note minimum lot size and minimum yard setback
requirements, and other applicable zoning requirements. Show and dimension any
required buffers, landscape strips, no-access easements, etc. Note any approved
Waivers from these Regulations.
q. All adjoining property owners, subdivision names, lot numbers and lot lines, block
letters, and zoning.
r. Location of all known existing or previously existing landfills.
s. Proposed recreation area, if any; area of the site; area and percent of site within the 100-
year floodplain; proposed disposition of the site (public ownership, homeowners
association, etc.).
t. Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate
evaluation of the subdivision.
10.2.6 Certificate of Development Plans Approval: Each Preliminary Plat shall carry the following
certificate printed or stamped thereon:
All requirements of the City of Sugar Hill Development Regulations relative to the
preparation and submission of a subdivision development permit application having been
fulfilled, and said application and all supporting plans and data having been reviewed and
approved by all affected City, County or State Departments as required under their
respective and applicable regulations; approval is hereby granted, on this Preliminary Plat
and all other development plans associated with this subdivision, subject to all further
provisions of said Development and other existing City Regulations.
Approved:
______________________________________ _______________
City Manager Date
City of Sugar Hill
THIS CERTIFICATE EXPIRES TWELVE MONTHS FROM THE DATE OF
APPROVAL UNLESS A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT IS ISSUED.
NOTE: The boundaries of the lots shown on this Plat have not been surveyed.
This Plat is not for recording.
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.10
3
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
10.2.7 The Preliminary Plat shall be accompanied by other Development Plans showing the following
information when same is not shown on, or evident from the Preliminary Plat. The various
plans may be combined where appropriate, and where clarity can be maintained.
a. Erosion Control Plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control Ordinance.
b. Grading Plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of Article 8 of these
Regulations.
c. Stormwater Drainage Construction Data:
(1) Location and size of all proposed drainage improvements, and all proposed
drainage easements to be located outside street right-of-way lines.
(2) Profiles of all storm drainage pipes and slope of receiving channels. On storm
drainage profiles a pipe chart shall be shown which will include pipe numbers,
pipe size, pipe material, pipe slope, pipe length, contributing drainage area,
design flow, design storm frequency, runoff coefficient and velocity for all pipe
collection systems. Hydraulic grade line is to be shown on all pipes (except roof
drains) for the required design flow. On all pipes which drain into detention
ponds or floodplains, the hydraulic grade line will be shown from the pond or
floodplain to the nearest catch basin, grated inlet or yard inlet. On all outfall
structures from detention ponds, the hydraulic grade line will be shown for the
100-year storm.
(3) Profiles of all open channels and ditches including Manning’s 25-year storm
normal depth and velocity. On storm drainage profiles an open channel chart
will be shown which will include open channel numbers, conveyance size,
lining material, length, channel slope, contributing drainage area, design flow,
design storm frequency, runoff coefficient and velocity for the required design
flow.
(4) Hydrological study used in determining size of structures, including map of all
contributing drainage basins and acreages.
d. Domestic Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Plans.
(1) If connection to a public water system is proposed, the domestic water supply plan
shall depict all water system improvements, water mains, fire hydrants, valves and other
appurtenances, and other information as may be required by Gwinnett County.
(2) If a connection to a public sewage disposal system is proposed or required, sewage
disposal plans are to include the location, size and profile of all sewer lines, manholes,
lift station and force main details, typical manhole construction details, any easements
required, together with sufficient dimensions to locate same on the ground and other
information as may be required by Gwinnett County.
(3) If on-site sewage disposal is approved by Gwinnett County Department of
Environmental Health, on-site sewage disposal plans shall include the location and size
of septic tank, extents of drain field and appurtenant structures, location and results of
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.10
4
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
percolation tests and other information as may be required by the Environmental Health
Department.
e. Construction Data for New Streets and Street Widenings:
(1) Centerline profiles and typical roadway sections of all proposed streets, as well
as plans and profiles for all proposed major thoroughfares. Typical roadway
sections shall be provided for street widenings.
(2) Where sanitary or storm sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade;
size, location, and bedding class of pipe; location and invert elevation of
manholes shall be indicated on the road profile.
(3) Profiles covering roadways that are extensions of existing roadways shall
include: elevations at 50 foot intervals for such distance as may be adequate to
provide continuity consistent with the standards required by the Regulations for
street improvements, but no less than 200 feet.
(4) All elevations shall be coordinated and tied into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey
or Department of Transportation bench marks where feasible, or into reference
monuments established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(5) Stub streets shall be profiled at least 200 feet onto adjoining property (no tree
cutting).
f. Buffer and Landscape Plan, if any such areas exist within the subdivision, prepared in
accordance with the specifications under this Article, the requirements of Article 5 of
these Regulations, and the requirements of the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance.
g. Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan (if required by The Landscape Ordinance).
h. Floodplain Management Plans. If any floodplain areas are located on the property, such
data as is required by the Floodplain Management Ordinance of these Regulations shall
be submitted.
i. Residential Subdivision Entrance Plans. Provide at least three lanes, minimum two
lanes for exit from the subdivision and one for entrance as well as a landscaping
island at least 12 feet long and three feet wide separating the entrance lanes from the
exit lanes. Show the size, location, elevation drawings and construction details of
any proposed entrance sign(s).
j. Residential Subdivision Perimeter Landscape Plan. Provide plans for dense
landscaping in a landscape buffer along the entire perimeter of all residential
subdivisions. Buffer is to consist of at least a staggered double row of evergreen and
semi-evergreen trees and shrubs native or adapted to the area. Trees shall be 6’ tall at
time of planting. Plantings shall be arranged to provide an effective visual screen of
at least 12’ in height at maturity. Buffer must not contain more than 30% of a single
species and must be maintained by all future land owners.
k. Street Light Plan. Provide street lighting location and design for the entire
development in accordance with street light ordinance and coordination with the
appropriate electricity provider.
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.10
5
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
10.2.8 Encroachments
Where construction is proposed on adjacent property, an encroachment agreement or easement
shall be submitted to the City.
10.3 FINAL PLAT SPECIFICATIONS
10.3.1
a. The Final Plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black ink on tracing cloth or
other permanent reproducible material. The scale of the Final Plat shall be 100 feet to
one inch (1" equals 100') or larger. Sheet size shall not exceed 42 inches by30 inches.
(Any sheet that is larger than 17 inches by 22 inches must be photographically reduced to
no more than 17 inches by 22 inches in order to be recorded with the Clerk of the
Superior Court, Gwinnett County.)
b. The Final Plat shall be submitted in an electronic copy to the Department of
Planning and Development. Bounding coordinates for parcel to be subdivided shall be
submitted in an Excel Spreadsheet. Electronic drawings shall be compatible with ESRI
ArcGIS, AutoCAD 2000; in digital format as *.dxf, *.dwg, *.dgn or *.shp; prepared in
North American Datum 1983 State Plane West and adjusted for Gwinnett County
coordinates.
1. Detention ponds are to be shown on a separate layer named ‘Det’.
2. Structures such as catch basins, drop inlets and yard inlets are to be shown on a
separate layer named ‘Inlet’.
3. Storm water pipes are to be shown on a separate layer named ‘Pipe’.
4. Junction boxes are to be shown on a separate layer named ‘Jnct’.
5. Structures such as headwalls and pipe outfalls are to be shown on a separate layer
named ‘Outlet’.
6. Parcel lines are to be shown as closed polygons on separate layer named ‘PL’.
7. Gas utility lines are to be shown on separate layer named ‘Gas’ with annotation
for pipe size and material.
10.3.2 The Final Plat shall be based on a certified boundary survey delineating the entirety of the
property contained within the Final Plat, and tied to a point of reference (tie point) with the same
degree of accuracy as the boundary survey itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less
than 1 in 10,000, and shall meet all requirements of Georgia Law regarding the recording of
maps and plats.
10.3.3 The Final Plat shall substantially conform to the Preliminary Plat and it may constitute only that
portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the subdivider proposes to record at any one
time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of these Regulations, and said
portion is not inconsistent with the public health, safety, or welfare. Any substantial deviation
from the Preliminary Plat shall require revision and re-approval of the Preliminary Plat.
10.3.4 The Final Plat shall contain the following information:
a. Name of the subdivision, unit number, Land District, and Land Lot number.
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.10
6
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
b. Name, address, and telephone number of owner of record, and the subdivider (if not the
owner).
c. Name, address, and telephone number of each professional firm associated with the
portion of the subdivision within the Final Plat (engineer, surveyor, landscape architect,
etc.).
d. Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point; notation as to the reference of bearings
to magnetic, true north or grid north, and indication whether bearings shown are
calculated from angles turned.
e. Location sketch of tract showing major surrounding features.
f. Name of former subdivision, if any or all of the Final Plat has been previously recorded.
g. Case number and date of approval for any applicable rezoning, Special Use Permit,
Variance or Waiver affecting the property.
h. Location and dimension of any buffer, landscape strip, special setback, no-access
easement, etc., required by the Zoning Ordinance or these Regulations.
i. Boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line, giving distances to the
nearest one-hundredth foot and bearings to the nearest second. Bearing and distance to
designated tie point shall be shown. The Plat shall have a closure precision of 1 foot in
no less than 10,000 feet.
j. Municipal or County jurisdictional lines approximately tied to the lines of the
subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or adjoin the subdivision;
land lot lines traversing or adjoining the subdivision shall also be indicated.
k. Locations, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining
the plat, the location and widths of all internal public crosswalks, and all other public
rights-of-way.
l. Street center lines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data including radii,
length of arcs and tangents between curves, point of curvature (P.C.) and point of
tangency (P.T.).
m. Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and bearings to the nearest
second, and radii of rounded corners, as necessary to delimit each lot.
n. Building setback lines along streets with dimensions.
o. When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than 90
degrees, the lot width measured in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance may be required to be shown, if deemed necessary by the City for clarity.
p. Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically.
q. Location and size of all drainage pipe, location and extent of detention ponds, the
location and size of all public water mains and fire hydrants, and the location,
dimensions, and purpose of any easements, including construction or slope easements if
required.
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.10
7
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
r. Location of any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use with notes
stating their purpose and limitations. Location of any areas to be reserved by private
deed covenant for common use of all property owners, or dedicated to a homeowner's
association.
s. A statement of private covenants if any, and they are brief enough to be put directly on
the plat; otherwise, if covenants are separately recorded, a statement as follows:
This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto
dated___________________, which hereby become a part of this plat, and which were
recorded ________________________________ and signed by the Owner.
t. Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers (all monuments
shall be in place prior to approval of the Final Plat.)
u. Certificates and statements specified in these Regulations, below.
v. All information required under the Georgia Metropolitan River Protection Act for
recording of plats, if applicable.
w. Extent of the 100-year floodplain and a floodplain chart showing the area within and
outside the floodplain for each lot containing any portion of the 100-year floodplain.
Origin of the floodplain data shall be indicated.
x. Street address numbers and block number designations for street names signs on
abutting streets, where appropriate.
y. Individual lots shall be designated HLP (House Location Plan), RDP (Residential
Drainage Plan) and/or RDS (Residential Drainage Study) if such are required by the
City to be approved prior to issuance of a building permit.
z. All other notes or notations as may be required by the City.
aa. For residential subdivisions each of the following statements shall be shown on the
final plat and the final plat shall be referenced in the deeds of all the lots:
Each unit shall have at least a two car garage and be constructed so that the front
exterior shall contain at least forty (40%) brick or stone. High grade cedar or fibercement
architectural style shingles, shake siding or lap siding shall be used on the
remainder.
No two units next to each other shall have same façade design and/or material.
A mandatory Home Owners Association shall be established to maintain the open
spaces, common spaces, any private streets, signs, storm water management areas,
and entry areas.
Front, side and rear yards shall be sodded for each unit.
Provide to school authorities detailed information on the impact of the development
may have on the school system. Notify the School Board and School Board Planning
Staff in writing, the number of units in the development, type of housing, the number
of bedrooms per house, and the phasing of the development, prior to issuance of a
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.10
8
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
Development Permit, with a copy to the Director, Department of Planning and
Development.
10.3.5 If any lands are shown as the Final Plat for dedication to the City of Sugar Hill other than street
rights-of-way or easements, a Warranty Deed transferring title to said land in fee simple, in a
form acceptable to the City Manager, shall be submitted with the Final Plat application.
10.3.6 If any lands are shown on the Final Plat for dedication to a Property Owners Association in
order to meet minimum park or open space requirements of these Regulations, a copy of the
deed of transfer for such dedication and a copy of the instrument of incorporation of the Property
Owners Association shall be submitted with the Final Plat application.
10.3.7 Each Final Plat shall carry the following certificates or statements printed or stamped thereon as
follows:
a. Final Surveyor's Certificate:
As required by Subsection (3d) of O.C.G.A. Section 15-6-67, the Registered Land
Surveyor hereby certifies that this map, plat, or plan has been approved for filing in writing by any and
all applicable Municipal, County or Municipal County Planning Commissions or Municipal or County
Governing Authorities, or that such governmental bodies have affirmed in writing that approval is not
required.
The Final Plat Approval signature certifies the City of Sugar Hill has approved this
map, plat, or plan for filing.
The Registered Land Surveyor further certifies that this map, plat, or plan complies with
the minimum standards and specifications of the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers
and Land Surveyors, and Georgia Superior Court Clerks’ Cooperative Authority.
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct as to the property lines and all
improvements shown thereon, and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or
under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist, and their location, size, type and
material are correctly shown. The field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of
one foot in __________ feet and an angular error of __________ per angle point, and was adjusted
using __________ rule. This plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one
foot in __________ feet, and contains a total of __________ acres. The equipment used to obtain the
linear and angular measurements herein was ________________________ .
By:________________________________________________
REGISTERED GEORGIA LAND SURVEYOR
REG. NO _____________ DATE OF EXPIRATION ______________
b. Owners Acknowledgment and Declaration
(STATE OF GEORGIA)
(COUNTY OF GWINNETT)
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or though a
duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and dedicates by
this Acknowledgement and Declaration to the use of the public forever all streets, sewer collectors,
lift stations, drains, easements, and other public facilities and appurtenances thereon shown.
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.10
9
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
_________________________________ __________________
Signature of Subdivider Date Signed
_________________________________
Printed or Typed Name of Subdivider
_________________________________ __________________
Signature of Owner Date Signed
_________________________________
Printed or Typed Name of Owner
c. Final Plat Approval:
The City Manager of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, certifies that this plat complies
with the City of Sugar Hill Zoning Ordinance and the City of Sugar Hill Development Regulations, as
amended, and has been approved by all other affected City and County Departments, as appropriate.
This plat is approved for recording subject to the provisions and requirements of the Development
Performance and Maintenance Agreement executed for this project between the Owner and the City of
Sugar Hill.
Reviewed and approval recommended by:
______________________________ Date____________________
Planning Director,
City of Sugar Hill
APPROVED THIS __________ DAY OF ________________, 20___.
_________________________________________________________
City Manager,
City of Sugar Hill
d. Health Department Certification (for Subdivisions Served by Septic Tanks):
The lots shown hereon have been reviewed by the Gwinnett County Health Department
and with the exception of lots _______________ are approved for development. Each lot is to be
reviewed by the Gwinnett County Health Department and approved for septic tank installation prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
DATED THIS _____________ DAY OF _________________, 20___.
BY: _____________________________________________________
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.11
0
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
TITLE:___________________________________________________
GWINNETT COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT
e. Public Notice - Drainage:
Every Final Plat shall contain the following statement:
NOTE: City of Sugar Hill assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natural
or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way, or for the extension of culverts beyond
the point shown on the approved and recorded subdivision plat.
f. House Location Plans (HLP):
On any Final Plat containing a lot for which a House Location Plan approval will first be
required prior to issuance of a building permit, the following statement shall be included:
HLP - HOUSE LOCATION PLAN
A House Location Plan shall be required to be approved by the City prior to issuance of
a Building Permit on those lots labeled "HLP". A House Location Plan is a scale drawing submitted by
the builder at the time of permit. It is not required that this plan be prepared by a land surveyor or
professional engineer. The purpose of this plan is to ensure that the house is properly located on the lot.
Please refer to the City of Sugar Hill Development Regulations or contact the City of Sugar Hill
Department Planning and Development for further information.
g. Residential Drainage Plan (RDP) or Study (RDS): On any Final Plat containing a
lot for which a Residential Drainage Plan (RDP) or Residential Drainage Study (RDS) will first
be required prior to issuance of a Building Permit, the following statement shall be included, as
applicable:
RDP – RESIDENTIAL DRAINAGE PLAN
RDS – RESIDENATIL DRAINAGE STUDY
A Residential Drainage Plan or Residential Drainage Study must be
approved by the City of Sugar Hill prior to issuance of a Building Permit
on those lots labeled “RDP” or “RDS”, respectively. Please refer to the
Development Regulations and contact the Department of Planning and
Development for further information.
10.4 HOUSE LOCATION PLAN (HLP)
(Please refer to section 9.2 of these Regulations for why an HLP may be required.)
10.4.1 House Location Plans shall be drawn to scale and may be shown on a certified boundary survey
of the lot or any other drawing showing the information required below. The City may accept a
House Location Plan drawn to the same scale as shown on the Final Plat where sufficient detail
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.11
1
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
can be shown to support an adequate review and approval. The House Location Plan may be
combined with a Residential Drainage Plan (RDP) if an RDP is required for the lot.
10.4.2 It is not the intent of the City that the House Location Plan be prepared by a registered surveyor
or engineer, but may be done by the individual proposing the improvements on the lot. It is the
intent, however, to receive a drawing with sufficient readability and accuracy to ensure that the
proposed improvements will be constructed on the lot in conformance with the requirements of
these Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance, or other regulations, as applicable.
10.4.3 House Location Plans shall show the following as applicable:
a. Boundary lines of the lot, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and bearings
to the nearest minute.
b. Location and names of all abutting streets or other rights-of-way.
c. Minimum required front, side and rear building setback lines with dimensions, and
notation of the existing zoning on the property.
d. The approximate outline of all impervious surfaces, buildings, driveways, parking areas,
swimming pools, recreational courts, patios, accessory structures and other
improvements existing or proposed on the property, and dimensions of buildings and
distances between all structures and the nearest property lines.
e. All easements, public water, sewer or storm drainage facilities traversing or located on
the property, septic tank, and septic tank drain field.
f. Subdivision name, lot designation, land lot, and district.
g. North arrow and scale.
h. Limit of the 100-year floodplain and any applicable buffers or special building setback
lines.
i. If the lot is located within the Chattahoochee River Corridor, the location of each area
by vulnerability category and calculations of impervious surface and clearance by
category, or other such data in accordance with the Certification for the subdivision
approved under the Metropolitan River Protection Act. Show also any buffer or setback
required by the Metropolitan River Protection Act.
j. All other applicable requirements of the Zoning Ordinance or conditions of zoning
approval.
k. Name, address, and telephone number of the owner and the person who prepared the HLP.
10.4.4 If a lot is located in the Chattahoochee River Corridor, a Certificate of Occupancy shall not
be issued for the structure or other improvements until conformance to the provisions or other
requirements of the House Location Plan have been field verified by a survey prepared by the
builder’s surveyor and submitted to the Department of Planning and Development.
10.5 RESIDENTIAL DRAINAGE PLAN (RDP) OR STUDY (RDS)
(Please refer to Section 9.2 of these Regulations for why a RDP may be required.)
10.5.1 Residential Drainage Plans shall be drawn to scale on a certified boundary survey of the lot
prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor, having an error of closure not exceeding one in 5000.
The Residential Drainage Plan may be combined with a House Location Plan (HLP) if an HLP
is required for the lot. The requirements contained herein shall also apply to lots which formerly
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.11
2
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
required SPED (Site Plan - Engineering Division) approval prior to issuance of a building
permit.
10.5.2 Residential Drainage Plans shall show the following as applicable:
a. Boundary lines of the lot, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and bearings to
the nearest minute.
b. Location and names of all abutting streets or other rights-of-way.
c. The outline of all impervious surfaces, buildings, driveways, parking areas, swimming
pools, recreational courts, patios, accessory structures and other improvements existing or
proposed on the property, and dimensions of buildings and distances between all structures
and the nearest property lines as required to locate the major improvements on the lot.
d. All easements, public water or sewer facilities traversing or located on the property, and
septic tank drain field.
e. Subdivision name, lot designation, land lot, and district.
f. North arrow and scale.
g. Contour lines based on sea level datum. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than
two feet, and shall be based on a field survey. Proposed grading of the lot shall be shown
along with the finished floor elevation of the lowest habitable floor of the house.
h. Storm water features, including swales, pipes, storm water detention and other structures, all
drainage (D.E.) easements, and directions of flow.
i. Floodplain features, including the limits of the flood hazard area, 100-year flood high water
elevation, origin of the floodplain data, and any proposed modifications to the floodplain
limits.
j. Sedimentation and erosion control measures to be taken or placed on the lot during
construction.
k. Names, address, and telephone number of the owner and person who prepared the RDP.
l. Seal, registration number, and signature of the Professional Engineer, Land Surveyor
or Landscape Architect who prepared the drainage improvements or modifications
shown on the RDP with the date of signature.
10.5.3 A Residential Drainage Study (RDS) shall be conducted by the developer’s or builder’s
design professional prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy on those lots so noted on
the Final Plat. The requirements for a RDS contained herein shall also apply to lots that
formerly required SSED (Site Study – Engineering Division) approval prior to issuance of a
Building Permit.
The grading and construction of the lot shall be field verified by the developer’s or builder’s
design professional as being in conformance with grading plans and storm water management
studies approved for the subdivision prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
10.5.4 A certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued for the structure until a written certification
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.11
3
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
has been received from the developer’s or builder’s design professional stating that the
provisions or improvements required by the Residential Drainage Plan or as a result of the
Residential Drainage Study have been field verified.
10.5.5 If a RDP or RDS is required because a stream or floodplain is on or adjacent to the lot, the
notation on the development plans and plat should be “RDP-E” or “RDS-E” as appropriate.
10.6 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS
10.6.1 An application for a development permit for a multi-family or nonresidential site shall consist of
the Site Plan, a certified boundary survey or Final Plat reference, associated slope or
construction easements (if any), and such other Development Plans as may be required by these
Regulations.
10.6.2 The Development Plans shall generally conform to the Concept Plan, if any, and may constitute
only that portion of the approved Concept Plan which the developer proposed to construct at one
time as a single unit, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of these rules and
regulations and all setbacks, maximum density, and other zoning restrictions. If no Concept
Plan was approved on the property, the Development Plans shall include the entire property
being developed having the same zoning category.
10.6.3 Scale
The Development Plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn at an engineering scale convenient to
illustrate the details of the project. Sheet size shall not exceed 42 inches by30 inches. Plan and
Profile sheets, if any, shall have a horizontal scale of no less than 100 feet to one inch and a
vertical scale of no less than 10 feet to one inch.
10.6.4 Project Boundary Data
a. The Site Plan shall be based on the boundaries of a lot as recorded on a Final
Subdivision Plat or on a certified boundary survey delineating the entirety of the
property contained within the project, and tied to a point of reference (tie point) with the
same degree of accuracy as the boundary survey itself. The survey shall have an
accuracy of no less than 1 in 10,000, and shall meet all requirements of Georgia Law
regarding the recording of maps and plats.
b. Each Site Plan shall be drawn on, accompanied by, or referenced to a boundary survey
which shall at least meet the requirements of 10.6.4, a. above.
10.6.5 The Site Plan shall contain the following (on one or more sheets):
a. Proposed name of development. If the project is located within a subdivision, the name
of the subdivision, lot, and block number must also be shown.
b. Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of record, and of the developer (if
not the owner).
c. Name, address, and telephone number of each professional firm associated with the
Development Plans (engineer, landscape architect, etc.).
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.11
4
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
d. Date of survey, north arrow, and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing,
and space for revision dates.
e. Proposed use of the site, including gross square footage for each different use type or
building.
f. Location (Land District and Land Lot), acreage or area in square feet, and density (if
applicable).
g. Location sketch locating the development in relation to the surrounding area with regard
to well known landmarks such as major thoroughfares or railroads. Sketches may be
drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but
not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as
a reference guide for the location sketch.
h. Size and location of all buildings, building setback lines, minimum yard lines, and
distances between buildings and from buildings to property lines; location of outdoor
storage areas; parking and loading areas, driveways, curb cuts and designated fire lanes.
Each building shall be identified with a number or letter.
i. Boundary lines of the perimeter of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths to
the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and bearings to the nearest second. Bearing and
distance to designated tie point.
j. Directional flow arrows for street drainage.
k. Contour lines based on sea level datum. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more
than two feet and shall include the entire site and all abutting public streets. Contour
lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial
photographs. The basis for the topographic contour shown shall be specified and dated.
l. Natural features within the proposed development, including drainage channels, bodies
of water, and other known significant features such as extensive exposed rock. On all
water courses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year
floodplain shall be outlined and the source of the depicted floodplain information shall
be indicated. The acreage or area in square feet within the floodplain shall be indicated.
m. Man-made and natural features existing within and adjacent to the proposed
development including existing right-of-way measured from centerline, pavement
widths, and names of jurisdiction lines; existing structures on the site and their
disposition, Chattahoochee River Corridor information and Chattahoochee River
Tributary Protection Areas (if applicable), and other significant information. Location
and dimensions of existing bridges; water, sewer, and other existing utility lines and
structures; culverts and other existing features should be indicated.
n. Proposed street names, roadway and right-of-way lines and widths and sites reserved
through covenants, easement, dedication or otherwise for public uses.
o. Identify unit number, division or stage of development, if any, as proposed by the
developer.
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.11
5
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
p. Show all adjoining property owners, subdivision names, lot numbers, lot lines and block
letters, and zoning.
q. Show the location and number of parking spaces according to the size of the building on
the plans. Show factors used in determining number of spaces as required in the Zoning
Ordinance. Handicapped parking spaces must be shown as required by the Georgia
Handicap law.
r. Zoning district, rezoning case number, date of approval and conditions as applicable).
Variances obtained on the property should be shown with the case number, date of
approval and conditions (if applicable). Note any approved Waivers from these
Regulations.
s. If buffers or other landscaping or screening treatments are required, show the location,
size, and type (natural or planted) on the plans conforming to the Tree
Preservation/Replacement Plan or Buffer and Landscape Plan, as applicable.
t. Location, height, and size of all freestanding signs to be erected on the site, and an
indication whether lighted or unlighted.
u. Location of all known existing landfills and proposed on-site bury pits (State EPD
Permit and City of Sugar Hill Special Use Permit or other approval may be required).
v. Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate
evaluation of the project.
10.6.6 Certificate of Development Plans Approval
Each Site Plan shall carry the following certificate printed or stamped thereon:
All requirements of the City of Sugar Hill Development Regulations relative to the
preparation and submission of a development permit application having been fulfilled,
and said application and all supporting plans and data having been reviewed by the City
and approved by all affected City or County Departments as required under the
respective and applicable regulations, approval is hereby granted of this Site Plan and all
other development plans associated with this project subject to all further provisions of
said Development Regulations and other City and County Regulations.
____________________________________________ ___________________
City Manager, Date
City of Sugar Hill
THIS CERTIFICATE EXPIRES TWELVE MONTHS FROM THE DATE OF
APPROVAL UNLESS A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT IS ISSUED
10.6.7 The Site Plan shall be accompanied by other Development Plans showing the following
information when same is not shown on, or evident from the Site Plan. The various plans may
be combined where appropriate and clarity can be maintained.
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.11
6
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
a. Erosion Control Plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control Ordinance.
b. Grading plan, prepared in accordance with the requirements of Article 8 of these
Regulations.
c. Storm Water Drainage Construction Data:
(1) Location and size of all proposed drainage improvements, and all proposed
drainage easements to be located outside street right-of-way lines.
(2) Profiles of all storm drainage pipes and slope of receiving channels. On storm
drainage profiles a pipe chart shall be shown which will include pipe numbers,
pipe size, pipe material, pipe slope, pipe length, contributing drainage area,
design flow, design storm frequency, runoff coefficient and velocity for all pipe
collection systems. Hydraulic grade line is to be shown on all pipes (except roof
drains) for the required design flow. On all pipes which drain into detention
ponds or floodplains, the hydraulic grade line will be shown from the pond or
floodplain to the nearest catch basin, grated inlet or yard inlet. On all outfall
structures from detention ponds, the hydraulic grade line will be shown for the
100-year storm.
(3) Profiles of all open channels and ditches including Manning’s 25-year storm
normal depth and velocity. On storm drainage profiles an open channel chart
will be shown which will include open channel numbers, conveyance size,
lining material, length, channel slope, contributing drainage area, design flow,
design storm frequency, runoff coefficient and velocity for the required design
flow.
(4) Hydrological study used in determining size of structures, including
map of all contributing drainage basins and acreages.
d. Domestic Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Plans.
(1) If connection to a public water system is proposed, the domestic water supply plan
shall depict all water system improvements, water mains, fire hydrants, valves and other
appurtenances, and other information as may be required by Gwinnett County.
(2) If a connection to a public sewage disposal system is proposed or required, sewage
disposal plans are to include the location, size and profile of all sewer lines, manholes,
lift station and force main details, typical manhole construction details, any easements
required, together with sufficient dimensions to locate same on the ground and other
information as may be required by Gwinnett County.
(3) If on-site sewage disposal is approved by Gwinnett County Department of
Environmental Health, on-site sewage disposal plans shall include the location and size
of septic tank, extents of drain field and appurtenant structures, location and results of
percolation tests and other information as may be required by the Environmental Health
Department.
e. Street Widening and Construction Data:
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.11
7
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
(1) Centerline profiles and typical roadway sections of all proposed streets, as well
as plans and profiles for all proposed major thoroughfares. Profiles (and plans,
where required) shall be drawn on standard plan and profile sheet with plan
section showing street layout, pavement and right-of-way width, curvature, and
required drainage facilities. Typical roadway sections shall be provided for
street widenings.
(2) Where sanitary or storm sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade,
size, location and bedding class of pipe; location and invert elevation of
manholes shall be indicated on the road profile.
(3) Profiles covering roadways that are extensions of existing roadways shall
include; elevations at 50 foot intervals for such distance as may be adequate to
provide continuity consistent with the standards required by these Regulations
for street improvements, but no less than 200 feet.
(4) All elevations shall be coordinated and sighted into U.S. Coast and Geodetic
Survey or Department of Transportation bench marks where feasible or into
reference monuments established by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
f. Buffer and Landscape Plan, if any such areas exist within the site, prepared in
accordance with the specifications contained in this Article, and the requirements of
Article 5 of these Regulations, and the requirements of the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree
Ordinance.
g. Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan (if required by the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree
Ordinance).
h. Floodplain Management Plans; if any floodplain areas are located on the property. Such
data as is required by the Floodplain Management Ordinance shall be submitted.
i. Private Water System Plans, if any, indicating proposed water main size and location,
with fire hydrants, on the site. The distance and direction to all other fire hydrants
within 500 feet of the site or buildings along existing streets or other access drives shall
also be indicated.
j. Street striping plan, showing striping in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control devices, for any street newly constructed to 4 or more lanes, and
all newly constructed or widened major thoroughfares.
k. Lighting Plan. Provide location and design for exterior lighting within the entire
development in accordance with these regulations and coordination with the
appropriate electricity provider.
10.6.8 Encroachments
Where construction is proposed on adjacent property, an encroachment agreement or easement
shall be submitted to the City.
10.6.9 Public Notice – Drainage
Every Site Plan shall contain the following statement:
Development Regulations Plan and Plat Specifications
City of Sugar Hill
10.11
8
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
Note: The City of Sugar Hill and/or Gwinnett County assumes no responsibility for overflow or
erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way, or for the
extension of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded plan. The City of
Sugar Hill and/or Gwinnett County does not assume the responsibility for the maintenance of
pipes in drainage easements beyond the City/County right-of-way.
10.7 TREE PRESERVATION/REPLACEMENT PLAN SPECIFICATIONS
10.7.1 A Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan shall be required only under the circumstances described
in the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance.
10.7.2 Tree Preservation/Replacement Plans shall be prepared in accordance with the specifications
contained in the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance. At the developer's option, the plan
may be combined with other plans such as a general landscaping plan for the project.
10.8 BUFFER AND LANDSCAPE PLAN SPECIFICATIONS
10.8.1 A Buffer and Landscape Plan shall be required as described in the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree
Ordinance.
10.8.2 The Buffer and Landscape Plans shall be prepared in accordance with the specifications
contained in the Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance. At the developer's option, the plan
may be combined with other plans such as a general landscaping plan for the project.
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.11
9
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
Article 11. Procedures.
11.1 SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCEDURES
11.1.1 Pre-Application Conference
Whenever any subdivision of a tract of land is proposed to be made, whether for residential
or nonresidential development, the subdivider is encouraged to present to the City
preliminary documents and graphic exhibits to permit early evaluation of the subdivider's
intentions and coordination with the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, Metropolitan
River Protection Act, etc., and to inform and provide the subdivider with the necessary
regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed project.
11.1.2 Concept Plan Approval
a. Application for Concept Plan approval shall be submitted to the City using an
application form and in a number of copies to be determined by the City Manager.
The Concept Plan shall include the entire property proposed for development, but
need not include the applicant's entire contiguous ownership.
b. In such case that the subdivider elects not to submit a Concept Plan, then the
subdivider may proceed directly with the submittal of Development Plans if they
show the entire property proposed for development. In so doing, however, the
subdivider assumes the risk of premature design and engineering expenses in the
event that the City requires subsequent design and engineering changes.
c. Following Concept Plan approval, a clearing and grubbing permit may be issued
based on a Tree Protection Plan (if required - see Buffer, Landscape and Tree
Ordinance) and soil erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by the City,
and consistent with an approved Certificate issued under the Metropolitan River
Protection Act, if applicable.
d. Copies of the approved Concept Plan shall be provided to the City for permanent
record, in a number as determined by the City Manager.
11.1.3 Development Plans Approval for Subdivisions
a. An application for Development Plans approval and issuance of a development
permit shall be submitted to the City using an application form and in a number of
copies as determined by the City Manager. The Development Plans may encompass
a portion of a property included within an approved Concept Plan. However, if no
Concept Plan has been approved, the Development Plans must include the entire
property being developed and having the same zoning. The application shall include
the Preliminary Plat, and construction drawings. All construction drawings and
other engineering data shall be prepared and sealed by a Professional Engineer or
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.12
0
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
Landscape Architect currently registered in the State of Georgia, in accordance with
provisions of Georgia Law.
b. Following submission to the City of a Preliminary Plat and all drawings required for
development permit review, a grading permit may be issued at the developer's
request based on a Tree Protection Plan (if required), soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan, hydrology study, and related construction drawings, and consistent
with an approved Certificate issued under the Metropolitan River Protection Act, if
applicable. The grading permit shall be limited to the area included within the
Development Plans and may be further conditioned as deemed appropriate or
necessary pending development permit approval.
c. The City Manager shall indicate on a review copy of the drawings or in a written
memorandum all comments related to compliance of the Development Plans with
these Regulations, principles of good design, the Zoning Ordinance, conditions of
zoning approval, and the regulations of other City departments, Gwinnett County
and State agencies as appropriate. The City Manager shall have final staff authority
to determine the applicability of any and all comments under these Development
Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance or conditions of zoning approval.
d. The City Manager may not approve any Preliminary Plat whereon is shown a lot
which would present particularly unusual difficulties for construction of a building,
which would clearly require a variance to be reasonably usable, or which is
otherwise "unbuildable" because of its unusability, whether due to the presence of
floodplain, unusual configuration, lack of public utilities or for any other reason. A
House Location Plan (HLP) may be required to be filed as a part of the Preliminary
Plat approval to substantiate the buildability of any such difficult or unusual lot.
e. The subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and
zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the noted and written
comments of the City Manager.
f. Should an applicant disagree with the findings or final review comments of the City
Manager or of any other City department, concluding that factual or interpretive
errors have been made, the following appeal procedure shall be followed to resolve
the issues.
(1) Submit to the City Manager a written statement clearly defining the nature of
the disagreement, the specific reference to the sections of the regulations
(i.e., Development Regulations, etc.) at issue, and the applicant's own
opinion.
(2) The City Manager shall automatically forward a copy of the appeal to the
City Council for final action in their normal course of business.
g. When the City Manager has determined that the plat and other Development Plans
are in compliance with all applicable City regulations and zoning requirements and
approval has been received from all affected City, Gwinnett County, and State
Departments, he shall sign and date a CERTIFICATE OF DEVELOPMENT
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.12
1
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
PLANS APPROVAL stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the plat. The
prescribed number, which the City Manager establishes from time to time, of
approved copies of the approved plat and Development Plans shall be transmitted to
the applicant and retained by the City for its records.
h. Following the above approval by all affected City, Gwinnett County, and State
Departments, a Development Permit shall be issued at the developer's request to
begin construction activities based on the approved development plans.
11.1.4 Final Plat Application and Review
a. When the improvements have been constructed in accordance with the requirements
and conditions of these regulations, the subdivider may submit to the City an
application for Final Plat approval, using an application form and in a number of
copies as determined by the City Manager.
b. The final subdivision plat application shall be accompanied by a completed
Certificate of Development Conformance and a draft Performance and Maintenance
Agreement.
c. The City Manager shall indicate on a review copy of the plat or in a written
memorandum all comments related to compliance of the Final Plat with these
Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance, conditions of zoning approval, and the
regulations of other City departments, Gwinnett County departments, and State
agencies as appropriate. The City Manager shall have final staff authority to
determine the applicability of any and all comments under these Development
Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance or conditions of zoning approval.
d. The subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and
zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the comments of the City
Manager.
e. Approval of the installation and construction of improvements by the City Manager
shall not constitute acceptance of the improvements for dedication purposes. The
City of Sugar Hill shall not have any responsibility with respect to any street or other
improvement, notwithstanding the use of same by the public, until the street or other
improvements have been officially accepted by the City Council.
11.1.5 Final Plat Approval
a. The City Manager shall not approve any Final Plat whereon is shown or by which is
otherwise created a lot which would present particularly severe and unusual
difficulties for construction of a building, which would clearly require a variance to
be reasonably usable, or which is otherwise unbuildable due to the presence of
floodplain, unusual configuration, lack of public utilities or Health Department
approval, or for any other justified reason.
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.12
2
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
b. Lots which would appear to be buildable under certain circumstances and would
require further study or additional information before a building permit could be
issued, but which present problems or unusual difficulties which can reasonably be
addressed or overcome by the lot owner, may be included in the Plat with the
appropriate notation of the steps necessary to allow issuance of a building permit
(see section 5.9, Lots, of the General Design Standards).
c. The City Manager shall determine that either:
(1) All improvements and installation to the subdivision required for approval of
the Final Plat under the rules and regulations of City of Sugar Hill have been
completed in accordance with the appropriate specifications; or
(2) All of the storm water drainage and detention facilities, water and sewer
utilities, street base and curbing construction required for approval of the
Final Plat have been properly installed and completed and, for those required
improvements not yet completed (grassing, pavement topping, required
landscaping, sidewalks, etc.) a performance surety shall have been filed by
the subdivider with the Development Performance and Maintenance
Agreement.
d. Prior to final plat approval, payment for materials and installation of traffic control
and street name signs shall be made to the Gwinnett County Department of
Transportation in accordance with the traffic engineering regulations. Payment of
the cost of striping major thoroughfares or required signalization, if required, and not
completed by the developer shall also be received by the Gwinnett County
Department of Transportation prior to approval of the Final Plat.
e. Prior to final plat approval, payment of the required plat recording fee shall be made
to the City.
f. Final approval by the City Manager shall not be shown on the Final Plat until all
requirements of these and other applicable regulations have been met, the City
Manager has approved the Certificate of Development Conformance and a
Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement has been executed. Refer
to section 11.6.2 of these Regulations.
g. Once the City has approved the Final Plat and all other affected departments and
agencies of government as required have certified compliance and signed the route
sheet, the City Manager shall certify by his signature on the original of the plat that
all of the requirements of these Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance, and the
conditions of zoning approval have been met, and that all other affected departments
have approved the plat. Once the Final Plat has been signed by the City Manager
and where use of septic tanks is proposed, by a duly authorized representative of the
Gwinnett County Health Department, it shall be deemed approved .
h. Once the Final Plat has been so certified, the City Manager shall authorize it to be
recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County. The subdivider
shall provide the City with an appropriate number of copies of the recorded plat, as
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.12
3
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
determined by the City Manager. Deeds to lands dedicated to City of Sugar Hill in
fee simple, or to Property Owner Associations for park or recreational use, shall be
recorded simultaneously with the Final Plat.
i. Within 12 months after final plat approval, the applicant shall file the plat with the
register of deeds as provided by law. The final plat approval shall expire within the
above referenced time period, unless the City Manager has granted a written
extension. The City Manager may grant up to two extensions of final plat approval,
each up to six months. Failure to record the final plat within the time frame noted
shall cause the final plat approval to be void.
11.1.6 Dedication (Acceptance)
a. The ratification and approval of a plat shall not be considered an acceptance of any
proposed dedication and does not impose on the City any duty regarding the
maintenance or improvement of any parts proposed for dedication until the City
accepts the dedication by official action or makes an actual appropriation of the parts
proposed for dedication by improvement. The disapproval of a plat shall be
considered a refusal by the City of Sugar Hill of the offered dedication indicated on
the plat.
b. All required public improvements, right-of-way of all public streets, drainage
easements contained within the street right-of-way and other public facilities and
appurtenances shown on the final plat shall be accepted separately by the City of
Sugar Hill subject to satisfactory completion of the Development Performance and
Maintenance Agreement executed for the project.
c. Land dedication for rights-of-way and other public works shall be presented to the
City Council by deed and dedication plat. Acceptance of such dedication shall be at
the discretion of the City Council and official action on the acceptance of the
dedication shall be taken in a public meeting. Within 30 days of acceptance by the
City Council, the deed and dedication plat shall be recorded with the Clerk of
Superior Court.
11.2 NON-SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCEDURES
11.2.1 Pre-Application Conference
Whenever any development of a single parcel of land (other than a subdivision or a one or
two-family dwelling) is proposed to be made, the developer is encouraged to present to the
City preliminary documents and graphic exhibits to permit early evaluation of the
developer's intentions and coordination with the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance,
Metropolitan River Protection Act, etc., and to inform and provide the developer with the
necessary regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed project.
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.12
4
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
11.2.2 Concept Plan Approval
a. Application for Concept Plan approval shall be submitted to the City using an
application form and in a number of copies to be determined by the City Manager.
b. The Concept Plan shall include the entire property being developed. Properties
which adjoin the subject property and which are under the same ownership or
control as the subject property shall be so indicated. In such case that the developer
elects not to submit a Concept Plan, then the developer may proceed directly with
the submittal of Development Plans, if they show the entire parcel being developed.
In so doing, however, the developer assumes the risk of premature design and
engineering expenses in the event that the City requires subsequent design and
engineering changes.
c. Following Concept Plan approval, a clearing and grubbing permit shall be issued at
the developer's request based on a Tree Protection Plan (if required - see Buffer,
Landscape and Tree Ordinance) and Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
approved by the appropriate agency, and consistent with an approved Certificate
issued under the Metropolitan River Protection Act, if applicable.
d. Following Concept Plan approval, a grading permit may be issued at the developer's
request based on the requirements above for a clearing and grubbing permit and in
addition a stormwater management report (hydrology study) shall be submitted and
approved.
e. Copies of the approved Concept Plan shall be provided to the City for permanent
record, in a number as determined by the City Manager.
11.2.3 Site Development Plans Approval
a. An application for Development Plan approval and issuance of a development
permit shall be submitted to the City using an application form and in a number of
copies as determined by the City Manager. The Development Plans may encompass
a portion of a property included within an approved Concept Plan. However, if no
Concept Plan has been approved, the Development Plans must include the entire
property being developed and having similar zoning. As required by these
Regulations, the application shall include the Site Plan and construction drawings, as
appropriate to the project. All construction drawings and other engineering data
shall be prepared and sealed by a Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect
currently registered in the State of Georgia, in accordance with the provisions of
Georgia Law.
b. The City Manager shall indicate on a review copy of the drawings or in a written
memorandum all comments related to compliance of the Development Plans with
these Regulations, principles of good design, the Zoning Ordinance, conditions of
zoning approval, and the regulations of other City and Gwinnett County
departments, and State agencies as appropriate. The City Manager shall have final
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.12
5
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
staff authority to determine the applicability of any and all comments under these
Development Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance or conditions of zoning approval.
c. The developer shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and
zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the noted and written
comments of the City Manager.
d. Deeds to lands dedicated to City of Sugar Hill in fee simple, shall be submitted to
the City Manager for recording.
e. Should an applicant disagree with the findings or final review comments of the City
Manager or of any other City department, concluding that factual or interpretive
errors have been made, the following appeal procedure shall be followed to resolve
the issues.
(1) Submit to the Department of Planning and Development a written statement
clearly defining the nature of the disagreement, the specific reference to the
sections of the regulations (i.e., Development Regulations, etc.) at issue, and
the applicant's own opinion.
(2) Should the department under appeal fail to respond within 10 working days
from the date of transmittal of the appeal by the Department of Planning and
Development, the City Manager shall automatically forward a copy of the
appeal to the City Council for final action in their normal course of business.
f. When the City Manager has determined that the Site Plan and other Development
Plans are in compliance with all applicable City regulations and zoning
requirements, and approval has been received from all affected City and Gwinnett
County Departments, or State Department as required, he shall sign and date a
CERTIFICATE OF DEVELOPMENT PLANS APPROVAL on a reproducible
copy of the plan. Approved copies of the approved Development Plans shall be
transmitted to the applicant and retained by the City for its record.
g. Following the above approval by all affected governmental agencies, and approval
of a Metropolitan River Protection Act Certificate, if applicable, a development
permit shall be issued at the developer's request to begin construction activities
based on the approved Development Plans. Said permit may include clearing,
grubbing, and grading as appropriate and approved as part of the project. A building
permit may also be issued on the basis of the approved development permit under
the provisions contained in these Regulations. A Certificate of Occupancy may not
be issued, however, until a Certificate of Development Conformance for the project
has been executed by the Owner and an executed Development Performance and
Maintenance Agreement has been received in accordance with these Regulations.
11.2.4 Certificate of Development Conformance Approval Process
a. Final approval by the City Manager shall not be shown on the Certificate of
Development Conformance until all requirements of these and other applicable
regulations have been met, all final inspections have been approved and a
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.12
6
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement has been executed. The
Agreement shall be accompanied by a letter of credit or other acceptable surety
providing for the maintenance of required public improvements and all other
applicable installations for a maintenance period of at least 30 months following the
date that the Certificate of Development Conformance is approved.
After the first 18 months of the maintenance period, if ninety (90) percent of the
buildings have certificates of occupancies issued, the developer may request to
reduce the surety to 30 percent of the original surety amount for the maintenance of
all installations and improvements required by these Regulations.
The maintenance period may be extended by the City Manager at the request of
the Developer and if any of the required public improvements are delayed beyond
the first 18 months, provided it is in the best interest of the health, safety and
welfare of the public. All public improvements shall be covered by a
maintenance period of at least 12 months following the date of installation.
b. The City Manager shall further determine that either:
(1) All required public improvements and other installations to the development
required for approval of the Certificate of Development Conformance under
the rules and regulations of City of Sugar Hill have been completed in
accordance with the appropriate specifications; or;
(2) All of the storm water drainage and detention facilities, water and sewer
utilities, street base and curbing construction required for approval of the
Certificate of Development Conformance have been properly installed and
completed and, for those required public improvements not yet completed,
within areas to be dedicated, (grassing, pavement topping, required
landscaping, sidewalks, etc.) a performance surety shall have been filed by
the developer with the Development Performance and Maintenance
Agreement, which performance bond shall:
(a) Be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the developer of all
work required to complete all Public improvements and installation
required to be dedicated for the development, or approved portion
thereof, in compliance with these rules and regulations within a
specified time, not to exceed three months;
(b) Be payable to, and for the indemnification of, the City;
(c) Be in an amount equal to the cost of construction of the required
Public improvements required to be dedicated not yet completed plus
an additional ten (10) percent of said costs, as calculated by the City
Manager on the basis of yearly contract prices or City contracts,
where available;
(d) Be with surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in
the State of Georgia; and,
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.12
7
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
(e) Be in a form acceptable to the City Manager or the City Attorney.
c. Payment for materials and installation of traffic control shall be made to City of
Sugar Hill and/or the Gwinnett County Department of Transportation in accordance
with the traffic engineering regulations prior to approval of the Certificate of
Development Conformance. Payment of the cost of striping major thoroughfares or
required signalization if required and not completed by the developer shall also be
received by the City of Sugar Hill and/or Gwinnett County Department of
Transportation prior to approval of the Certificate of Development Conformance.
d. Payment of the required plat recording fee shall be made to the City prior to
approval of the Final Plat.
e. Once the City inspector has performed all final inspections and recommended
approval of the Certificate of Development Conformance and all other inspections
by affected departments and agencies of government as required have certified
compliance and signed the route sheet, the City Manager shall certify by his
signature on the original of the Certificate of Development Conformance that all of
the requirements of these Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance, and the conditions of
zoning approval have been met, and that all other affected departments have given
final approval. Where use of septic tanks is proposed, written approval shall be
obtained from a duly authorized representative of the Environmental Health
Department. The Certificate of Development Conformance shall not be deemed
approved until it has been signed by the City Manager.
11.3 ASSIGNMENT OF NAMES AND ADDRESS
11.3.1 Subdivision or Development Names
a. Proposed subdivision or development names must be reviewed and approved prior
to the issuance of a development permit. Names will be reviewed by the Gwinnett
County Department of Planning and Development upon submittal of the Preliminary
Plat or Site Plan.
b. Proposed names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the
name of any other subdivision or development in Gwinnett County or its
municipalities except for extensions of existing subdivisions or developments.
c. Subdivision and development names may be reserved if submitted and approved
along with the Concept Plan for the project.
11.3.2 Street Names
a. Proposed street names must be reviewed and approved prior to approval of a Final
Plat for recording. Street names may be reserved through approval as shown on an
approved Concept Plan or Preliminary Plat for the subdivision. Proposed names for
private streets shall follow the same rules as for public streets.
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.12
8
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
b. Street names shall consist of a root name of the developer's choosing and a suffix
designation (such as "Street", "Avenue", "Drive", etc.), and shall be followed by a
quadrant suffix. Directional prefixes (i.e., "North", "South") and the prefixes "old"
or "new" shall not be used.
c. All streets shall bear the proper quadrant suffix appropriate to its location within the
City (i.e. NE, NW, SE and SW), as determined by the Gwinnett County Department
of Planning and Development.
d. A proposed street that is obviously in alignment with another already existing and
named street shall bear the name of such existing street, unless this requirement is
waived.
e. Except within the same development, no proposed street name shall duplicate (be
spelled the same or be phonetically the same) as an existing street name within
Gwinnett County or the City of Sugar Hill regardless of the use of such suffix
designations as "Street", Avenue", "Boulevard", "Drive", "Place", "Way", "Court",
or however otherwise designated. In the same subdivision, a root name may not
occur more than twice.
f. All street root names and suffix designations are subject to the approval of the
Gwinnett County Department of Planning and Development. Obscene or otherwise
unacceptable language, abbreviations, contractions, or initials may not be used.
g. Root names shall consist of no more than 13 characters including space, hyphens,
etc. Letters not occurring in the English alphabet, and numerals, shall not be used.
11.3.3 Street Address Assignments
a. A street address number must be assigned prior to issuance of a building permit. For
any new structure proposed on a property which has not been assigned an address, a
street number will be assigned upon confirmation or establishment of the property as
a buildable lot of record under the requirements of these Regulations.
b. Subdivisions
House numbers will be assigned after an Exemption Plat or Preliminary Plat is
approved for the property. Submit two copies of the approved plat to the Gwinnett
County Department of Planning and Development. Block number assignments shall
also be designated for abutting major street name signs at this time.
c. Commercial/Industrial Projects or Buildings
Projects will be numbered after the developer submits the Site Plan for development
review.
d. Apartment Projects
Projects will be numbered after the developer submits copies of the Site Plan for
development review. The overall development will be issued a single street address.
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.12
9
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
The developer will be responsible for numbering/lettering individual buildings and
units.
e. Condominium Projects
Projects will be numbered after the developer submits the Site Plan for development
review. Individual units shall be numbered consecutively if located along public or
private streets. Units in the "stacked-flat" configuration shall use the same
numbering approach as applies to an apartment project.
f. The following numbering systems shall be followed per postal regulations:
(1) Individual mailbox for each dwelling units: Each street in the project
must be named.
(2) Cluster box system - Centralized mailbox for entire project: One
street name will serve to assign all house numbers for main delivery.
11.4 INITIATION OF DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
11.4.1 Initial Activities Required
Following the issuance of any permit authorizing clearing and grading of a site:
a. Required erosion control measures must be installed where practical by the
developer and inspected and approved by the City prior to actual grading or removal
of vegetation. All control measures shall be in place as soon after the
commencement of activities as possible and in coordination with the progress of the
project.
b. Soil sedimentation facilities must be installed and operational prior to major grading
operations.
c. Areas required to be undisturbed by the Zoning Ordinance, conditions of zoning
approval, Metropolitan River Protection Act or other ordinance or regulation shall be
designated by survey stakes, flags, or other appropriate markings and shall be
inspected and approved by the City prior to the commencement of any clearing or
grading activities.
11.4.2 Tree Protection Areas
Prior to the initiation of land disturbance activities and throughout the clearing and grading
process the following must be accomplished for an designated tree protection area in
accordance with any approved Buffer and Landscape Plan or Tree
Preservation/Replacement Plan for the property:
a. For those trees which are not to be removed, all protective fencing, staking, and any
tree protection area signs shall be in place. These barriers must be maintained
throughout the land disturbance process and should not be removed until
landscaping is begun.
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.13
0
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
b. The tree protection areas shall not be utilized for storage of earth and other materials
resulting from or used during the development process.
c. Construction site activities such as parking, materials storage, concrete washout,
burning, etc. shall be arranged to prevent disturbances within the tree protection
areas.
11.4.3 Development Inspections
Oral notification shall be made by the developer or contractor to the Department of Planning
and Development of the City of Sugar Hill at least 24 hours prior to commencement of
activity for each of the following phases as authorized by any permit for site work or
development. Inspections shall be made by the City and passed prior to continuation of
further activity or proceeding into new phases.
a. Clearing or clearing and grubbing of the site or any portion included under the
permit.
b. Grading. Installation of slope stakes shall be required. Upon completion of
roadway grading, the Water Certificate shall be submitted to the City certifying that
the centerline of the road and the offset centerline of the water line is within 6" of
that shown on the approved plans or revised plan submittal. Inspection and approval
shall be required prior to trenching or continuation with sub-base preparation.
c. Installation of storm drainage pipe, detention, or other storm water facilities.
d. Installation of sanitary sewer and appurtenances. This notification shall be made
simultaneously with official notification by the developer or contractor to the
Gwinnett Public Utilities Department, Water Pollution Control Division, and if for
informational purposes only to the City.
e. Curbing of roadways. Inspection should be requested before the forms have been
set (if used). Roadway width will be spot checked by string line between curb
stakes.
f. Sub-base or subgrade of streets. After compaction, the subgrade will be string-lined
for depth and crown. The subgrade shall be roll tested and shall pass with no
movement, to the satisfaction of the City.
g. Street base. The base will be string-lined for depth and crown, and shall pass a roll
test with no movement to the satisfaction of the City.
h. Paving. A City inspector shall be on site during the paving process to check
consistency, depth, and workmanship, as applicable. For asphalt paving, the
temperature of the material will be spot-checked, and the roadways may be cored
after completion to check thickness, at the owners expense.
11.4.4 Responsibility for Quality and Design
The completion of inspections by City of Sugar Hill officials or employees and
authorization for work continuation shall not transfer responsibility for the quality of the
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.13
1
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
work performed or materials used from the contractor or developer, not imply or transfer
acceptance of responsibility for project design or engineering from the professional
corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared.
11.4.5 Stop Work Orders
Work which is not authorized by an approved permit, or which is not in conformance to the
approved plans for the project, or which is not in compliance with the provisions of these
Regulations or any other adopted code, regulation or ordinance of City of Sugar Hill, shall
be subject to immediate Stop Work Order by the City. Work which proceeds without
having received the necessary inspections of the City shall be halted until all inspections of
intervening work is completed.
11.4.6 Stabilization for Erosion Control
If for any reason a clearing and grubbing, grading, or development permit expires after land
disturbance activities have commenced, the developer shall be responsible for stabilizing the
site for erosion control, under the direction of the appropriate stated agency or City.
11.4.7 Site Cleanup
The applicant shall be responsible for removal of all equipment, material, and general
construction debris from the property, street or other public way. Dumping of debris into
sewers, onto adjacent property or onto other unauthorized land in the City of Sugar Hill is
prohibited.
11.5 APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT CONFORMANCE
11.5.1 Prerequisite to Final Plat or Certificate of Occupancy
This approval shall be a prerequisite to the approval of a Final Plat or issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy for any part of a project or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy
for any part of a project included in a subdivision development or non-residential site
development. The approval shall reflect the owner's certification that all site work and
construction has been accomplished according to the terms of approved plans and permits,
and that all required public improvements and other facilities intended for maintenance,
supervision and dedication to the public are in compliance with appropriate standards,
regulations, codes and ordinances. Such approval shall be revoked in cases of fraud or
whenever unauthorized changes are made to the site without the benefit of required permits.
11.5.2 Submission Requirements
Upon completion of the project as authorized for construction by the development permit,
the owner shall file a Certificate of Development Conformance with the City Manager along
with all required record drawings and the "as-built" hydrology study for the project with the
actual parameters from the record drawing of the detention facilities. Record drawings
required by other agencies shall be approved or released by each appropriate agency prior to
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.13
2
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
approval of final plat or certificate of occupancy. The Certificate of Development
Conformance shall be in a form as required by the City Manager and shall be accompanied
by a Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement completed in draft form. If
the owner is a corporation, the documents shall be signed by the President or Vice President,
be affixed by the corporate seal, and either the corporate secretary shall attest to the
signature and affix the corporate seal, or a Certificate of Corporate Resolution shall also be
submitted.
11.5.3 Required Record Drawings
As-built drawings shall bear the stamp and certification of a Professional Engineer or Registered
Land Surveyor and show the location, vertical and horizontal alignment and finished
elevations (top and inverts, as appropriate) of the improvements listed below:
a. Storm water systems, storm water management facilities, drainage
improvements, systems, pipes and channels.
b. Bridges and culverts.
c. Sanitary sewer systems. (In accordance with the requirements of the
Gwinnett County Department of Water Resources).
d. Water system. (In accordance with the requirements of the Gwinnett County
Department of Water Resources).
e. Streets. Street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve
data of intersection, radii, length of tangents, and arcs, and degree of
curvature with basis of curve data. Also indicate pavement width and
pavement structure (individual thickness of wearing course, binder course,
base, and/or sub-base).
f. Curb and gutter, sidewalks, multi-purpose trails, bicycle facilities, and
recreation improvements on property dedicated to the public.
g. Signage in public right-of-way and other public dedicated areas.
h. Modifications to the 100-year floodplain (if any).
i. Any other improvements subject to maintenance, supervision or dedication
by/to the City.
11.5.4 Approval
Following final inspection and approval of all record drawings, the City Manager shall
approve the Certificate of Development Conformance.
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.13
3
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
11.6 PROJECT CLOSEOUT AND CONTINUING MAINTENANCE
11.6.1 Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement
Based on the approved Certificate of Development Conformance, the owner shall file a final
Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement with the City Manager, along with
any required Certificate of Corporate Resolution and performance or maintenance sureties,
as a prerequisite to the approval of a Final Plat or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for
any part of a project included in a subdivision development or non-residential site
development. The Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement shall be in a
form as required by the City Manager, and shall cover the following:
a. Final required improvements yet to be completed (e.g., grassing, topping, sidewalks,
required landscaping) and performance sureties. Final landscaping shall be provided
in accordance with a schedule acceptable to the City. The developer may be allowed
up to three months in which to finish the other designated improvements, after the
date of approval of the Certificate of Development Conformance unless an extension
has been granted by the City Manager up to 24 months. All cost estimates shall be
as prepared by or acceptable to the City.
b. Maintenance of all required public improvements, including but not limited to public
streets and drainage facilities within public streets or easements for the specified
maintenance period after the date of approval of the Certificate of Development
Conformance. Repairs shall be made for any deficiencies identified within the
maintenance period or the sureties shall be called or forfeited to complete same.
c. Indemnification of the City against all liability for damages arising as a result or
errors or omissions in the design or construction of the development for a period of
ten years. If liability is subsequently assigned or transferred to a successor in title or
other person, a copy of such legal instrument shall be filed with the Clerk of
Superior Court, Gwinnett County.
11.6.2 Maintenance Period
a. The Agreement shall be accompanied by an acceptable surety providing for the
maintenance of all installations for a maintenance period of at least 30 months
following the date that the Certificate of Development Conformance is approved.
After the first 18 months of the maintenance period, once ninety (90) percent of the
buildings proposed for development on the approved Final Plat have certificates of
occupancy issued, the developer may request to reduce the surety to 30 percent of
the original surety amount for the maintenance of all installations and improvements
required by these Regulations.
b. The maintenance period may be extended by the City Manager at the request of the
Developer and if any of the required public improvements are delayed beyond the first 18 months,
provided it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the public.
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.13
4
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
c. The maintenance period shall not be less than 18 months from installation of the street
wearing course and shall be extended equal to any extension of time for the Performance Bond
granted by the City Manager but not to exceed 24 months.
d. All other public improvements shall be covered by a maintenance period of at least 12
months following the date of installation.
11.6.3 Maintenance and Performance Surety
a. The maintenance and performance sureties, may be in the form of cash deposited
with the City, a bond, or letter of credit from a bank or other financial institution licensed to operate
in the State of Georgia in a form acceptable to the City Manager or City Attorney. Each surety must
include a contact mailing address, phone number and fax number for a location within the State of
Georgia.
b. Performance surety shall:
(i) Be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the subdivider or developer
of all work required to complete all improvements and installations for the subdivision, or approved
portion thereof, in compliance with these rules and regulations within a specified time, not to exceed
the specified performance period;
(ii) Be payable to, and for the indemnification of, the City;
(iii) Be in an amount equal to the cost of construction of the required
improvements not yet completed plus an additional ten (10) percent of said costs, as calculated by
the City Manager on the basis of yearly contract prices or City contracts, where available;
(iv) Be with surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the State
of Georgia; and,
(v) Be in a form acceptable to the City Manager or the City Attorney.
c. Maintenance surety shall, in all cases, be provided in an amount as shown on the
calculation worksheet as provided by the City Manager.
d. A maintenance surety for the sanitary sewer facilities is required separately by the Gwinnett
County Public Utilities Department, Water Pollution Control Division in accordance with their
regulations. For the water system improvements, the contractor employed by the developer shall be
responsible for maintenance of all water mains and appurtenances for one year from the date of
approval of the Certificate of Development Conformance by correcting all defects or deficiencies in
materials or workmanship.
11.6.4 Failure to Complete or Maintain Improvements
If a performance and maintenance agreement has been executed, and surety has been posted and
required public improvements are not installed pursuant to the terms of the agreement, the City
Manager may:
(i) Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all public improvements be installed
regardless of the extent of completion of the development at the time the agreement is declared to be
in default;
(ii) Obtain funds pursuant to the surety and complete the public improvements by themselves or
through a third party;
Development Regulations Procedures
City of Sugar Hill
11.13
5
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
(iii) Assign its right to receive funds pursuant to the surety in whole or in part to any third party,
including a subsequent owner of the subdivision or addition for whom the public improvements
were not constructed, in exchange for the subsequent owner’s agreement to complete the required
public improvements; and/or
(iv) Exercise any other rights available under the law.
Development Regulations Fees
City of Sugar Hill
12.1
36
Article 12. Fees.
12.1 Application filing and permit fees shall be as may be established from time-to-time by the
City Council.
12.2 Permit fees, if any, shall be submitted as a prerequisite to issuance of the permit. Nonpayment
as a result of submission of a check having insufficient funds on account, or for
any other reason, shall cause the permit to be voided and reissuance subject to penalty as
may be established by the City Council.
12.3 Application fees or review fees, if any, shall be submitted with the application and upon
acceptance of said submission for review and consideration shall not be refundable. Failure
to pay a required application fee shall cause the application to be returned to the applicant
without acceptance for review or consideration by the City.
12.4 Following the approval of development plans, and prior to authorization to begin
construction, the developer shall pay into the Treasury of the City of Sugar Hill such
required inspection, sanitary sewer permit charges, curb cut, or other fees as may be
established from time-to-time by the City Council. Such fees shall not be refundable
following issuance of a Development Permit, except upon approval of the City Council.
12.5 Prior to Approval of Development Conformance for a project, the developer shall provide to
the Gwinnett County Department of Transportation such fees for traffic control signs, street
name signs, and street striping as shall be required by Traffic Engineering Regulations and
established from time-to-time by the City Council or Gwinnett County Board of
Commissioners.
12.6 Prior to approval of a Final Plat or Certificate of Occupancy, the developer shall provide to
the City such recording fees and performance and/or maintenance bonds as shall be required
by these Regulations or established from time-to-time by the City Council.
Development Regulations Administration, Appeal, and Violations
City of Sugar Hill
13.1
37
Article 13. Administration, Appeal and Violations.
13.1. Administration.
13.1.1 These Development Regulations shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by the
City Manager of City of Sugar Hill, Georgia. All other ordinances or regulations
referenced herein, such as the fire prevention and life safety codes, building and other
technical codes, health, water, and sewer regulations, shall be administered by the
directors of the departments responsible for such regulations, as established by the State of
Georgia and the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners.
13.1.2 In any case in which activities are undertaken in violation of these Regulations, not in
compliance with the provisions of a permit issued under the authorization of these
Regulations, or without authorization of a permit which would otherwise be required, the
City Manager is hereby authorized to suspend or invalidate such permits, order that all
unauthorized or improper work be stopped, direct correction of deficiencies, issue
summons to any court of competent jurisdiction, or take any other legal or administrative
action appropriate to the severity of the violation and degree of threat to the public health,
safety, and welfare.
13.2. Regulations to be published.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Manager to maintain an accurate and upto-
date compilation of these Development Regulations and all amendments and pertinent
attachments thereto, and to publish said compilation and make it available to the public at
a cost as established by the City Council.
13.3 Modifications.
Modification of the design standards set forth in these Development Regulations may be
authorized by the City Manager in specific cases when, in his opinion, undue hardship
may result from strict compliance; provided any such determination shall be based
fundamentally on the fact that unusual topographical or other exceptional conditions
require such modification, or that the granting of the modification will not adversely affect
the general public welfare or nullify the intent of these Regulations. Any such
modification granted by the City Manager shall be made in writing to the developer and
also made a part of the City’s records. Application for any modifications shall be filed in
writing on a form provided by the City with necessary supporting documents with the City
Manager by the developer and shall explain in detail the reasons and facts supporting the
application.
13.4 Appeal and waiver of the regulations.
13.4.1 Appeals
Appeals of the interpretation by the City Manager of the requirements of these
Regulations shall first be submitted in writing (on a form provided by the City) to the City
Manager who shall review the request in a timely manner and receive comments from
Development Regulations Administration, Appeal, and Violations
City of Sugar Hill
13.1
38
other affected City or County departments. The appeal thereupon shall be forwarded to
the City Council for final action in their normal course of business.
13.4.2 Waivers
Waiver requests of the requirements of these Regulations shall be submitted on an
application form as prescribed by the City Manager, along with such fees as shall be
established by the City Council from time-to-time. The City Manager shall coordinate the
review of each waiver request by all other affected City or Gwinnett County departments
and shall summarize such comments or recommendations as may be received to the City
Council for final action in their normal course of business.
13.5. Violations, enforcement and penalties.
Any action or inaction that violates the provisions of these regulations or the requirements of
an approved plan or permit shall be subject to the enforcement actions or penalties outlined
here in. Any such action or inaction that is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a
public nuisance and also may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The
imposition of any of the enforcement actions or penalties described herein shall not prevent
such equitable relief.
13.5.1. Enforcement Procedures.
The following are the enforcement procedures authorized by these regulations:
a. Notices of Violation
Enforcement shall begin with the issuance of a written Notice of Violation to the
owner or responsible person by the City Manger or his/her designee. The notice may
be delivered personally or sent by first class mail. The Notice of Violation shall
contain at least the following:
1. The name and address of the owner or responsible person;
2. The location or address of the site upon which the violation is
occurring;
3. A description of the nature of the violation;
4. A description of the remedial actions or measures necessary to bring
an action or inaction into compliance with a permit, approved plan or
these regulations;
5. The deadline or completion date of any such remedial actions or
measures;
6. A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against
the owner to responsible person to whom the Notice or Violation is
directed.
In the event the owner or responsible person fails to correct the violations after the
deadline contained in the Notice of Violation, the City Manager or his/her designee is
Development Regulations Administration, Appeal, and Violations
City of Sugar Hill
13.1
39
authorized to take or impose any one or more of the additional actions contained
herein.
b. Stop Work Order
The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to issue Stop Work Orders to an
owner or responsible person. Stop Work Orders are effective immediately and shall
remain in effect until the necessary corrective actions or remedial measures as set
forth in the Notice of Violation have occurred. Stop Work Orders may be withdrawn
or modified by the City Manager or his/her designee in order to enable an owner or
responsible person to take the necessary remedial actions or measures to correct the
violations.
c. Refusal to Issue Certificate of Occupancy or Completion
The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to refused to issue Certificates of
Occupancy or Completion for the building or other improvements constructed or
being constructed on a site until the owner or responsible person has taken the
remedial actions or measures as set forth in the Notice of Violation or has otherwise
corrected the violation described therein.
d. Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit
The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to suspend, revoke or modify a
permit that was issued to authorizing land disturbing activities or development. The
City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to reinstate a suspended, revoked or
modified permit after the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions
or measures stated in the Notice of Violation or has otherwise corrected the violations
described therein. The City Manager or his/her designee is also authorized to
reinstate such permit, which may include conditions as the City Manager or his/her
designee may deem necessary, to enable the owner or responsible person to take the
necessary remedial actions or measures to correct the violations.
e. Refusal to Approve Final Subdivision Plats
The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to refuse to approve Final Plats
until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures set
forth in the Notice of Violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described
therein.
f. Issuance of Citations or Summons to Court
The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to issue a citation or summons to
the owner or responsible person requiring such person to appear in a court of
competent jurisdiction to answer charges of violations of these regulations.
Development Regulations Administration, Appeal, and Violations
City of Sugar Hill
13.1
40
13.5.2. Legal Penalties and/or Remedies.
a. Fine and/or Sentence
Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any
provision of these regulations shall be guilty of violating a dealing adopted
ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia and shall be punished either by a fine
not less than $100.00 per day and not greater than $1,000.00 per day, or by
sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in jail, or both a fine and jail or
work alternative. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
b. Other Legal Remedies
In any case in which a violation of these regulations has occurred, the city, in
addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order,
injunction, abatement, or take other appropriate legal action or proceeding
through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such
unlawful use or activity.
Development Regulations Adoption and Amendments
City of Sugar Hill
14.1
41
Article 14. Adoption and Amendment.
14.1. Effective Date.
14.1.1 These regulations shall be in full force and effect on ____________________, following
the adoption by the City Council of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, and shall apply to any
land disturbance Permit for which an application is received after the effective date of
these Regulations.
14.1.2 Any subdivision or other project for which a valid and complete application for a
Development Permit shall have been received prior to the effective date of these
Regulations shall be considered "grandfathered" and, at the developer's option, may
proceed to completion and building permits may be issued under the Development
Regulations in place prior to the effective date of these Regulations, provided that the
Development Permit is or can be issued within 90 calendar days of said effective date and
all time frames associated with said permit are observed.
14.1.3 Any subdivision or other project for which a Development Permit has been issued prior to
the effective date of these Regulations shall be considered "grandfathered" and, at the
developer's option, may proceed to completion and building permits may be issued under
the terms of said permit and the Development Regulations in place prior to said effective
date.
14.1.4 Any subdivision or other project for which only a Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, or
Grading Permit shall have been issued prior to effective date of these Regulations shall be
brought into conformance with these Regulations prior to issuance of a Development
Permit. Administrative modifications in accordance with Article 13 shall be granted as
necessary and appropriate where full compliance is not feasible or cannot reasonably be
achieved because of the stage of development, limitations imposed by the site, or design
parameters.
14.1.5 Nothing in these Regulations shall be construed to affect the validity of any building
permit lawfully issued prior to the effective date of these Regulations.
14.2 Amendments.
14.2.1 These Regulations may be amended from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council
of the City of Sugar Hill. Such amendments shall be effective as of their date of adoption
unless otherwise stated in the adopting resolution.
14.2.2 Any subdivision or other project for which a valid and complete application for a
Development Permit shall have been received prior to the adoption of an amendment to
these Regulations may, at the developer's option, proceed to completion and building
permits may be issued as though no amendment had been approved, provided that the
Development Permit is or can be issued within 90 calendar days of said amendment and
all time frames associated with said permit are observed.
14.2.3 Any subdivision or other project for which a Development Permit has been issued prior to
the adoption of an amendment to these Regulations may, at the developer's option,
proceed to completion and building permits may be issued as though no amendment had
been approved.
Development Regulations Adoption and Amendments
City of Sugar Hill
14.1
42
14.2.4 Any subdivision or other project for which only a Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, or
Grading Permit shall have been issued prior to adoption of an amendment to these
Regulations shall be brought into conformance with the amendment (if applicable) prior to
issuance of a Development Permit. Administrative modifications in accordance with
Article 13 shall be granted as necessary and appropriate where full compliance is not
feasible or cannot reasonably be achieved because of the stage of development, limitations
imposed by the site, or design parameters.
14.2.5 No amendment to these Regulations shall be construed to affect the validity of any
building permit lawfully issued prior to the adoption of said amendment.
14.3. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of these Regulations is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or void, the validity of the remaining portions of these
Regulations shall not be affected thereby, it being the intent of the City Council of the City
of Sugar Hill in adopting these Regulations that no portion thereof or provision of the
Regulations contained herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the
unconstitutionality or invalidity of any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
provisions of these Regulations.
14.4. Conflicting Regulations.
All regulations or parts of regulations of the Code of Laws of the City of Sugar Hill,
Georgia, in conflict with these Regulations shall be and the same are hereby repealed in their
portions so in conflict. Provided, however, that it is not the intent of these Regulations to repeal
or affect any Law of the State of Georgia, or any Code or Ordinance of Gwinnett County adopted
as a requirement of a State Law, in which case the most restrictive requirement shall control.
Development Regulations Amendments
City of Sugar Hill
15.14
3
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
AMENDMENTS
1. February 9, 1998: Amended Section 4.1.1 Permit Required; Exemptions. Amended
adding Section 4.1.7, Permits for Lots require Residential Drainage
Plans for Lots Platted Ten Years Previous to Permit Application.
2. October 12, 1998 Amended Section 4.1.1 Clearing and grading of more than one lot
requires City Approval. Amended by adding Section 8.1.7 Slopes
greater than four (4) per cent shall have a stormwater collection system.
Amended Section 8.4.1 Surface Drainage Design Standards paragraph (i)
is amended to require collection system for slopes over four (4) per cent
and paragraphs h and i are added.
3. August 12, 2002 Amend Development Regulations Articles 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 to
incorporate the 2002 Stormwater Regulation changes.
4. September 9, 2002 Amended Development Regulations Articles 5, 6, and 11 to incorporate
changes for street base requirements, maintenance bond requirements,
recreation area requirements, and swimming pool size requirements.
5. October 13, 2003 Amended Section 10.3.1 by adding Section
10.3.1.b. to incorporate Final Plat Submittal requirements. Amended
Section 6.13.3.c. by deleting in its entirety and replaced with changes
regarding sidewalks. Amended Section 6.13.3.d. by deleting in its
entirety and replaced with changes regarding curb termini. Amended
Section 8.2.3.c.6. by deleting in its entirety and replaced with
additional detail requirements for detention ponds. Amended Section
6.3.5 by adding Section (6) for local street designs. Amended Section
10.1.3.t. by adding signature block for the Director, Planning and
Development Amended Section 10.2.6. by adding signature block for
the Director, Planning and Development Amended Section 10.3.7.c.
by adding signature block for the Director, Planning and Development
6. September 13, 2004 Amended Development Regulations Article 6 to incorporate changes to
construct 5 feet wide sidewalks along frontage of developments along
public streets. Amended Article 10 to provide additional elements in the
Preliminary Plats and Final Plats for residential subdivision with the
exception of minor subdivisions.
7. May 9, 2005 Amended 2.2 Definitions, Section 4.2.1, Section 4.2.2, 8.1.8, 8.2.1 (b),
8.2.1 adding (f), (g) and (h), 8.2.2 (b), 8.2.3 (b), 8.2.3 (l), 8.2.4 (g), 8.2.8
(a), (b), 8.7.3, 8.8, 8.9.1(a), (b), (c), (d), 8.9.10 (a), (b), (c), 9.6.4(b), 9.6.5,
9.8.1, 10.3.7 (b), (c), (g), 10.4.4, 10.4.5, 10.5.2, 10.5.3, 10.5.4,10.5.5,
13.5, 13.5.1 (a-f), 13.5.2 (a-b), 13.5.3 deleted in its entirety.
8. June 13, 2005 Added Article 5.10 Town Center Overlay District.
Development Regulations Amendments
City of Sugar Hill
15.14
4
Updated 6-12-17 kbl
9. October 9, 2006 Added Article 8.3.3 (f.) pertaining to reinforced concrete pipe.
10. March 12, 2007 Deleted Section 5.10 Town Center Overlay District in its entirety.
Changed 10.1.3.t, revised wording in 10.3.4.aa.4, replaced City Manager
with Director, Planning and Development in signature blocks for items
10.2.6; 10.3.7.c, and 10.6.6.
11. January 12, 2009 Deleted Section 1.1.2 and replaced, deleted Section 2.1.2(b) and
replaced, added
Section 9.10 Site Lighting Guidelines.
12. March 9, 2009 Deleted in its entirety and replaced Articles 3, 5, 6, 10, & 11.
13. November 9, 2009 Deleted Article 9.6.8 in its entirety and replaced.
14. June 14, 2010 Deleted 8.1.5 in its entirety and replaced, added 8.5.3 Stop Work Order.
15. August 13, 2012 Deleted in its entirety Paragraph C of sub-section 10.3.7 of Article 10
Plan and Plat Specifications and replaced. Deleted in its entirety subsection
11.1.4 of section 11.1 Subdivision Review Procedures of Article
11 Procedures and replaced. Deleted sub-section 11.1.5 of section 11.1
Subdivision Review Procedures of Article 11 Procedures and replaced.
Added new sub-section titled 11.1.6 Dedication (Acceptance) to Section
11.1 Subdivision Review Procedures of Article 11 procedures. Added a
new sub-section titled 11.4.7 Site Cleanup to section 11.4 Initiation of
Development Activities of Article 11 Procedures. Deleted in its entirety
sub-section 11.5.3 of section 11.5 Approval of Development
Conformance of Article 11 Procedures and replaced. Deleted in its
entirety section 11.6 Project Closeout and Continuing Maintenance of
Article 11 Procedures and replaced.
16. July 13, 2013 Article 6, 6.3.1 Right of Way and Pavement Widths replaced in its
entirety and replaced.
17. June 13, 2016 Article 5, Section 5.4 Required Public Improvements , Article 11,
Section 11.2.4 Certificate of Development Conformance, Section 11.5.1
Prerequisite to Final Plat or Certificate of Occupancy, Article 11, Section
11.6.1 Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement, Article
11, Section 11.6.2 Maintenance, Period, Subdivision.
18. June 12, 2017 Article 8, Section 8.2.6, 8.7.1 and 8.7.2, Article 10, Section10.3.7 (a &
c), Article 11, Section 11.1.5 (g), and 11.5.3.
Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia
Page 1 of 15
ORDINANCE
The Mayor and City Council of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia hereby repeals the Storm
Water Management Ordinance and any amendments thereto.
The Mayor and City Council of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia hereby adopt the
following as the City’s stand alone Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance:
Section 1. General Provisions
1.1 Title
This ordinance shall be known as the "Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance of the
City of Sugar Hill, Georgia".
1.2 Authority
The authority for this ordinance is based on home rule provisions of the Georgia Constitution,
Article IX, Section 2, Paragraph 3(a)(6).
1.3 Findings
It is hereby determined that:
(1) The city separate storm sewer system was designed and installed to manage stormwater
so as to prevent localized flooding, damage to property and risk to public safety;
(2) The city separate storm sewer system was not designed or installed as a receiving system
for non-stormwater discharges;
(3) Discharges to the city separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of
stormwater contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of
receiving waters;
(4) These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections
to the city separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or
institutional establishments;
(5) These non-stormwater discharges not only impact local waterways individually, but
geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative
impacts on receiving waters;
(6) The impacts of these non-stormwater discharges adversely affect public health and safety,
drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other
uses of lands and waters;
(7) These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges
into the city separate storm sewer system;
(8) Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of State and
Federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of
nonpoint source pollution caused by non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm
sewer system;
(9) The Clean Water Act requires the management and maintenance of the city separate
storm sewer system and the management of discharges to that system;
(10) Therefore, in order to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm
sewer system, it is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and
discharges to the city separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will
prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment.
1.4 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general
welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer
system to the maximum extent practicable as required by Federal law. This ordinance
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of non-stormwater discharges into the city
separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this ordinance are to:
(1) Comply with all Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and Federal
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) storm water regulations developed pursuant to
the Clean Water Act; and
(2) Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city separate storm sewer system;
and
(3) Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping
or disposal, to the city separate storm sewer system; and,
(4) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and
enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance
1.5 Applicability
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply within the City Limits of the City of Sugar Hill. The
City may enter into agreements with Gwinnett County, or other municipalities, to carry out the
purpose of this ordinance. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, enforcement of
provisions, resolution of disputes, and cooperative monitoring and management of the separate
storm sewer system and management programs.
1.6 Compatibility with Other Regulations
This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance constitute a minimum standard, should not
Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia
Page 3 of 15
be deemed to limit or repeal any other local requirements, and are in addition to the requirements
of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of
this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.
1.7 Severability
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or
invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this
ordinance.
1.8 Responsibility for Administration
(1) The department shall have the power to administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this ordinance and any procedures, standards and guidelines established
under authority of this ordinance. Such power shall include the right to maintain an action
or procedure in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain
any violation of this ordinance.
(2) The department shall be responsible for the conservation, management, maintenance
(where applicable), extension and improvement of the city separate storm sewer system,
including activities necessary to control storm water and activities necessary to
administer and implement the storm water management programs incorporated by
reference into the city's NPDES storm water permit.
(3) The department may develop, and update periodically, a storm water management design
manual for the guidance of persons preparing storm water management plans, designing
or operating storm water management systems, and designing or operating facilities that
may contribute non-stormwater discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system.
(4) The department may:
(a) Establish or oversee the establishment of standards and guidelines for controlling
storm water; and
(b) Determine the manner in which conveyances should be operated; and
(c) Inspect private systems which discharge to the city separate storm sewer system;
and
(d) Advise other departments on issues related to storm water; and
(e) Protect facilities and premises controlled by the city and prescribe how they are to
be used by others; and
(f) Require facilities or activities that create new, increased, or significantly changed
storm water contributions to the city's separate storm sewer system to comply
with the terms of this ordinance; and
(g) Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the
city separate storm sewer system.
Section 2. Definitions
(1) For the purposes of this ordinance, unless specifically defined below, words or phrases
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this ordinance its most effective application. Words in the singular shall include the
plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense
shall include the future tense; the word "shall" connotes "mandatory" and not
"discretionary"; the word "may" is permissive.
(2) Unless otherwise specified, or it is apparent from the context, definitions herein will be
the same as those in other city codes.
(3) For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words, and their
derivates, shall have the meaning given herein:
"Accidental Discharge" means a discharge prohibited by this ordinance that occurs by chance
and without planning or thought prior to occurrence.
"Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.),
and any subsequent amendments thereto.
"Construction Activity" means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects
resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
"Conveyance" shall mean an aboveground or underground natural or man made drainage feature,
that provides for the collection and movement of storm water, and shall include but not be
limited to concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, roads with drainage systems,
highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities,
structural storm water controls, drainage channels, reservoirs, rights of way, storm drains,
culverts, street gutters, oil/water separators, modular pavements and other similar drainage
structures.
"City" shall mean the City of Sugar Hill and such of its departments, employees and agents as
may have duties and responsibilities for administering and enforcing all storm water
management activities and implementation of the provisions of this ordinance.
"City Separate Storm Sewer System" means any conveyance or system of conveyances which is:
Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia
Page 5 of 15
a) Owned or maintained by the city;
b) Not a combined sewer; and
c) Not part of a publicly owned treatment works.
"Department" shall mean, unless otherwise specified, the city department responsible for storm
water management activities and implementation of the provisions of this ordinance.
"Director" shall mean either the director of the city department responsible for storm water
management activities and implementation of the provisions of this ordinance or any of that
person's duly authorized representatives.
"Discharge" shall mean the direct or indirect release of water, fluid, materials or other matter to a
conveyance or surface that drains to a conveyance.
"Illicit Discharge" means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city separate
storm sewer system.
"Illegal Connection" shall mean any of the following:
a) Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or man made,
which is used exclusively to drain a non-stormwater discharge to the city's
separate storm sewer system; or
b) Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or man made, that
was designed, installed or redirected for the purpose of draining a non-stormwater
discharge into the city's separate storm sewer system; or
c) Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or man made,
which is connected to the city separate storm sewer system and which has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city
regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether
natural or man made, was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time the connection was made, or has been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by the city or any other authorized enforcement agency.
"Illegal connection" expressly includes, without limitation, those connections made in the past.
"Industrial Activity" means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR,
Section 122.26 (b)(14).
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit"
means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC §
1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the
permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
"Non-Stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, drainage, or discharge that is not composed
entirely of stormwater and which may include pollutants, but that excludes:
a) Water from those sources described in section 3.1(2)(a) and 3.1.(2)(b) of this
ordinance; and /or
b) Any discharge permitted under NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger
and administered under the authority of the State and the federal Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge
to the city separate storm sewer system.
"Person" means, except to the extent exempted from this ordinance, any individual, partnership,
firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board,
public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the
State, any interstate body or any other legal entity.
"Pollutant" means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but
are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids;
cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; nonhazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other
discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; process waste
water and wash water; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals;
animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete
and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
"Pollution" shall mean the man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical,
biological, thermal and radiological integrity of water.
"Premises" shall mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or
unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
"Procedure" shall mean a procedure adopted by the department, by and through the director, to
implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this ordinance, or to carry out other
responsibilities as may be required by this Code or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of the
city or other agencies.
"State Waters" means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds,
drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or
artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not
entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person.
"Stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any
form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, but which also includes:
Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia
Page 7 of 15
a) Water from those sources described in section 3.1(2)(a) and 3.1(2)(b) of this
ordinance; and /or
b) Any discharge permitted under NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger
and administered under the authority of the State and the federal Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge
to the city separate storm sewer system.
"Storm water management design manual" shall mean the most recent version of the Gwinnett
County Georgia Storm Water Design Manual.
"Structural Stormwater Control" means a structural stormwater management facility or device
that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not
limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow.
"Variance" shall mean the modification of the minimum storm water requirements for specific
circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship
and not fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
Section 3. Prohibitions
3.1 Prohibition of Illicit Discharges
(1) It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to throw, drain, or otherwise
discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge
into the city separate storm sewer system anything other than stormwater.
(2) Discharges from the following sources are exempt from the prohibition provision in
section 3.1(1) above:
(a) Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water
sources, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, landscape irrigation or lawn
watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to
storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains
(not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and
any other water source not containing pollutants;
(b) Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing
by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
3.2 Prohibition of Illegal Connections
(1) It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to construct, connect, use,
maintain, or suffer or allow the continued existence of any illegal connection to the city
separate storm sewer system.
(2) Illegal connections must be disconnected. The department may require that illegal
connections be disconnected and redirected if necessary, to an approved on-site sewage
management system or the sanitary sewer system. Such redirected connections must be
approved by the agency responsible for administering and operating those systems.
(3) The department may require any underground or above ground pipe, drain or other
conduit, that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be
connected to the city's separate storm sewer system, to be located by the owner or
occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice from the department. Such notice
will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or
conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer,
sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm
sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of
these investigations are to be documented and provided to the department. Failure to
comply with the terms of the written notice mentioned within this subsection shall
constitute a violation of this ordinance.
Section 4. Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit
shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be
required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the city separate storm
sewer system.
Section 5. Access and Inspection of Properties and Facilities
5.1 Access and Inspection
The director or his designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect premises, properties and
facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
ordinance.
(1) If a property or facility has security measures in force, which require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to the director or his designee.
(2) The owner or operator shall allow the director or his designee ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, investigation, observation, monitoring,
measurement, recording, enforcement, sampling and testing, photography and
videotaping for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
The owner or operator shall allow the director or his designee to examine and copy any
Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia
Page 9 of 15
records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit. The director or his
designee shall duly notify the owner of said property or the representative on site, except
in the case of an emergency.
(3) The director or his designee shall have the right to set up on any premises, property or
facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the department to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of discharges.
(4) The director or his designee may require the owner or operator to install monitoring
equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available
to the department. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own
expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy. Measurements, tests and analyses performed shall be completed in accordance
with 40 CFR Part 136, unless the director approves another method.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises, property
or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or
operator at the written or oral request of the director or his designee and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the director or his designee access to a facility, property
or premises shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
(7) If the director or his designee has been refused access to any part of a premises, property
or facility from which stormwater is or would likely be discharged, and the director or his
designee is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or
any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment
and welfare of the community, then the department may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
5.2 Schedule
The director or his designee may determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance.
Section 6. Notification of Accidental Discharges and Spills
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility,
activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation
has information of any known or suspected release of non-stormwater from that facility or
operation which is resulting or may result in a discharge of that non-stormwater into the city
separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take
all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to
minimize the effects of the discharge.
Said person shall notify the department by phone, facsimile or in person within 24 hours of
discovering the discharge. Such notification shall detail the nature, quantity and time of
occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the department within three business days of the phone or in
person notice. If the discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the
owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at
least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the
discharge or spill.
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other
appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified.
Failure to provide notification of a release or discharge as provided above is a violation of this
ordinance.
Section 7. Violations, Enforcement and Penalties
7.1 Violations
It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this ordinance. Any person, who has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this ordinance, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in
this section. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. The department may
institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this ordinance.
Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or
permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the department from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief.
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the
department has the right but not the duty, to enter upon the subject private property or premises,
without giving prior notice, and take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or
restore the property. The department is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in
Section 7.5.
7.2 Notice of Violation
Whenever the department finds that a violation of this ordinance has occurred, the department
may order compliance by written notice of violation.
(1) The notice of violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the alleged violator; and
Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia
Page 11 of 15
(b) The address when available or a description of the building, structure, premises or
land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; and
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation; and
(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this
ordinance and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; and
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the
person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and,
(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the department
by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days of service of notice of
violation.
(2) Such notice of violation may require without limitation:
(a) The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting;
(b) The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections;
(c) That violations of this ordinance shall cease and desist;
(d) The abatement of non-stormwater discharges, the remediation of land or the
effects of pollution, and the restoration of any affected property to its unaffected
condition;
(e) Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and,
(f) The implementation of pollution prevention practices; and
(g) The development and provision to the department of written remediation or action
plan's; and
(h) The development and provision to the department of documents showing the
location and discharge points of conveyances, pipes, channels, or drains; and
(i) Any other actions that will lead to the remedy of a condition of violation of this
ordinance.
7.3 Appeal of Notice of Violation
Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the director or his
designee. The notice of appeal must be received by the department within thirty (30) days from
the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal before the director shall take place
within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the director shall
be final.
7.4 Enforcement Measures
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of
Violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 3 days of the decision of the director upholding the
decision of the director or his designee, then, in addition to any other remedies that may be
available, representatives of the department or its contractors may enter upon the subject private
premises, property or facility, where they are then authorized to take any and all actions or
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. Such measures or actions
shall include but not be limited to repairs, maintenance, containment, cleanup and remediation. It
shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises, property or facility to refuse to allow the department or designated contractor to enter
upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
7.5 Costs of Abatement of the Violation
Within 10 working days after abatement of the violation by the department or its contractors, the
owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs.
The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the
assessment within 10 working days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within thirty
(30) days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within thirty (30) days after a
decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and
shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason
of such violation.
7.6 Criminal Penalties
For violations of this ordinance, the department may issue a citation to the alleged violator
requiring such person to appear in a court of competent jurisdiction to answer charges for such
violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation
shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
7.7 Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is a threat to public
health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be
abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law.
7.8 Remedies Not Exclusive
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any
applicable federal, state or local law and the department may seek cumulative remedies.
The department may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses. If the amount due is
Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia
Page 13 of 15
not paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of a notice requiring payment of such costs, or if an
appeal is taken, within thirty (30) days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a
special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount
of the assessment.
Section 8 Variances
8.1 Variance Circumstances
(1) The director or his designee may grant a variance from the requirements of this ordinance
if exceptional circumstances applicable to a site or premises exist such that strict
adherence to the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship and will
not fulfill the intent of the ordinance. Specifically, such variances may be granted in such
individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the director or his designee
that:
(a) There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular site
in question; and
(b) The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the impact on upstream and
downstream properties; and
(c) The application of the ordinance to this particular site would create an
unnecessary hardship; and
(d) Such conditions are peculiar to the particular site involved; and
(e) Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the site owner; and
(f) Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor
impair the purposes or intent of this ordinance.
(2) A written request for a variance shall be required and shall state the specific variance
sought and the reasons, with supporting data, that a variance should be granted. The
request shall include all information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance.
(3) The director or his designee will conduct a review of the request for a variance within 30
working days of receiving the request.
BE IT ORDAINED that this ordinance becomes effective upon its adoption.
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that all regulations or parts of regulations in conflict with this
resolution are hereby rescinded to the extent of said conflict.
IT IS SO ORDAINED this 9th day of May, 2005.
____________________________
Steve, Edwards Councilmember
____________________________
Marc Cohen, Councilmember
Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill, Georgia
Page 15 of 15
____________________________
Clint Thompson, Councilmember
____________________________
Nick Thompson, Councilmember
____________________________
Ron Johnson, Councilmember
ATTEST:
_________________________
Jane Whittington, City Clerk
Submitted to Mayor: ___________________
Approved by the Mayor this ____ day of May, 2005
____________________________
Gary Pirkle, Mayor




























Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 1 of 14
The City of Sugar Hill Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Ordinance
Adopted: December 11, 2017
Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 2 of 14
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SUGAR HILL
THAT THE CITY OF SUGAR HILL SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL ORDINANCE
AND ALL AMENDMENTS BE DELETED IN ITS ENTIRETY, AND REPLACED WITH THE
FOLLOWING TEXT:
SECTION I TITLE
This ordinance will be known as “The City of Sugar Hill Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance.”
SECTION II DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance, unless otherwise
specifically stated:
1. Best Management Practices (BMP’s): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to
prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than,
those practices contained in the “Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia’ published by the
Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted.
2. Board: The Board of Natural Resources.
3. Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation,
which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.
4. Certified Personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved
by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
5. Commission: The State Soil & Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC).
6. CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sedimentation Control with current certification by EnviroCert,
Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc.
7. Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation;
the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation.
8. Department: The Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
9. Design Professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of engineering, architecture,
landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in
Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals
shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional
licensure.Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative.
10. District: The Gwinnett County Soil and Water Conservation District.
11. Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources.
12. Drainage Structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or
other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a
release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.
13. Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
14. Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A.
Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best
management practices, and requirements in section IV.C. of this ordinance.
15. Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original
ground surface or an excavation.
16. Final Stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas
and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill
cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in
permanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered
with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas) or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as
defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate
for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction.
17. Finished Grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the
proposed design.
18. Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting,
filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled
condition.
19. Ground Elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.
20. Land-Disturbing Activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the
movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing,
Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 3 of 14
dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as
described in Section III, Paragraph 5.
21. Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct
construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph,
“plan” means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch,
advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such
as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a
specific plot.
22. Local Issuing Authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to
subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8.
23. Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et.seq., which
addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage
basins.
24. Natural Ground Surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.
25. Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical
techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This
technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended
particles are present.
26. NOI: A Notice of Intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the State General Permit.
27. NOT: A Notice of Termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the General Permit.
28. Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and
specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day
operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation
and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers
at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion , sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply
with other permit conditions.
29. Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or
site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water.
30. Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this
ordinance.
31. Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate,
commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other
political subdivision of this State, any interstate body or any other legal entity.
32. Phase or Phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed
and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site.
33. Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.
34. Properly Designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specification contained in the
“Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia” (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water
Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and
amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal.
35. Roadway Drainage Structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually
nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway
by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without
shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.
36. Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been
moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.
37. Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water,
wind, ice or gravity.
38. Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan: An erosion and sedimentation control plan approved
in writing by the Gwinnett County soil and water conservation district.
39. Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of
temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the
resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.
40. State General Permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or
permits for storm-water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued
in the future pursuant to the state’s authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code
Section 12-5-30.
41. State Waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs,
wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the
Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 4 of 14
boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of
a single individual, partnership, or corporation.
42. Structural Erosion and Sedimentation Control Practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or
sediment- producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing
the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss.
Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level
spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such
practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.
43. Trout Streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife
Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water
Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6
at www.gaedp.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a selfsustaining
population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those
in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the
year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs.
44. Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or
sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with:
a. Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or
b. Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
c. Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.
45. Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert,
drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which
has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason
of overflow or floodwater.
46. Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar
areas.
SECTION III EXEMPTIONS
This ordinance shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the
following:
1. Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968";
2. Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying;
3. Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance
work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion;
4. The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a
part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one
(1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such
residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For
single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone
between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the
Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed
between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action
from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet,
and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at
least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a
trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams
flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall
be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by
this paragraph shall be enforced by the Local Issuing Authority;
5. Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of
products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed
for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and
rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys;
Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 5 of 14
producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry,
eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds;
6. Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry
practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in
paragraphs (15) and (16) of Section IV C. of this ordinance, no other land-disturbing activities, except for
normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices
were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices;
7. Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
of the United States Department of Agriculture;
8. Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not
apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned
disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for
purposes of this paragraph, “State Waters” excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only
during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround;
provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre,
which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage
way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is
located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from
regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this
section;
9. Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the
Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or
any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided,
however that construction or maintenance projects of Department of Transportation or State Road and Tollway
Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-
7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and
Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development
or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit
shall be submitted to the Local Issuing Authority, the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the
minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be
subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders;
10. Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system
or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the
regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in
O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation,
transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical
system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility
under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as
defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation,
transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common
plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall
enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been
issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and
11. Any public water system reservoir.
SECTION IV MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION, AND SEDIMENTATION, AND POLLUTION
CONTROL USING BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements
of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities
which are not exempted by this ordinance shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and
sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the
minimum requirements of Section IV B. & C. of this ordinance. The application of measures and practices shall
apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary
and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation
Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 6 of 14
pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and
the NPDES General Permit.
B. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS/BMPs
1. Best management practices as set forth in Section IV B. & C. of this ordinance shall be required for all landdisturbing
activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall
constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with
paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of
stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act".
As used in this subsection the terms "proper design” and “properly designed” mean designed in accordance
with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the “Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in
Georgia” specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b).
2. A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been
properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing
permit issued by a local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to
subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such
discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25)
nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10)
nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall
be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to
any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger
common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or
greater than five (5) acres.
3. Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any
land- disturbing permit issued by a Local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the
Division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for
each day on which such failure occurs.
4. The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent
monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities
occur.
5. The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in C. 15. and 16., in light of O.C.G.A. §
12-7-6 (c).
C.The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of
governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general
permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and
minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices
contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water
Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as
the following:
1. Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to
minimize erosion;
2. Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum;
3. Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion
potential;
4. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented;
5. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum;
6. Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;
7. Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development;
8. Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable;
9. To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment
basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a
disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements
of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq.;
10. Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations
or the sloping of fills;
11. Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property;
12. Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely
affect other property owners;
Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 7 of 14
13. Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods
are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum;
14. Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or
control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site
or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in Section IV B. 2. of this
ordinance;
15. Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks
of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal
stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as
protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to
O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed,
provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and
are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake
Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term ‘ephemeral
stream’ means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short
duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above ground-water table year round; for
which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of
water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established
pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain
in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following
requirements shall apply to any such buffer:
a. No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural,
undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed.
Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as
long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural
canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any
person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract
with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long
as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy
is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and
b. The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an
angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a
width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures
are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for
water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and
16. There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been
wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout
streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except
where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed ; provided, however, that small springs and streams
classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have
a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule
providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the
downstream landowner’s property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent
trout streams. The Director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided
that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are
implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer:
a. No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural,
undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are
completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of
vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat
and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however,
that any person constructing a single–family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under
contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any
time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a
natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and
b. The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an
angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a
width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures
Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 8 of 14
are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for
water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines.
D. Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 et. seq. shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and
regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum
requirements in Section IV B. & C. of this ordinance.
E. The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of
another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in
this ordinance or the terms of the permit.
SECTION V APPLICATION/PERMIT PROCESS
A. GENERAL
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the
general development plans. The Local Issuing Authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area
surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance,
flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land
within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only
parties who may obtain a permit.
B. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
1. No person shall conduct any land- disturbing activity within the City of Sugar Hill jurisdictional boundaries
without first obtaining a permit from the Department of Planning and Development to perform such activity
and providing a copy of Notice of Intent submitted to EPD if applicable.
2. The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Development and must
include the applicant’s erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary.
Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in Section V C. of this ordinance. Erosion,
sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that
the land disturbing activity purposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of Section IV B.
& C. of this ordinance will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by
three (3) copies of the applicant’s erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall
contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of
the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10.
3. A fee, in the amount of $ (see Fee Schedule at the Department of Planning and Development) shall be
charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area.
4. In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of
O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and
these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for
each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All
applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified
pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division;
except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or
(10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the Division, regardless of the existence of a Local
Issuing Authority in the jurisdiction.
5. Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the Local Issuing Authority shall refer the
application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the
erosion and sedimentation control plan. A District shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of
receipt. Failure of a District to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The
results of the District review shall be forwarded to the Local Issuing Authority. No permit will be issued
unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances required by Section IV C. 15. & 16have
been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per Section V B. 7., have been obtained.
Such review will not be required if the Local Issuing Authority and the District have entered into an
agreement which allows the Local Issuing Authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without
referring the application and plan to the District. The Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority
shall approve or disapprove a revised Plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the Local Issuing
Authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised
Plan submittal.
Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 9 of 14
6. If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the
Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application
under consideration, the Local Issuing Authority may deny the permit application.
7. The Local Issuing Authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government
security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per
acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant
does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the Local Issuing
Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor
to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not
apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of
any determination or order of the Local Issuing Authority with respect to alleged permit violations.
a. The City of Sugar Hill shall require the posting of a bond before any permits are granted pursuant to this
ordinance. The required bond may be posted in any the following methods or in a combination of
methods: Cash, Irrevocable letter of credit, or Government security. The required bond shall be in the
amount of Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or portion of an acre disturbed. The procedure
for the forfeiture of the required bond for failure to comply with this ordinance is set forth in Section VII
C. of this ordinance.
b. The bond shall be in the format required by the City as shown in Appendix A.
C. PLAN REQUIREMENTS
1. Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Section IV B. & C. of this
ordinance, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound
conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby
incorporated by reference into this ordinance. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the
interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed,
vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and
storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive
computation shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land
development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing
activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of
involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the
Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20.
2. Data Required for Site Plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion,
Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the Commission as of January 1
of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted.
D. PERMITS
1. Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days
after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are
obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall
include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken.
2. No permit shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan
has been approved by the District and the Local Issuing Authority has affirmatively determined that the plan
is in compliance with this ordinance, any variances required by Section IV C. 15. & 16. are obtained,
bonding requirements, if necessary, as per Section V B. 7., are met and all ordinances and rules and
regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority are met. If the permit
is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant.
3. Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this
ordinance, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the
Division shall enforce such requirements upon the Local Issuing Authority.
4. If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase.
5. The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the Local Issuing Authority, as to all or any portion
of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance
with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in
violation of this ordinance. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any
portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit.
6. The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits
or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the
application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7 (f) (1).
Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 10 of 14
SECTION VI INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. The Department of Planning and Development will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for
which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and
if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the Local
Issuing Authority shall regulate primary, secondary, and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state
general permit. Primary permitees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management
practices where the primary permitee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permitees shall be
responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is
conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for the installation and
maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is
deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the
approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply shall
be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall
state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing
activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance.
B. The Local Issuing Authority must amend its ordinance to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any
amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975.
C. The Department of Planning and Development shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may
reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at
reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of
land-disturbing activities.
D. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the Local Issuing Authority,
the Commission, the District, or Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents
appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in
the process of carrying out his official duties.
E. The Districts or the Commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities
which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a). The Districts or the
Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving
the effectiveness of the county’s or municipality’s erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The
District or the Commission shall notify the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found.
F. The Division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as
Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to Code Section 12-7-8 (a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited
to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority’s ordinance and review of
conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates
that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a) has not
administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement
entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7 (e), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or
municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days
within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a Local Issuing Authority. If the
county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division,
the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a Local Issuing Authority.
SECTION VII PENALTIES AND INCENTIVES
A. FAILURE TO OBTAIN A PERMIT FOR LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY
If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in
this ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business
license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities
within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority.
B. STOP-WORK ORDERS
1. For the first and second violations of the provisions of this ordinance, the Director or the Local Issuing
Authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the
Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 11 of 14
violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall
issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action
or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public
health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary
permit, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a
warning;
2. For a third and each subsequent violation, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an
immediate stop-work order; and;
3. All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary
corrective action or mitigation has occurred.
4. When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or
significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his or
her Designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have
not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the Local Issuing
Authority or by the Director or his or her Designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately
upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such
stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation
and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls.
C. BOND FORFEITURE
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to
comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall
set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which
such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply
within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties,
shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of
Section V B. 7. The Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may
use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into
compliance. The following procedure shall be instituted:
a. A written notice stating that a failure to comply with this ordinance shall be served upon the person to whom
the permit was issued. The written notice shall contain the following: (1) a description of the problem that
constitutes a failure to comply, (2) the measures necessary to achieve compliance and (3) a specific date and
time by which compliance must be obtained.
b. If compliance has not occurred before the date and time specified in the written notice, the permittee shall be
deemed in violation of this ordinance and all remedies under this ordinance shall be available to the City.
The bond required under Section V B. 7. shall be deemed forfeited upon failure to comply within the time
frame allowed by the written notice.
c. In order to use the forfeited bond, the City must send written notice to the permitee stating that the bond has
been forfeited by the failure to obtain compliance within the specified time. The notice of bond forfeiture
shall include information concerning the appeal of the automatic forfeiture. The notice shall state that an
appeal must be filed with the Clerk of Court for the Sugar Hill Municipal Court within 10 days of the date of
the notice of bond forfeiture. The notice shall state that if an appeal is not filed within 10 days of the date of
the notice of bond forfeiture, the City will use the bond to obtain compliance with the City’s ordinance.
d. Any appeal shall be heard by the Sugar Hill Municipal Court at is next regularly scheduled court date or a
specially set court date. An appeal of the decision of the Sugar Hill Municipal Court must be filed in the
Gwinnett County Superior Court under the Writ of Certiorari process.
MONETARY PENALTIES
Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance, or any permit condition or limitation established
pursuant to this ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or
emergency order of the Director issued as provided in this ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to
exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, notwithstanding any
provisions in any City charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to
exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed
for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases
brought as violations of this ordinance under county ordinances approved under this ordinance shall be
authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during
which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation.
Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 12 of 14
SECTION VIII EDUCATION AND CERTIFICATION
A. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or
any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on
their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division
and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20.
B. For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary,
secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimumone person
who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person
and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission
present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be
defined as any land-disturbing site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale
permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit.
C. Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified
personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance.
D. If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the
certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person of entity
involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee
shall meet those education requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19
and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph.
SECTION IX ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL JUDICIAL REVIEW
A. ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the Issuing Authority upon
finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the
holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the
person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the City of Sugar Hill Municipal Court
within thirty (30) days after receipt by the Issuing Authority of written notice of appeal.
B. JUDICIAL REVIEW
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Issuing Authority, after exhausting his administrative
remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
SECTION X EFFECTIVITY, VALIDITY AND LIABILITY
A. EFFECTIVITY
This ordinance shall become effective on the 10th day of October, 2016.
B. VALIDITY
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held
unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
C. LIABILITY
1. Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this ordinance, nor the compliancewith provisions of
this ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise
imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the Local Issuing Authority or District for damage to any
person or property.
2. The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of
another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for
in this ordinance or the terms of the permit.
3. No provision of this ordinance shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act
of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved
thereunder or pollute any Waters of the State as defined thereby.
Soil Erosion and SedimentationControl Ordinance Amendment December 2017 Page 13 of 14
APPENDIX A
City of Sugar Hill, Georgia
SOIL EROSION & SEDIMENTATION CONTROL MAINTENANCE/PERFORMANCE BOND
Bond No.: ________
KNOW ALL THOSE BY THESE PRESENTS, that we ________________________________________, hereinafter called the
Principal and __________________________________________, as Surety, are held and firmly bound unto the CITY OF
SUGAR HILL, GEORGIA, hereinafter called the City, in the just and full sum of _________________________________Dollars
($___________) to the payment of which, well and truly to be made, the said Principal and Surety bind themselves, their
respective heirs, administrators, executors, successors and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly by these presents.
The said Principal has heretofore received authorization from the City for development and construction of Residential and
Non-Residential Development for _____________________________;
As a condition precedent to the approval, the Principal is required to undertake on-site and erosion control improvements, in
a manner which is set forth and specified in the approval as executed by the City. If full implementation of the approved plan
does not provide for effective erosion control measures, additional erosion control and sedimentation measures shall be
implemented by the Principal to control or treat the sediment source;
This agreement shall be governed by the laws of the state of Georgia;
The maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices, whether, temporary or permanent,
shall be at all times the responsibility of the Principal. In the event that the Principal fails to maintain compliance with the
approved plan or with the requirements of the City of Sugar Hill Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance the
proceeds of the bond shall be used by the City of Sugar Hill to stabilize the site and otherwise bring the site into compliance;
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION is such, that if the above bounded Principal
shall well and truly keep, do and perform each and every, all and singular, the matters and things in said approval, then this
obligation shall be null and void; otherwise shall remain in full force and effect. The bond shall remain in full force and effect
until permanent stabilization and satisfactory removal of temporary erosion control measures has occurred, as verified by
the City of Sugar Hill Department of Planning and Development in writing or 18 months from the issuance of a Final Plat or
Certificate of Occupancy.
IT IS HEREBY UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED that the total sum due under this bond shall not exceed the sum as stated above.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this instrument has been executed by the duly authorized representatives of the Principal and
Surety.
SIGNED, SEALED AND DATED this ______ day of _____________, 20____.
Attest: By:_____________________________(SEAL)
Principal
_________________________________
Corporate Secretary ________________________________
Printed Name and Title
Attest: By:_____________________________(SEAL)
Principal
_________________________________
Corporate Secretary _________________________________
Printed Name and Title

Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 1 of 15
ORDINANCE
WHEREAS, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Sugar Hill find that buffers adjacent to
streams provide numerous benefits including:
• Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of
streams and their water resources
• Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater
• Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation
• Protecting and stabilizing streams banks
• Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff
• Maintaining base flow of streams
• Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem
• Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat
• Providing riparian wildlife habitat
• Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity
• Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace
WHEREAS, the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District recommends the adoption
of a Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance equivalent to or better than their Model Stream Buffer
Protection Ordinance; and,
WHEREAS, the Mayor and City Council finds that the purpose of the following Stream Buffer
Protection Ordinance is to protect the health, safety, environment, convenience, order, prosperity
and the general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City of Sugar Hill; to minimize
public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water
quality by provisions designed to:
• Create buffer zones along the streams of the City of Sugar Hill for the protection of water
resources; and
• Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements
and by requiring authorization for any such activities.
NOW THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED that the Mayor and City Council of the City
of Sugar Hill adopt the following as the Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar
Hill.
Article 1. Title
This ordinance shall be known as the “Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar
Hill.”
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 2 of 15
Article 2. Definitions.
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of a stream in its existing or
enhanced state of vegetation (established by Subsection 4.1.1 herein).
Department means the City of Sugar Hill Department of Planning and Development.
Director means the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or the director’s
designee.
Impervious Cover or Impervious Surface means any paved, hardened or structural surface,
including but not limited to, buildings, dams, decks, driveways, parking areas, patios, streets,
swimming pools, tennis courts, walkways, and other structures..
Land Development means 1. (verb) All activities associated with the conversion of land or the
expansion or replacement of an existing use to any new use intended for human operation, occupancy or
habitation, other than for agricultural purposes devoted strictly to the cultivation of the land, dairying or
animal husbandry. Such activities include land disturbance (clearing and grubbing the land of
vegetation and stumps, and grading) and the construction of improvements such as but not limited to
streets, driveways or parking areas, water or sewer mains, storm water drainage facilities, sidewalks or
other structures permanently placed on or in the property. 2. (noun) Where appropriate to the context,
the term "development" also may be used to denote a specific subdivision or project which is a single
entity or intended to be constructed as in interrelated whole, whether simultaneously or in phases.
Land Development Activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in
land development.
Land Disturbance means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the
movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to,
clearing, clearing and grubbing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not
including agricultural practices.
Land Disturbance Activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in
land disturbance.
Floodplain means those lands subject to flooding, which would have at least a one percent
probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as
shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood.
Lot or Parcel means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or
as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon.
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 3 of 15
Permit means the permit issued by the Department of Planning and Development required for
undertaking land development activity.
Perennial Stream means a watercourse having a source, terminus, banks and channel through
which water flows on a continuous basis as depicted on the most recent United States Geological
Survey 7.5-minute quadrangle map (scale 1:24,000).
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private
corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state
agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, interstate body or any
other legal entity.
Protection Area, or Stream Protection Area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas
of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream.
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment.
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by Subsection 4.1.2 extending beyond
any buffer applicable to the stream.
Stream means any stream, beginning at:
1. The location where the normal stream flow has wrested the vegetation. The normal
stream flow is any flow that consists solely of base flow or consists of both base flow
and direct runoff during any period of the year. Base flow results from the
groundwater that enters the stream channel through the soil. This includes spring
flows into streams. Direct runoff is the water entering stream channels promptly
after rainfall or snow melts; or
2. A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 20 acres or more; or
3. Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 20
acres, the Department of Planning and Development may require field studies to
verify the existence of a stream.
Stream Bank means the confining cut of a stream channel.
Stream Channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream.
Trail, Multi-use means a hard surface (concrete, asphalt, boardwalk, etc.) transportation structure
specifically constructed for alternative transportation such as walking, biking, roller blading, etc.
and not intended to transport motorized vehicles such as cars, trucks, motorcycles, etc.
Utility means a public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations,
electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 4 of 15
facilities, storm water systems and railroads or other utilities identified by Gwinnett County.
Watercourse means any natural or artificial waterway, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal,
conduit, culvert, drain, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or
intermittently, having a definite channel, bed and bank, and included any area adjacent thereto which
is subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.”
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream.
Article 3. Applicability
This ordinance shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream
protection area as defined in Article 2 of this ordinance. These requirements are in addition to, and
do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and
approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer
requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations.
After the effective date of this ordinance, this ordinance shall apply to new subdividing and platting
activities.
3.1 Grandfather Provisions
This ordinance shall not apply to the following activities:
3.1.1 Work consisting of the repair, maintenance or replacement within the same
disturbed area of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on
or before the effective date of this ordinance.
3.1.2 Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not
limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn
maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such
properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements.
3.1.3 Any lawful land development activity that is under construction, has a valid permit,
or has submitted a valid and complete application for a permit as of the effective
date of this ordinance provided that the permit is or can be issued within 90
calendar days of the effective date of this ordinance and all time frames associated
with said permit are observed.
3.1.4 Any lawful land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but
that is part of a larger master development plan, such as a house in a subdivision or
a building in an office park or other phased development that has a valid
Preliminary Plat Permit per Subsection 3.1.3 herein, or approved Concept Plan, or
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 5 of 15
has submitted a valid and complete application for approval of a Concept Plan and
receives approval within 90 calendar days as of the effective date of this ordinance
provided that the future permit is or can be issued within 2 calendar years of the
effective date of this ordinance and all time frames associated with said permit are
observed.
3.2. Exemptions
The following specific activities are exempt from this ordinance, however any activity
within a state waters’ buffer must meet State requirements:
3.2.1 Activities for the purpose of building one of the following:
- a stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route including but not limited
to bike paths and pedestrian trails, or utility line;
- public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures;
- land development necessary to provide access to a property;
- public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks,
foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks;
- unpaved foot trails and paths;
- activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality
and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering
techniques are used.
3.2.2 Public sewer line installation in easements running parallel with the stream where
necessary, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land
disturbance within a state waters’ buffer must meet State requirements. This
includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance
of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures.
This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads or
other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except
for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection 3.2.1, above.
3.2.3 Land development activities within a dedicated transportation right-of-way existing
at the time this ordinance takes effect or approved under the terms of this
ordinance.
3.2.4 Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this ordinance takes effect or
approved under the terms of this ordinance, land disturbance activities and such
impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility,
including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures.
3.2.5 Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when
emergency work is performed under this subsection, the person performing it shall
report such work to the Department of Planning and Development on the next
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 6 of 15
business day after commencement of the work. Within 10 business days thereafter,
the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period
as may be determined by the Department of Planning and Development to be
reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have
caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection
area.
3.2.6 Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or
agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such
activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited,
then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management
practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the
activities that intruded on the buffer.
3.2.7 Multi-use trails no more than 12 feet in width and activities related to construction
of a multi-use trail no more than 12 feet in width, provided the trail complies with
the requirements of the City of Sugar Hill Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control
Ordinance.
3.2.8 Detention/Water Quality ponds provided said ponds comply with all other local,
state and federal requirements including but limited to the Floodplain Management
Ordinance, the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, U.S Army Corp
of Engineers wetlands regulations
Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity
proposed on a property.
Article 4. Land Development Requirements
4.1. Buffer and Setback Requirements
All land development activity subject to this ordinance shall meet the following
requirements:
4.1.1 An undisturbed buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on
both banks of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. The land
forming the bank is also considered part of the buffer for purposes of this
ordinance.
4.1.2 An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally,
beyond the undisturbed buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited.
Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback.
4.1.3 The location of septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall comply with Gwinnett
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 7 of 15
County Board of Health Environmental Health Section regulations.
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious
cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted
pursuant to Section 4.2 herein.
4.2. Variance Procedures
Variance requests from the requirements of this ordinance shall be submitted on an application
form as prescribed by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or the
director’s designee, along with such fees as shall be established by the City Council. The
Director of the Department of Planning and Development or the director’s designee shall
coordinate the review of each variance request with all other affected City departments and
shall summarize such comments or recommendations as may be received by the Mayor and
Council for action in their normal course of business. The review must include a
recommendation from the Department of Planning and Development.
This section describes how to apply for a variance from this ordinance; however, any
activity within a state waters’ buffer must meet State requirements
Variances may be granted in accordance with the following provisions:
4.2.1 Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and it is not
specifically exempted from this ordinance, and its shape, topography or other
existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this
ordinance, and the Department of Planning and Development finds and determines
that the requirements of this ordinance prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the
property by the owner, the Mayor and Council may grant a variance from the
buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require
mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the
parcel. The Mayor and Council are authorized to use a consent agenda to fulfill the
terms of this Subsection.
4.2.2 Except as provided above, the Mayor and Council shall grant no variance from any
provision of this ordinance without first conducting a public hearing on the
application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an
affirmative vote of the Mayor and Council. The Department of Planning and
Development shall follow the Public Hearing, or “notice”, requirements for a
variance to be heard by the Mayor and Council as provided in the City of Sugar
Hill Zoning Ordinance.
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this ordinance,
actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a
hardship on that property.
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 8 of 15
Variances will be considered only in the following cases:
4.2.2.1 The applicant provides evidence that impacts to the buffer have been
avoided or minimized to the fullest extent practicable; and
4.2.2.2 The project involves the construction or repair of a structure which, by its
nature, must be located within the buffer. Such structures include dams
and detention/retention ponds; or
4.2.2.3 Paved recreational foot trails and viewing areas, providing that impacts to
the buffer are minimal; or
4.2.2.4 The proposed land disturbing activity within the buffer will receive a
permit from the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) under
Section 404 of the federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of
1972, 33 U.S.C. Section 1344, and the Corps of Engineers has received a
mitigation plan to be implemented as a condition of such a permit. In
addition, land disturbing activities in the buffer that are outside the
USACE’s jurisdiction must be mitigated; or
4.2.2.5 The buffer intrusion is mitigated using the procedure established in the
Gwinnett County Storm Water Design Manual; or
4.2.2.6 A valid and complete application for rezoning of the property is
submitted prior to the effective date of this ordinance and approval of the
rezoning by the City Council occurs after the effective date of this
ordinance application, and the variance request is consistent with the
intent of this Ordinance factoring into account the property owner's
reliance on standards in effect at the time of the rezoning; or
4.2.2.7 The property is part of a larger master development that has a concept
plan previously approved by the City Council through the rezoning
process, but does not meet the requirements of 3.1.4 herein as of the
effective date of this Ordinance, and the variance request is consistent
with the intent of this Ordinance factoring into account the property
owner's reliance on standards in effect at the time of the rezoning.
4.2.3 At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information:
4.2.3.1 A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain
boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey;
4.2.3.2 A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and
other physical characteristics of the property;
4.2.3.3 A dated site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed
structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and
proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and
setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately
and clearly indicated;
4.2.3.4 Documentation that impacts to the buffer have been avoided or
minimized to the fullest extent practicable;
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 9 of 15
4.2.3.5 A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion;
4.2.3.6 A stormwater management site plan, if applicable;
4.2.3.7 Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is
proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being
proposed;
4.2.3.8 A description of the project, with details of the buffer disturbance,
including estimated length of time for the disturbance and justification
for why the disturbance is necessary;
4.2.3.9 Any other reasonable information related to the project that the
Department of Planning and Development may deem necessary to
effectively evaluate the variance request;
4.2.3.10 A copy of the permit application, supporting documentation, and
proposed mitigation plan as submitted to the United States Army Corps
of Engineers under Section 404 of the federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendment of 1972, 33 U.S.C. Section 1344, if applicable;
4.2.3.11 A copy of the permit application, supporting documentation, and
proposed mitigation plan as submitted to the Georgia Environmental
Protection Division for a variance from the state waters’ buffer; and
4.2.3.12 A buffer mitigation plan in accordance with the procedure outlined in the
Gwinnett County Storm Water Design Manual.
4.2.4 The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a
variance:
4.2.4.1 The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical
characteristics of the property;
4.2.4.2 The locations of all streams on the property, including along property
boundaries as determined from field inspection;
4.2.4.3 The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and,
4.2.4.4 Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or
no intrusion;
4.2.4.5 The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed
variance;
4.2.4.6 Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural
resources and the environment;
4.2.4.7 The value of mitigation activities as calculated in accordance with the
Gwinnett County Storm Water Design Manual.
Article 5. Additional Information Requirements for Development on Buffer Zone
Properties
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the
following:
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 10 of 15
5.1 A site plan showing:
6.1.1 The location of all streams on the property;
6.1.2 Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property;
6.1.3 Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than two (2)-foot contour
intervals;
6.1.4 Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and,
6.1.5 Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed
impervious cover within the setback;
5.2 Description
A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and,
5.3 Documentation
Any other documentation that the Department of Public Utilities may reasonably deem
necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is
addressed in the approval process.
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan
approval.
Article 6. Responsibility
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with
the provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed
by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to
impose any liability upon the City of Sugar Hill, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to
persons or property.
Article 7. Inspection
The Department of Planning and Development may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or
setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following
completion of the work. The permittee shall assist representatives of the department in making such
inspections. The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his or her designee
shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as he or she may reasonably deem necessary
to carry out the duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time
upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any
land development activities within the protection area.
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry
for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct,
hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties.
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 11 of 15
Article 8. Violations, Enforcement and Penalties
Any action or inaction that violates the provisions of this ordinance or the requirements of an approved
plan or permit shall be subject to the enforcement actions or penalties outlined herein. Any such action
or inaction that is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and also may be
abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the enforcement actions or
penalties described herein shall not prevent such equitable relief.
8.1 Enforcement Procedures
The following are the enforcement procedures authorized by this ordinance. In the event the
owner or responsible person fails to correct the violations after the deadline contained in the
Notice of Violation, the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or the
director’s designee are authorized to take or impose any one or more of the additional actions
contained herein.
8.1.1 Notices of Violation
Enforcement shall begin with the issuance of a written Notice of Violation to the
owner or responsible person by the Director of the Department of Planning and
Development or the director’s designee. The notice may be delivered personally or
sent by first class mail. The Notice of Violation shall contain at least the following
information:
8.1.1.1 The name and address of the owner or responsible person;
8.1.1.2 The location or address of the site upon which the violation is occurring;
8.1.1.3 A description of the nature of the violation;
8.1.1.4 A description of the remedial actions or measures necessary to bring an
action or inaction into compliance with a permit, approved plan or this
ordinance;
8.1.1.5 The deadline or completion date of any such remedial actions or measures;
8.1.1.6 A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the
owner or responsible person to whom the Notice of Violation is directed.
8.1.2 Stop Work Orders.
The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or the director’s
designee is authorized to issue Stop Work Orders to an owner or responsible person.
Stop Work Orders are effective immediately and shall remain in effect until the
necessary corrective actions or remedial measures as set forth in the Notice of
Violation have occurred. Stop Work Orders may be withdrawn or modified by the
Director of the Department of Planning and Development or the director’s designee in
order to enable an owner or responsible person to take necessary remedial actions or
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 12 of 15
measures to correct the violations.
8.1.3 Refusal to Issue Certificates of Occupancy or Completion.
The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or the director’s
designee is authorized to refuse to issue Certificates of Occupancy or Completion
for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on a site
until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures as
set forth in the Notice of Violation or has otherwise corrected the violations
described therein.
8.1.4 Suspension, Revocation, or Modification of Permit.
The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or the director’s
designee is authorized to suspend, revoke or modify a permit that was issued
authorizing land disturbing activities or development. The Director of the
Department of Planning and Development or the director’s designee is authorized to
reinstate a suspended, revoked or modified permit after the owner or responsible
person has taken the remedial actions or measures stated in the Notice of Violation
or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. The Director of the
Department of Planning and Development or the director’s designee is also
authorized to reinstate such permit, which may include conditions as the Director of
the Department of Planning and Development or the director’s designee may deem
necessary, to enable the owner or responsible person to take the necessary remedial
actions or measures to correct the violations.
8.1.5 Refusal to Approve Final Subdivision Plats.
The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or the director’s
designee is authorized to refuse to approve Final Plats until the owner or
responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures set forth in the
Notice of Violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein.
8.1.6 Issuance of Citations or Summons to Court.
The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or the director’s
designee is authorized to issue a citation or summons to the owner or responsible
person requiring such person to appear in a court of competent jurisdiction to
answer charges for violations of this ordinance.
8.2 Legal Penalties and/or Remedies.
8.2.1 Fine and/or Sentence.
Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any
provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of
the City and shall be punished either by a fine not less than $100 per day and not
greater than $1,000 per day, or by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 60
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 13 of 15
days in jail, or both a fine and jail or work alternate. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
8.2.2 Other Legal Remedies.
In any case in which a violation of this ordinance has occurred, the City, in
addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order,
injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding
through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such
unlawful use or activity.
8.3 Petition
In any case in which any land is, or is proposed to be, used or activities are undertaken in
violation of this ordinance or any amendment thereto adopted by the City Council, the City, in
addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction,
abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of
competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity.
Article 9. Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review
9.1 Administration
This ordinance shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by the Director of the
Department of Planning and Development or the director’s designee.
9.2 Administrative Appeal
Appeals of the interpretation by the Director of the Department of Planning and Development
or the director’s designee of the requirements of this ordinance shall first be submitted in
writing (on a form provided by the Department of Planning and Development) to the Director
who shall review the request in a timely manner and receive comments from other affected
departments. Such appeal shall be made within fifteen days after the decision to be appealed.
The appeal thereupon shall be forwarded to the Mayor and Council for action in their normal
course of business.
9.3 Judicial Review
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the Director of the Department of Planning
and Development or the director’s designee, after exhausting all administrative remedies,
shall have the right to appeal certiorari to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
Article 10. Adoption and Amendment
10.1 Effective Date
10.1.1 This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon the date of adoption by the City
Council of the City of Sugar Hill and shall apply to any land disturbance permit for
Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Sugar Hill
_________________________________________________________________
Page 14 of 15
which an application is received after the effective date of this ordinance.
10.1.2 Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to affect the validity of any building
permit lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
10.2 Amendments
10.2.1 This ordinance may be amended from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council
of the City of Sugar Hill. Such amendments shall be effective as of their date of
adoption unless otherwise stated in the adopting resolution.
10.2.2 Any subdivision or other project for which a valid and complete application for a
Development Permit shall have been received prior to the adoption of an amendment
to this ordinance may, at the developer's option, proceed to completion and building
permits may be issued as though no amendment had been approved, provided that the
Development Permit is or can be issued within 90 calendar days of said amendment
and all time frames associated with said permit are observed.
10.2.3 Any subdivision or other project for which a Development Permit has been issued
prior to the adoption of an amendment to this ordinance may, at the developer's option,
proceed to completion and building permits may be issued as though no amendment
had been approved.
10.2.4 Any subdivision or other project for which only a Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, or
Grading Permit shall have been issued prior to adoption of an amendment to this
ordinance shall be brought into conformance with the amendment (if applicable) prior
to issuance of a Development Permit.
10.2.5 No amendment to this ordinance shall be construed to affect the validity of any
building permit lawfully issued prior to the adoption of said amendment.

The 1997
BUFFER, LANDSCAPE,
TREE ORDINANCE
The City of Sugar Hill, Georgia
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Table of Contents
City of Sugar Hill i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTENT, PURPOSE AND TITLE 1.1
1.1 INTENT 1.1
1.2 PURPOSE 1.1
1.3 TITLE 1.1
2. DEFINITIONS 2.1
2.1 DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES 2.1
3. BUFFER REGULATIONS 3.1
3.1 APPLICABILITY 3.1
3.2 STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT BUFFERS 3.1
3.3 STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION BUFFERS 3.3
4. LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS 4.1
4.1 APPLICABILITY 4.1
4.2 LANDSCAPE STRIP PLANTING REQUIREMENTS 4.1
4.3 OFF-STREET PARKING LOT PLANTING REQUIREMENTS 4.3
4.4 NO-ACCESS EASEMENT SCREENING REQUIREMENTS 4.4
5. TREE PRESERVATION AND TREE REPLACEMENT REGULATIONS 5.1
5.1 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS 5.1
TABLE A SUMMARY OF APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS 5.4
5.2 PERMITS 5.6
5.3 TREE DENSITY REQUIREMENTS 5.8
TABLE B CREDIT FOR EXISTING TREES 5.10
TABLE C CREDIT FOR REPLACEMENT TREES 5.11
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Table of Contents
City of Sugar Hill ii
5.4 TREE PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS 5.13
5.5 TREE BANK 5.15
6. PLAN AND PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 6.1
6.1 WATER-EFFICIENT DESIGN CONSIDERATION 6.1
6.2 BUFFER AND LANDSCAPE PLAN SPECIFICATIONS 6.2
6.3 TREE PRESERVATION/REPLACEMENT PLAN
SPECIFICATIONS 6.3
7. COMPLIANCE 7.1
7.1 ARTIFICIAL MATERIALS PROHIBITED 7.1
7.2 WARRANTY OR MAINTENANCE SURETY 7.1
7.3 INSPECTION 7.1
7.4 PERFORMANCE SURETY 7.1
7.5 CONTINUING MAINTENANCE 7.3
8. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND APPEALS 8.1
8.1 ENFORCEMENT 8.1
8.2 VIOLATION AND PENALTY 8.1
8.3 APPEALS AND WAIVERS 8.2
9. ADOPTION 9.1
9.1 REPEAL CLAUSE 9.1
9.2 SEVERABILITY 9.1
9.3 AMENDMENT 9.1
9.4 EFFECTIVE DATE 9.1
AMENDMENTS
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Intent, Purpose and Title
City of Sugar Hill 1.1
ARTICLE 1
INTENT, PURPOSE AND TITLE
1.1 INTENT
1.1.1 This Ordinance shall apply to all properties or portions
thereof located within the incorporated areas of The City
of Sugar Hill, Georgia, to the extent of the provisions
contained herein. The City Council of The City of Sugar
Hill hereby finds that the protection and preservation of
trees, the planting of new trees and other landscape
material, and the provision of buffers between dissimilar
uses as part of the land development process is a public
purpose and provides for the public health and general
welfare.
1.2 PURPOSE
1.2.1 The purpose of this Ordinance is to preserve and enhance the
City’s natural environment through tree protection and
preservation, the planting of trees and other landscape
material, and the provision of natural and/or planted
buffers between dissimilar uses. The Ordinance is
intended to further the City’s policy that all development
sites where trees are most commonly removed will achieve
upon project completion a uniform standard related to tree
coverage, landscaping and buffers.
1.2.2 This Ordinance is also intended to further the City’s policy
of encouraging all individuals or firms who propose to
develop land, and which are required to meet the
requirements of this Ordinance, to consider the use of
water-efficient landscaping principles and techniques.
1.3 TITLE
1.3.1 This Ordinance shall be known as "The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance of The City of Sugar Hill, Georgia" and may
be referred to generally as "The Buffer Ordinance," or
"The Landscape Ordinance," or "The Tree Ordinance," or, as
used herein, "this Ordinance."
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Definitions
City of Sugar Hill 2.1
ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS
2.1 DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES
2.1.1 In construing the provisions hereof and the meaning of
each and every word, term, phrase, or part thereof,
where the context will permit, the definitions of
words as contained in the adopted Zoning Ordinance
of City of Sugar Hill, supplemented by the
following, shall apply:
Buffer: Land area used to visibly separate one use
from another through screening and distance, to
shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or
other conditions, to block physical passage to nonsimilar
areas, or to reduce air pollution, dust,
dirt, and litter.
Clearing: The removal of vegetation from a
property, whether by cutting or other means.
Construction Buffer: A type of buffer which is
temporary and remains in effect during the
construction of a project.
Department : The City of Sugar Hill Department of
Planning and Development (DoP&D), as established by
the City of Sugar Hill City Council, and as operated
through the actions and administration of the City
Manager or his/her designee.
Development Regulations: The adopted regulations
providing for the subdivision and development of
real property within City of Sugar Hill, Georgia, as
amended from time-to-time by the City Council of the
City of Sugar Hill.
Diameter Breast Height (DBH): The diameter of a
tree measured at a point 4 and 1/2 feet above the
ground.
Director: The City Manager and/or the Director of
the Department of Planning and Development or
his/her designee.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Definitions
City of Sugar Hill 2.2
2.1.1 (Cont.)
Dripline: A line on the ground established by a
vertical plane extending from a tree's outermost
branch tips down to the ground; i.e., the line
enclosing the area directly beneath the tree's crown
from which rainfall would drip.
Floodplain, 100-Year: Those lands subject to
flooding, which have at least a one percent
probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar
year; and specifically, the floodplain as shown on
the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map as prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
Grading: The placement, removal, or movement of
earth by use of mechanical equipment on a property.
Land Disturbance Permit (LDP): Any permit other
than a Building Permit issued by City of Sugar Hill
that authorizes clearing or grading activities on a
site or portion of a site. Said permit may be
Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, Grading, or
Development Permit as defined and authorized under
the Development Regulations of the City of Sugar
Hill.
Landscape Strip: Land area located within the
boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and
used for landscaping upon which only limited
encroachments are authorized.
Screening: A method of shielding or obscuring one
abutting or nearby structure or use from another by
opaque fencing, walls, berms, densely planted
vegetation, or the like.
Shrub: A woody plant of relatively low height, as
distinguished from a tree by having several stems
rather than a single trunk.
Timber Harvesting: The felling, loading and
transporting of timber products (pulpwood, etc.).
The term "timber harvesting" may include both clear
cutting and selective cutting of timber.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Definitions
City of Sugar Hill 2.3
2.1.1 (Cont.)
Tree Density Unit (TDU): A credit assigned to a
tree, based on the diameter of the tree, in
accordance with tables contained in this Ordinance.
Tree Density Standard (TDS): The minimum number of
Tree Density Units per acre which must be achieved
on a property after development.
Tree: Any self-supporting woody perennial plant,
usually having a main stem or trunk and many
branches, and at maturity normally attaining a trunk
diameter greater than 3 inches at any point and a
height of over 10 feet.
Tree Diameter: The widest cross-sectional dimension
of a tree trunk measured at diameter breast height
(dbh) or at a point below dbh for new trees or
multi-trunked species, but in no case less than 6
inches from the ground.
Tree Protection Area (TPA): Any portion of a site
wherein are located existing trees which are
proposed to be preserved in order to comply with
the requirements of this Ordinance. The Tree
Protection Area shall include no less than the total
area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the
dripline of the tree or group of trees collectively.
Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan (TP/RP): A plan
that identifies Tree Protection Areas where existing
trees are to be preserved and where proposed
replacement trees are to be planted on a property to
meet minimum requirements, as well as methods of
tree protection to be undertaken on the site and
other pertinent information.
Tree Thinning: Selective cutting or thinning of
trees only for the clear purpose of good forestry
management in order to protect said forest from
disease or infestation and in no way shall be
construed as clear cutting.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Definitions
City of Sugar Hill 2.4
2.1.1 (Cont.)
Zoning Buffer: A buffer required by the Zoning
Ordinance or as a condition of zoning, special use
or variance approval for a specific property.
Zoning Ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of City of
Sugar Hill, Georgia, as amended from time-to-time by
the City Council of City of Sugar Hill or any such
Ordinance not expressly superseding this Ordinance.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Buffer Regulations
______________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 3.1
ARTICLE 3
BUFFER REGULATIONS
3.1 APPLICABILITY.
3.1.1 Buffers shall be required between dissimilar districts or
uses in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance or as a condition of zoning, special use or
variance approval.
3.2 STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT BUFFERS
3.2.1 Width of Buffers
Buffers shall meet the minimum width requirements
contained in the Zoning Ordinance, except as authorized to
be reduced by the applicable buffer reduction process, as
follows:
a. As specified in the "Minimum Buffer Strip Requirement
Table"; or
b. As specified in a residential zoning district for a
permitted non-residential use (e.g. a church, temple,
synagogue, etc.); or
c. As required by a condition of zoning, special use, or
variance approval.
3.2.2 Screening Requirements
a. Buffers shall be natural, undisturbed, and free of
encroachments except as authorized by a condition of
zoning, special use or variance approval, or as
authorized herein, and shall contain the existing
tree cover and vegetation as well as any supplemental
plantings or replantings as may be required.
b. Buffers shall be of such nature and density so as to
screen activities, structures and uses on the
property from view from the normal level of a first
story window on an abutting lot and shall further
provide a year-round effective visual screen.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Buffer Regulations
______________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 3.2
3.2.2 (Cont.)
c. Buffers required along side property lines shall
extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise
required by the Director in order to observe the
sight distance requirements contained in the
Development Regulations, or as authorized by a
condition of zoning, special use, or variance
approval.
d. In situations where the required buffer width is
partially or completely contained within an existing
easement (e.g. power or natural gas transmission,
etc.), the screening requirements of this Ordinance
shall be met outside of the easement area.
3.2.3 Supplemental Plantings
a. Buffers in which vegetation is non-existent or is
inadequate to meet the screening requirements of this
Ordinance shall be planted with supplemental
plantings so as to provide a year-round effective
visual screen.
b. Supplemental plantings and replantings shall consist
of evergreen trees, shrubs, or combination thereof,
native or adaptable to the region. All trees planted
shall be a minimum of 6 feet in height at time of
planting and shall be a species which will achieve a
height of at least 20 feet at maturity. All shrubs
planted shall be a large growing species, shall be a
minimum of 3 feet in height at time of planting and
shall be a species which will achieve a height of at
least 10 feet at maturity.
c. All supplemental plantings shall be installed to
allow for proper plant growth and maintenance.
3.2.4 Non-Vegetative Screening
a. Non-vegetative materials utilized to satisfy the
screening requirements of this Ordinance, in addition
to the use of existing vegetation and/or supplemental
plantings, may consist of walls, fences, earthen
berms or any combination thereof.
b. If walls or fences are to be utilized, their
placement and installation shall be such so as to
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Buffer Regulations
______________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 3.3
cause minimal disturbance of existing vegetation and
located so as to provide an effective visual screen.
3.2.5 Disturbance or Encroachments
a. Ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities,
stormwater detention ponds, sanitary sewer conveyance
facilities, similar facilities, and any associated
easements, shall not encroach into a buffer except
that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g.
stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes) may encroach into
the buffer as near to perpendicular as practical.
b. Supplemental plantings or replantings of vegetation,
or authorized non-vegetative screening devices shall
be authorized to encroach into a buffer provided
there is minimal disturbance of any significant
existing vegetation.
c. Land disturbance is authorized in areas of a buffer
that are devoid of significant vegetation provided
that the final grade and replantings of vegetation
meet the screening requirements contained herein.
d. Dying, diseased or dead vegetation may be removed
from a buffer provided minimal disturbance occurs.
Vegetation thus removed shall be replaced where
necessary to meet the screening requirements
contained herein.
3.2.6 Protection During Land Disturbing Activities
a. During authorized land disturbing activities, buffers
shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to
commencement of, and during, construction.
b. The method of demarcation and protection utilized
shall be in accordance with Best Management
Practices(BMP) or as required by the Department.
3.3 STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION BUFFERS.
3.3.1 Where Required
Construction buffers shall be required where specifically
provided in the Zoning Ordinance between single family
residential subdivisions, or as a condition of zoning,
special use or variance approval.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Buffer Regulations
______________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 3.4
3.3.2 Time Constraints
Construction buffers shall only be in effect during the
construction period of a project and shall terminate upon
project completion. In the case of a residential
subdivision, a construction buffer shall terminate upon
each individual lot with the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy for the principal dwelling.
3.3.3 Disturbance or Encroachments
a. Construction buffers shall be natural, undisturbed
and free of encroachments except as authorized by a
condition of zoning, special use or variance
approval, or as authorized herein.
b. The encroachment of ditches, swales, stormwater
conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds,
sediment basins, sanitary sewer conveyance
facilities, similar facilities, and any associated
easements, into a construction buffer shall not be
authorized except that necessary access and utility
crossings (e.g. stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes),
and natural bottom detention ponds (sediment basins
must be located outside of the construction buffer)
and their appurtenant structures which require no
grading and removal of trees, may encroach upon the
construction buffer.
c. If the construction buffer on a residential lot is
devoid of existing trees and vegetation, and a tree
survey is submitted to document this situation prior
to conducting land disturbing activities (including
clearing) on the lot, then the Department may
authorize the encroachment of a building or structure
into the construction buffer for a distance not to
exceed 10 feet.
3.3.4 Protection During Land Disturbing Activities
a. During authorized land disturbing activities,
construction buffers shall be clearly demarcated and
protected prior to commencement of, and during,
construction.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Buffer Regulations
______________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 3.5
b. The method of demarcation and protection utilized
shall be in accordance with Best Management Practices
(BMP) or as required by the Department.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Landscape Regulations
______________________________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 4.1
ARTICLE 4
LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
4.1 APPLICABILITY.
4.1.1 Non-Residential and Multi-Family Uses
Non-residential and multi-family uses shall provide
for landscape plantings on-site as follows:
a. In a Landscape Strip at least 10 feet in width
adjacent to any street right-of-way abutting the
property and running the length of the entire
property frontage; and
b. In areas adjacent or internal to off-street
parking lots that are required by the Zoning
Ordinance to contain more than 5 off-street
parking spaces; and
c. As required by a condition of zoning, special
use or variance approval.
4.1.2 Residential Subdivisions
Residential subdivisions shall provide for landscape
plantings on-site as follows:
a. In no-access easements that are required to be
provided by the Development Regulations along
the line of double frontage lots abutting upon a
major thoroughfare; and
b. As required by a condition of zoning, special
use of variance approval.
4.2 LANDSCAPE STRIP PLANTING REQUIREMENTS
4.2.1 Ten (10) Foot Wide Landscape Strips
Landscape Strips which are required to be 10 feet in
width shall contain landscaping and plantings within
said strip as follows:
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Landscape Regulations
______________________________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 4.2
4.2.1 (Cont.)
a. One (1) tree for each 25 linear feet of strip
length shall be provided. Each tree shall be at
least 6 feet in height at time of planting and
shall be a species native or suitable to this
region.
b. One (1) shrub for each 25 linear feet of strip
length shall be provided. Each shrub shall be a
species native or suitable to this region.
c. Trees and shrubs required herein may be planted
and spaced singly or in groups as authorized by
the Director so long as the total number of
plantings is achieved.
d. The remaining ground area shall be sodded,
seeded or hydroseeded with grass, and/or planted
with groundcover species and/or provided with
other landscaping material, or any combination
thereof.
4.2.2 Five (5) Foot Wide Landscape Strips
Landscape Strips which are required to be 5 feet in
width shall contain landscaping and plantings within
said strip as follows:
a. One (1) tree for each 50 linear feet of strip
length shall be provided. Each tree shall be at
least 6 feet in height at time of planting and
shall be a species native or suitable to this
region.
b. One (1) shrub for each 50 linear feet of strip
length shall be provided. Each shrub shall be a
species native or suitable to this region.
c. Trees and shrubs required herein may be planted
and spaced singly or in groups as authorized by
the Director so long as the total number of
required plantings is achieved.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Landscape Regulations
______________________________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 4.3
4.2.2 (Cont.)
d. The remaining ground area shall be sodded,
seeded or hydroseeded with grass, and/or planted
with groundcover species and /or provided with
other landscaping material, or any combination
thereof.
4.2.3 Encroachments Into Landscape Strips
Required Landscaped Strips shall not be encroached
upon by parking spaces, driveway surfaces or
stormwater detention facilities except that driveway
crossings may traverse such strip as near to a
perpendicular alignment as practical.
4.3 OFF-STREET PARKING LOT PLANTING REQUIREMENTS
4.3.1 Quantity, Spacing and Planting Standards
Off-street parking lots which are required to
contain more than 5 off-street parking spaces shall
contain landscaping and plantings as follows:
a. One (1) tree for each 5 spaces around the
perimeter of the parking lot shall be provided.
b. One (1) tree for each 10 spaces on the interior
of the parking lot shall be provided.
c. Each tree shall be at least 6 feet in height at
time of planting and shall be a species native
or suitable to this region.
d. The minimum planting area or space for each tree
shall be at least 25 square feet.
e. Trees shall be planted in areas surrounding the
perimeter of the parking lot and/or shall be
planted in planting areas or islands internal to
the parking lot. Trees may be planted and
spaced singly or in groups.
f. Ground areas shall be sodded, seeded or
hydroseeded with grass and/or planted with
groundcover species, and/or provided with other
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Landscape Regulations
______________________________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 4.4
landscaping material, or any combination
thereof.
4.4 NO-ACCESS EASEMENT SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
4.4.1 No-access easements which are required to be provided
and recorded by the Development Regulations, or as a
condition of zoning, special use or variance
approval, shall be screened as follows:
a. Planted with a single line of evergreen trees or
shrubs; or,
b. Contain a solid or decorative fence; or,
c. Contain such other landscaping treatments or
grade changes which will produce a partial
screening effect as authorized by the Director.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.1
ARTICLE 5
TREE PRESERVATION AND TREE REPLACEMENT REGULATIONS
5.1 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS
5.1.1 The terms and provisions of this Article shall apply to any
activity on real property which requires the issuance of a
Land Disturbance Permit within the City of Sugar Hill.
Table A: Summary of Applicability and Exemptions, at the
end of this Section, summarizes those activities which are
exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance and those for
which a Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan must be
approved prior to issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit.
5.1.2 Grandfathered Projects
a. This Article shall not apply to any portion of a
property included within the limits of a valid Land
Disturbance Permit issued prior to the effective date
of this Ordinance, provided that all time constraints
relating to the permit issued shall be observed. In
no event shall any grandfathered project be extended
for a greater time period than 24 months from the
date of enactment of this Ordinance.
b. The requirements of this Article may be waived by
the Department for a Land Disturbance Permit which is
to proceed with development of a larger project, at
least 75% of the land area of which has already
received a permit or permits initiating clearing or
grading activities.
5.1.3 Horticultural or Agricultural Operations
a. All plant or tree nurseries and botanical gardens
shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this
Ordinance in relation to those trees which are being
grown for relocation and continued growth in the
ordinary course of business, or for some public
purpose.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.2
5.1.3 (Cont.)
b. All orchards of trees in active commercial operation
shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this
Ordinance for bona fide agricultural purposes only.
5.1.4 Removal of Disease or Infestation
Upon the advice of the County Extension Service or the
Georgia Forestry Commission in accordance with commonly
accepted forestry practices and a finding of tree disease
or infestation, the Director may authorize the removal of
trees to prevent the transmission of disease or
infestation, to prevent the danger of these trees falling,
or to prevent potential injury to life and property. The
owner/developer, prior to the removal of the diseased
trees, shall notify the Director, identifying the location
of the infested property, and shall submit to the Director
the written finding of the County Extension Service or
Georgia Forestry Commission.
5.1.5 Tree Thinning
Upon the written advice and findings of the County
Extension Service or Georgia Forestry Commission, the
thinning of trees (selective cutting only) solely for the
purpose of good forestry management, may be permitted upon
authorization by the Director and shall require the
submittal and approval of a Tree Preservation/Replacement
Plan. Permits authorizing tree thinning shall be limited
to the following:
a) The property shall not have been subdivided. The
property shall have the same configuration since June
9, 1970.
b) A 75 foot undisturbed buffer (not a zoning buffer)
shall be provided and maintained along the entire
perimeter of the property, including road frontages,
during the land disturbing activity, except for
authorized access crossings.
c) The property shall be required to meet a Tree Density
Standard of 24 units per acre upon completion of
authorized land disturbing activities.
d) The owner/developer shall utilize the recommended
Best Management Practices (BMP's) as established by
the Georgia Forestry Commission.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.3
5.1.6 Credit For Zoning Buffer Plantings Excluded
Existing trees proposed to be retained and new trees
proposed to be planted in order to meet the buffer
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance or conditions of
zoning, special use or variance approval shall not be
considered in fulfilling the requirements of this
Ordinance. Trees or other vegetation shall not be removed
from a zoning buffer area except under the provisions as
established herein or by the Zoning Ordinance.
5.1.7 Credit For Construction Buffers - Trees Saved in Single
Family Residential Districts Included
Trees saved in a Construction Buffer identified on a Tree
Preservation/Replacement Plan shall count toward Tree
Density Standard.
5.1.8 Easement Exemption
a) Properties possessing natural gas, petroleum or
electric power transmission easements, or major
sanitary sewer main (greater than 8 inches in
diameter) or water main (greater than 16 inches in
diameter) distribution easements, may exclude the
land area contained in said easement from the total
acreage of the property in fulfilling the Tree
Density Standard of this Ordinance provided that no
improvements (e.g. parking lots, tennis courts,
driveways, stormwater detention facilities, etc.) are
proposed within the easement. If any improvements
are proposed within the easement, then the land area
so utilized within the easement for the improvements,
plus an additional 10-feet of land area surrounding
the improvements, shall be used to fulfill the Tree
Density Standard of this Ordinance.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.4
TABLE A
SUMMARY OF APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS
PROJECT TYPE TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION APPLICABILITY
1 and 2 Family
Dwellings
Building Permit Compliance
Inspection may
be required
(5.3.3)
Grandfathered
Projects
Any property included within the
limits of a LDP approved prior to
the effective date of this
Ordinance.
Exempt
(5.1.2)
Horticultural
or
Agricultural
Operations
Land clearing for clearly
agricultural purposes, including
timber harvesting, in RA-200
zoning district; Plant or Tree
Nurseries; Orchards
Exempt
(5.1.3)
Diseased or
Infested Trees
Removal upon advice and written
finding of County Extension
Service or Georgia Forestry
Commission
Exempt
(5.1.4)
Tree Thinning Thinning of trees (selective
cutting) in zoning districts
other than RA-200 solely for the
purpose of good forestry
management, utilizing recommended
BMP's of the Georgia Forestry
Commission, upon the advice and
written findings of the County
Extension Service or Georgia
Forestry Commission
TP/RP Required
(5.1.5)
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.5
TABLE A
(CONTINUED)
PROJECT TYPE TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION APPLICABILITY
Residential and
Non-Residential
Subdivisions
Land disturbance limited to
areas needed for streets,
drainage and utilities
TP/RP not
required
*
(5.2.3,a)
Land disturbance beyond areas
needed for streets, drainage,
and utilities
TP/RP required
(5.2.2)
Building Permit for the
construction of 1 and 2 Family
Dwellings
Compliance
Inspection may
be required
(5.3.3)
Recreation Area TP/RP required
(5.2.3,a)
Multi-family and
Non-Residential
Sites
Clearing or clearing and
grubbing only, limited to
areas outside of all minimum
yards, buffers, and 100 year
flood plain
TP/RP not
required *
**
(5.2.3,b)
Clearing or clearing and
grubbing only, proposing
disturbance within a minimum
yard or 100 year flood plain
TP/RP required
(5.2.2)
Grading or Development Permit TP/RP required
(5.2.2)
Building Permit Covered by TP/RP
as approved by
LDP
(5.2.2)
* LIMITS OF LAND DISTURBANCE TO BE DESIGNATED WITH PROTECTIVE TREE
FENCING, STAKING, OR CONTINUOUS RIBBON PRIOR TO COMMENCEMENT OF
ACTIVITIES, CONSISTENT WITH EXEMPTION ALLOWANCES.
** ADDITIONAL AREAS MAY BE DESIGNATED BY DOP&D TO REMAIN
UNDISTURBED BASED ON LAND USE PLAN.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.6
5.2 PERMITS
5.2.1 Land disturbance activities shall not commence until such
activities have been authorized by issuance of an
appropriate Land Disturbance Permit under the provisions
of the Development Regulations.
5.2.2 For those projects not exempt from the provisions of this
Ordinance, and not included under Subsection 5.2.3 below,
a Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan shall be submitted
along with the other documents required by the Development
Regulations for the issuance of a Clearing, Clearing and
Grubbing, Grading, or Development Permit.
a. All Tree Preservation/Replacement Plans and related
documentation shall be reviewed by the Department
for conformance to the provisions of this Ordinance
along with and at the same time as all other plans
required for a requested Land Disturbance Permit
under the provisions of the Development Regulations.
b. Clearing, grading and development activities shall
conform in all respects with the approved Tree
Preservation/Replacement Plan. Any revisions to the
proposed development of a property, and any changes
reflected in a subsequently submitted permit
application, shall be shown on a revised Tree
Preservation/Replacement Plan and be approved as part
of the new or revised permit prior to the
commencement of such changed activities.
c. A maximum of twenty (20) acres of residential land
can be mass-graded at any one time subject to a plan
having been reviewed and approved showing phasing of
the development of the residential subdivision.
d. Subsection 5.3.3 shall apply to residential
subdivision development of individual lots and the
TP\TR Plan.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.7
5.2.3 Projects which propose only limited development activities
may be issued a Land Disturbance Permit without a Tree
Preservation/Replacement Plan under the following
circumstances:
a. Residential subdivisions shall not be required to
submit a Tree Preservation /Replacement Plan if the
proposed land disturbance and construction activities
are strictly limited to those directly related to the
provision of the streets and storm water drainage and
detention facilities, placement of required soil
erosion and sedimentation controls, the installation
of public or private utilities, and other required
improvements, excluding recreation areas, expressly
required by the City or by a condition of zoning,
special use or variance approval.
b. Nonresidential subdivisions shall not be required to
submit a Tree Preservation /Replacement Plan if the
proposed land disturbance and construction activities
are strictly limited to those directly related to the
provision of the streets and storm water drainage and
detention facilities, placement of required soil
erosion and sedimentation controls, the installation
of public or private utilities, and other required
improvements, expressly required by the City or by a
condition of zoning, special use or variance
approval.
c. Individual multi-family residential and
nonresidential projects (not involving the
subdivision of the property) may be allowed to
undertake activities limited to clearing or clearing
and grubbing only, without approval of a Tree
Preservation/Replacement Plan if the proposed land
disturbance activities are limited to those portions
of the property outside of all minimum yard areas
required by the zoning district, all buffer areas
required by the Zoning Ordinance or conditions of
zoning, variance or special use approval, and any
area within the 100-year flood plain, except for curb
cut access into the property and for the placement of
required soil erosion and sedimentation controls.
Additional areas may be designated by the Department
to remain undisturbed as may be reasonably required
with consideration given to the proposed use of the
property, as well as adjacent properties, in
accordance with the City 's Land Use Plan. The
limits of clearing or clearing and grubbing shall be
established no closer to the boundaries of all said
undisturbed areas than the driplines of the trees
which are located within said areas.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.8
d. For any property for which a Tree
Preservation/Replacement Plan was not required prior
to issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit under the
provisions of this Section, all areas required to be
undisturbed shall be provided with protective tree
fencing, staking, or continuous ribbon along the
limits of clearing or grading which adjoin existing
trees in accordance with the provisions found in
Subsection 5.4.1. Such measures shall be in place
prior to beginning clearing or grading activities,
and shall be maintained throughout the land
disturbance period.
5.3 TREE DENSITY REQUIREMENTS
5.3.1 Minimum Tree Density Standard
On each property for which a Tree
Preservation/Replacement Plan is required by this
Ordinance, existing trees may be retained and new trees
shall be planted such that the property shall attain or
exceed a Tree Density Standard of 16 Tree Density Units
per acre, exclusive of any acreage within a zoning buffer
and any trees required to be preserved or planted within
a zoning buffer. The trees, both existing and new, where
feasible shall be reasonably distributed throughout the
site, with emphasis on tree groupings to achieve aesthetic
results following professional landscaping standards.
Trees may be retained or planted for credit within a
public street right-of-way if granted authorization by
the Department of Transportation.
5.3.2 Tree Density Standard Calculation
The Tree Density Standard shall be calculated by summing
the following credits and dividing by the total acreage of
the project included within the limits of the permit
application (but excluding any acreage included within a
zoning buffer).
a. Credit for existing trees proposed to be preserved
on the site shall be calculated by multiplying the
number of trees (by diameter) times the units
assigned in TABLE B, CREDIT FOR EXISTING TREES.
Credit shall be given all trees preserved on a
property having a diameter of 3" or more, except
trees located in a zoning buffer.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.9
5.3.2 (Cont.)
b. Credit for new trees proposed to be replaced on the
site shall be calculated by multiplying the number
of trees (by diameter) times the units assigned in
TABLE C, CREDIT FOR REPLACEMENT TREES. Credit shall
be given all new trees replaced on a property except
for new trees of less than 1 inch in diameter and new
trees planted in a required zoning buffer. Multitrunked
ornamental trees shall only be given credit
by measuring the single largest trunk and not the
cumulative total of the various trunks. Tree-form
shrubs shall not be given credit for satisfying the
required Tree Density Standard.
c. Additional credits shall be granted under the
following circumstances:
(1) A total tree density credit not to exceed three
(3) times the units shown on Table B, may be
granted by the Department for existing trees to
be retained which have greater value as
outstanding specimen trees or having historic
value or being a rare or unique species.
(2) Existing trees to be retained within a minimum
yard area (as required by the applicable zoning
district) or within a 100-year flood plain shall
be granted a bonus credit of 50 percent of the
units assigned in Table B unless the tree is
located within a required zoning buffer.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.10
TABLE B - CREDIT FOR EXISTING TREES
CONVERSION FROM TREE DIAMETER IN INCHES
TO TREE DENSITY UNITS FOR TREES REMAINING ON SITE
DIA. UNITS DIA. UNITS DIA. UNITS DIA. UNITS
3 .05 15 1.2 27 4.0 39 8.3
4 .1 16 1.4 28 4.3 40 8.7
5 .15 17 1.6 29 4.6 41 9.2
6 .2 18 1.8 30 4.9 42 9.6
7 .3 19 2.0 31 5.2 43 10.1
8 .4 20 2.2 32 5.6 44 10.6
9 .5 21 2.4 33 5.9 45 11.0
10 .6 22 2.6 34 6.3 46 11.5
11 .7 23 2.9 35 6.7 47 12.0
12 .8 24 3.1 36 7.1 48 12.6
13 .9 25 3.4 37 7.5 49 13.1
14 1.1 26 3.7 38 7.9 50 13.6
NOTE: FOR THE PURPOSE OF THIS ORDINANCE, TREE DIAMETERS ARE MEASURED
AT DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) OR AT ANY POINT BELOW DBH
FOR NEW TREES OR MULTI-TRUNKED SPECIES, BUT IN NO CASE
LESS THAN 6 INCHES FROM THE GROUND.
NOTE: FOR THE PURPOSE OF THIS ORDINANCE, TREE DIAMETER FRACTIONS MAY
BE "ROUNDED-UP" IF 0.5 INCHES OR GREATER OR "ROUNDED-DOWN"
IF LESS THAN 0.5 INCHES.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.11
TABLE C - CREDIT FOR REPLACEMENT TREES
CONVERSION FROM TREE DIAMETER IN INCHES
TO TREE DENSITY UNITS FOR PROPOSED REPLACEMENT TREES
Diameter Units Diameter Units
1 .4 8 1.3
2 .5 9 1.5
3 .6 10 1.7
4 .7 11 1.9
5 .9 12 2.1
6 1.0 13 2.3
7 1.2 14 2.5
NOTE: FOR THE PURPOSE OF THIS ORDINANCE, TREE DIAMETERS ARE MEASURED
AT DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) OR AT ANY POINT BELOW DBH
FOR NEW TREES OR MULTI-TRUNKED SPECIES, BUT IN NO CASE
LESS THAN 6 INCHES FROM THE GROUND.
NOTE: FOR THE PURPOSE OF THIS ORDINANCE, TREE DIAMETER FRACTIONS MAY
BE "ROUNDED-UP" IF 0.5 INCHES OR GREATER OR "ROUNDED-DOWN"
IF LESS THAN 0.5 INCHES.
NOTE: MULTI-TRUNKED ORNAMENTAL TREES SHALL BE GIVEN CREDIT BY
MEASURING THE SINGLE LARGEST TRUNK ONLY. TREE-FORM SHRUBS
SHALL NOT BE GIVEN CREDIT.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.12
5.3.3 One and Two Family Dwellings
If the subdivision is exempt under Subsection 5.2.3a this
Subsection (5.3.3) does not apply. However, if the
subdivision was not exempt under Subsection 5.2.3a and was
required to submit a TP\TR under Subsection 5.2.2 this
Subsection (5.3.3) shall apply.
Each residential lot shall have at a minimum two (2) Tree
Density Units. The front yard shall contain at least one
(1) Tree Density Unit. The minimum replacement trees for
front yards shall be shade or flowering trees that measure
at least 3 caliper inches in diameter. Examples of shade
or flowering trees include all types of oak, maples,
birch, tulip poplar, fruit trees, walnut, hickory or elm.
To meet this requirement, all other replacement tree
species to be planted in a residential front yard that are
not listed above shall be approved by the department prior
to planting. Existing trees shall be allowed to meet this
requirement based on Table B - Credit For Existing Trees.
The requirements of Subsection 5.2.2 may indicate the
requirements of this section have been addressed in the
TP\TR Plan. If this is the case, a compliance inspection
is all that is needed to comply with this section.
Prior to an issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, a
compliance inspection will be made to ensure that all
applicable requirements for this section have been
satisfied and the appropriate trees have been planted.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.13
5.4 TREE PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS
5.4.1 The following guidelines and standards shall apply to trees
proposed to be preserved for credit toward meeting the
minimum required Tree Density Standard on a property.
a. Tree Protection Areas
The root system within the dripline is generally
considered to be the critical root zone. To protect
these critical root zones, a tree protection area
shall be established around each tree or group of
trees to be retained.
(1) The Tree Protection Area shall include no less
than the total area beneath the tree canopy as
defined by the dripline of the tree or group of
trees collectively.
(2) Layout of the project site utility and grading
plans shall avoid disturbance of the tree
protection areas.
(3) Construction site activities such as parking,
materials storage, concrete washout, burn hole
placement, etc., shall be arranged so as to
prevent disturbances within tree protection
areas.
b. Protective Barriers
(1) Protective tree fencing, staking or continuous
ribbon shall be installed between tree
protection areas and areas proposed to be
cleared, graded, or otherwise disturbed on the
site, prior to any land disturbance.
(2) All Tree Protection Areas are recommended to be
designated as such with "tree save area signs"
posted in addition to the required protective
fencing, staking, or continuous ribbon. Signs
requesting subcontractor cooperation and
compliance with tree protection standards are
recommended for site entrances.
(3) All Tree Protection Areas must be protected from
soil sedimentation intrusion through the use of
silt screens or other acceptable measures placed
up-slope from the tree protection area.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.14
5.4.1.(CONT.)
(4) All protective tree fencing, staking or
continuous ribbon and all erosion control
barriers must be installed prior to and
maintained throughout the land disturbance and
construction process, and should not be removed
until final landscaping is installed.
c. Encroachment
If encroachment into a Tree Protection Area occurs which
causes irreparable damage to the trees, the Tree
Preservation/Replacement Plan shall be revised to
compensate for the loss. Under no circumstances shall the
developer be relieved of responsibility for compliance
with the provisions of this Ordinance, nor shall plan
revision activities stop the Department from instituting
action for violation of this Ordinance.
5.4.2 Replacement trees proposed to be planted for credit toward
meeting the minimum required Tree Density Standard on a
property shall comply with the following guidelines and
standards:
a. The spacing of replacement trees must be compatible
with spatial site limitations and with responsible
consideration towards species size when mature.
b. Species selected for planting shall be native or
adaptable to the region and the intended growing
site. Standards for transplanting shall be in
keeping with those established by the International
Society of Arboriculture, as included in the "Tree
and Shrub Transplanting Manual," latest edition, or
similar publications. Refer to the American
Association of Nurserymen publication "American
Standard for Nursery Stock" (ANSI Z60, 1973) for
plant material quality specifications. Refer to the
"Manual of Woody Landscape Plants" (Michael Dirr,
1983, Castle Books) or similar publications for
information on tree species site requirements.
c. Trees selected for planting must be free from injury,
pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root
defects, and must be of good vigor, so as to assure a
reasonable expectation of survivability.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance
Tree Preservation and Tree Replacement Regulations
City of Sugar Hill 5.15
5.5 TREE BANK
5.5.1 Where a tree is to be removed under the provisions of this
Ordinance, the City may, with the consent of the property
owner, relocate the tree at the City's expense to Cityowned
property for replanting, either for permanent
utilization at the new location, or for future use at
other City property.
5.5.2 Credit may be given to the property for each relocated tree
as though the tree was proposed to remain on the property,
if the tree is relocated to a site designated by the City
at the owner/developer's expense.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Plan and Plat Specifications
_____________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 6.1
ARTICLE 6
PLAN AND PLAT SPECIFICATIONS
6.1 WATER-EFFICIENT DESIGN CONSIDERATION
It is the policy of The City of Sugar Hill to encourage
individuals or firms who prepare the plans and plats
required by this Ordinance to consider the use of waterefficient
landscaping principles and techniques as one of
the criterion to be used in plant selection and design.
6.1.1 Principles and Techniques of Water-Efficient Landscaping
The recommended principles and techniques to be considered
are as follows:
a. Proper Location and Design - locating plants where
they will naturally thrive and not require excessive
water and maintenance to survive, as well as grouping
plants by water needs, and limiting and concentrating
high water using plants.
b. Turf Selection - selecting turf grasses that can
survive the variable rainfall conditions in this
region, and limiting turf areas.
c. Efficient Watering - once plants are established,
avoid watering during periods of normal rainfall and
during droughts, watering every week to 10 days or
less depending on the drought tolerance of the
plants.
d. Soil Improvements - loosening and breaking up the
soil beyond the immediate planting area to allow
better water absorption and to promote deep roots.
e. Mulching - using mulch to hold moisture in the soil
which helps maximize the benefits of watering as well
as preventing weeds.
f. Plant Selection - selecting plants according to their
watering requirements and optimum locations.
g. Maintenance - maintaining the landscape to maximize
water conservation such as increasing mowing heights
and avoiding fertilizing during dry spells.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Plan and Plat Specifications
_____________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 6.2
6.2 BUFFER AND LANDSCAPE PLAN SPECIFICATIONS
The following subsections and paragraphs outline the
required elements of the plans and plats mentioned
throughout this Ordinance.
6.2.1 A Buffer and Landscape Plan shall be prepared for any project
wherein buffer areas or other landscaping areas or
treatment are required by this Ordinance, the Zoning
Ordinance, conditions of zoning, special use or variance
approval, or other regulations of The City of Sugar Hill,
and shall be approved prior to issuance of a Development
Permit. While the Plan shall cover, at a minimum, the
required buffer and landscape areas, the Plan can be
combined with a general landscaping plan for the entire
project and/or a Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan (if
required), at the developer's option.
6.2.2 The Buffer and Landscape Plan shall be shown on a Site Plan
or boundary survey drawn to the same or a larger scale as
the other plan documents prepared for the Development
Permit Application and shall cover the same area.
6.2.3 The Buffer and Landscape Plan shall contain but need not be
limited to the following:
a. Project name and Land District, Land Lot, and
acreage.
b. Developer's name and telephone number.
c. The name, address, and telephone number of the
Registered Landscape Architect, Urban Forester, or
Arborist responsible for preparation of the plan, and
the Seal or statement of professional qualifications
of said person (which may be attached separately).
The performance of professional services in the
preparation of plans required herein shall comply
with Georgia Law governing the practice of the
applicable profession.
d. Boundary lines of each buffer or other landscape
area, appropriately labeled.
e. Delineation of undisturbed buffer areas, and any
other areas wherein trees are proposed to be retained
to meet City requirements, along the
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Plan and Plat Specifications
_____________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 6.3
6.2.3 (Cont.) driplines of the trees or groups of trees contained
therein. These areas shall be treated in accordance
with the Tree Protection Area requirements contained
in this Ordinance, and labeled as such. Protective
barriers and signage as required by this Ordinance
shall be shown as to location and detailed.
f. General location of all proposed trees, shrubs,
vines, groundcovers, mulching, and other features
proposed within the buffer/landscape area. A scale
sufficient to clearly indicate all details shall be
used, along with a north arrow.
g. Within areas involving or adjacent to land form
changes, existing and finish grade topographic lines
at an interval of no more than 2 feet may be
required.
h. For new plant materials to be installed, a plant
material list including but not limited to:
(1) Common and botanical names of all proposed
plants.
(2) Plant quantities.
(3) Size and condition of plants. (Example:
1" caliper, 6 feet height, balled and
burlapped).
(4) Spacing.
(5) Remarks as necessary to insure proper
plant selection upon installation.
(Example: Specimen, multi-trunked).
6.3 TREE PRESERVATION/REPLACEMENT PLAN SPECIFICATIONS
6.3.1 Tree Preservation/Replacement Plans shall be prepared by a
professional Landscape Architect, Urban Forester, or Arborist in
accordance with the specifications for such plans contained herein.
The performance of professional services in the preparation of plans
required herein shall comply with Georgia Law governing the practice
of the applicable profession. Other licensed professionals (e.g.
architects, engineers, etc.) may be authorized by the Director to
prepare Tree Preservation Plans, but not
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Plan and Plat Specifications
_____________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 6.4
6.3.1 (Cont.)
Tree Replacement Plans, provided that they demonstrate, to
the satisfaction of the Director, competency and knowledge
in the principles and practices of arboriculture.
6.3.2 The Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan shall be shown on a
copy of a Preliminary Plat, Concept Plan or Site Plan,
with the exception of a permit to conduct tree thinning,
as appropriate to the proposed development, drawn to the
same scale as the other plan documents prepared for a Land
Disturbance Permit application on the property, and shall
cover the same area. The plan may be combined with a
required Buffer and Landscape Plan for the project, at the
option of the developer.
6.3.3 The Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan shall provide
sufficient information and detail to clearly demonstrate
that all applicable requirements and standards of this
Ordinance will be fully satisfied.
6.3.4 The Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan shall contain but
need not be limited to the following:
a. Project name, Land District, Land Lot, north arrow
and scale.
b. Developer's name, address, and telephone number.
c. The name, address, and telephone number of the
professional Landscape Architect, Urban Forester,
Arborist or other authorized individual responsible
for preparation of the plan, in accordance with the
requirements of Subsection 6.3.1, above, and the Seal
or statement of professional qualifications of said
person (which may be attached separately).
d. Delineation of all minimum yard areas, buffers, and
landscape areas as required by the Zoning Ordinance
or conditions of zoning, special use or variance
approval.
e. Total acreage of the site and total acreage exclusive
of all zoning buffer areas.
f. Delineation of all areas located within a 100-year
flood plain.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Plan and Plat Specifications
_____________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 6.5
6.3.4 (Cont.)
g. Existing Trees to be retained in Tree Protection
Areas:
Trunk location and size (to the nearest inch in
diameter at or below diameter breast height), of
individual trees proposed to remain for credit toward
meeting the minimum tree density standard on the
property. Groups of 3 or more trees whose driplines
combine into a single Tree Protection Area may be
outlined as a group and their number, by diameter,
shown in the Summary Table. If the number and size
of all existing trees to remain on the site exceeds
the required tree density standard for the entire
site, only those trees required to meet the minimum
tree density standard must be shown. All Tree
Protection Areas are to be outlined and labeled.
h. Tree Protection Measures:
(1) A detail or description of the protective tree
fencing, staking, or continuous ribbon to be
installed, and the location of such measures,
which at a minimum shall follow the dripline of
all trees to be retained along adjoining areas
of clearing, grading, or other construction
activity.
(2) Measures to be taken to avoid soil sedimentation
intrusion into Tree Protection Areas, and the
location of such devices.
(3) Proposed location of temporary construction
activities such as equipment or worker parking,
materials storage, burn holes, equipment
washdown areas, and entrance pads.
(4) Proposed type and location of any tree save area
signs or other pertinent signage.
i. If replacement trees are proposed to be planted in
order for the property to achieve the required Tree
Density Standard, the replacement trees shall be
shown and their spacing and diameter identified, to
the extent needed to achieve the minimum
requirements. Trees grouped together in tree
planting areas may be listed on the Summary Table by
total number in the grouping, by size.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Plan and Plat Specifications
_____________________________________________________________
City of Sugar Hill 6.6
6.3.4 (Cont.)
j. A Summary Table of the number of existing trees to
remain and new trees to be planted, by diameter to
the nearest inch at or below dbh, shall be shown
along with calculations showing the tree density
achieved for the site. Additional credits shall be
noted where applicable (see Subsection 5.3.2,
paragraph c.). Groupings of trees in Tree Protection
Areas and areas for new tree planting may be keyed to
the Summary Table by area rather than having each
tree individually labeled on the plan.
6.3.5 The plan sheet which shows the grading plan, including
existing and proposed contour lines, shall indicate the
dripline location of all Tree Protection Areas through the
use of shading on the plans. The exact location of each
tree is not desired to be shown, only the limits of the
Tree Protection Area and any other areas which are not to
be disturbed.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Compliance
City of Sugar Hill 7.1
ARTICLE 7
COMPLIANCE
7.1 ARTIFICIAL MATERIALS PROHIBITED
7.1.1 All artificial plants, trees, shrubs, grass or other
vegetation shall be prohibited from fulfilling the
requirements of this Ordinance.
7.2 WARRANTY OR MAINTENANCE SURETY
7.2.1 Upon final installation of new trees, shrubs or other
landscape material planted to meet the requirements of
this Ordinance, and following acceptance by the
Department in accordance with the procedures set forth in
the Development Regulations, the owner shall either
provide proof of warranty or post a Maintenance Bond or
other acceptable surety, warranting the new trees, shrubs
or landscape material for a period of no less than one
(1) year.
7.3 INSPECTION
7.3.1 The Department shall perform an inspection of the plantings
and landscape materials required by this Ordinance prior
to expiration of the one (1) year warranty or maintenance
period. The owner shall be notified of any replacements
or restoration that must be made to maintain compliance
with this Ordinance or conditions of zoning, special use
or variance approval.
7.3.2 Required landscape material found to be dead or near death
shall be replaced prior to release by the Department of
the warranty or maintenance surety. In no case shall
replacement be delayed greater than 30 days from
notification unless a performance bond is posted with the
Department.
7.4 PERFORMANCE SURETY
7.4.1 Compliance Prior to Certificate of Occupancy or Final Plat
Approval
In the event that new trees proposed to be planted to
achieve the Tree Density Standard as set forth in the Tree
Regulations contained herein, or other trees or landscape
material required to be planted as set forth in the Buffer
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Compliance
City of Sugar Hill 7.2
7.4.1 (Cont.)
Regulations or Landscape Regulations contained herein, are
not installed upon application for a Certificate of
Occupancy or Final Plat approval as appropriate to the
project, then a Performance Bond or other acceptable
surety in an amount equal to 110% of the value of the new
trees or landscape material and their installation shall
be posted with the Department in accordance with the
performance bonding requirements and provisions of the
Development Regulations.
7.4.2 Compliance upon Permit Completion or Expiration
Properties where a permit is issued to conduct land
disturbing activities that do not require the issuance of
a Certificate of Occupancy or the approval of a Final
Plat, or said activities as authorized are completed or
the permit expires, shall comply with the Tree Density
Standard of this Ordinance as follows:
a. Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, or Grading Only
Permits
Replacement trees proposed to be planted to achieve
the Tree Density Standard of this Ordinance which are
not planted upon completion or prior to expiration of
a Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, or Grading Permit,
shall be planted within 30 days of the completion or
expiration of said permit unless a Performance Bond
is posted with the Department.
b. Development Permits
Replacement trees proposed to be planted to achieve
the Tree Density Standard of this Ordinance which are
not planted upon expiration, as opposed to
completion, of a Development Permit shall be planted
within 30 days of expiration of said permit unless a
Performance Bond is posted with the Department.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Compliance
City of Sugar Hill 7.3
7.5 CONTINUING MAINTENANCE
7.5.1 The owner, occupant, tenant, and respective agent of each, if
any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
perpetual maintenance and protection of buffers and
landscape plantings required by this Ordinance.
7.5.2 The Department is hereby authorized to order diseased,
infested, dying, dead or damaged landscaping required
herein to be replaced.
7.5.3 Buffers that, over a period of time, lose their screening
ability shall be replanted to meet the requirements of
this Ordinance.
7.5.4 Replacement trees and landscaping shall be in accordance with
the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Enforcement, Violation and Appeals
City of Sugar Hill 8.1
ARTICLE 8
ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND APPEALS
8.1 ENFORCEMENT
It shall be the responsibility of the Department to
enforce this Ordinance. The Director or his/her designee
shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any
Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, Grading, Development or
Building Permit or to withhold issuance of a Certificate
of Occupancy, and shall have the authority to suspend all
work on a site or any portion thereof, where tree removal
or damage occurs in violation of this Ordinance or the
provisions of the approved Tree Preservation/Replacement
Plan for the site.
8.2 VIOLATION AND PENALTY
Any person violating provision of this Ordinance shall be
guilty of violating a duly adopted Ordinance of The City
of Sugar Hill, and upon conviction by a court of competent
jurisdiction, may be punished either by a fine not to
exceed $500, or confinement in the County jail not to
exceed 60 days, or both. The Court shall have the power
and authority to place any person found guilty of a
violation of this Ordinance on probation and to suspend or
modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of said
suspension, the Court may require payment of restitution
or impose other punishment allowed by law which may
include mandatory attendance at an educational program
regarding tree preservation. The owner of any property
wherein a violation exists, and any builder, contractor,
or agent who may have assisted in the commission of any
such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense.
The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Enforcement, Violation and Appeals
City of Sugar Hill 8.2
8.3 APPEALS AND WAIVERS
8.3.1 Variance from the Zoning Ordinance
The preservation of trees may be considered as a condition
peculiar to a piece of property in support of a request
for a Variance from the literal application of the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, under the procedures
and requirements contained therein.
8.3.2 Appeals
Appeals of the interpretation of the requirements of this
Ordinance by the Director shall be filed and processed in
accordance with the appeal procedures as set forth in the
Development Regulations.
8.3.3 Waivers
Waiver requests of the requirements of this Ordinance
shall be filed and processed in accordance with the waiver
procedures as set forth in the Development Regulations.

The Buffer, Landscape, and
Tree Ordinance Amendments
City of Sugar Hill
AMENDMENTS
1. October 12, 1998 Amended Section 5.5.1 Exclusions of single family lots are removed.
Table A is amended to show proper exemptions. Section 5.2.2 revised
to allow a maximum of twenty acres that may be cleared at one time.
Section 5.2.3 is amended to distinguish a difference between residential
and non-residential. Section 5.3.3 added to require two (2) tree density
units to be planted on each single family lot where mass grading takes
place.






