6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 1/439
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there
are any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 1069
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF
CLIVE, IOWA, 2008,BY AMENDING PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE.
BE ITENACTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CLIVE, IOWA:
SECTION 1. INTERNAL REFERENCES. All references to section numbers in
this ordinance shall be to sections contained within Title 8 (Public Utilities), Chapter 3 (Industrial and Commercial Wastewater and Hauled Waste) of the "2008
Clive Code of Ordinances" unless otherwise specified.
SECTION 2. AMENDMENT. Title 8, Chapter 3 (Industrial and Commercial Wastewater and Hauled Waste) is hereby amended by deleting the Chapter and
inserting in lieu thereof the following:
CHAPTER 3
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
ACT OR CLEAN WATER ACT: the 1972 Federal Water Pollution Control Act, the 1977 Clean Water Act, and the 1987 Water Quality Act, as amended.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The Iowa department of natural resources.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE:
A. An executive officer of a corporation.
B. A general partner of a partnership.
C. The proprietor of a proprietorship.
D. The conservator, trustee, attorney in fact, receiver or other person or agent authorized in law and in fact to act on behalf of users which are not corporations,
partnerships, or proprietorships or on behalf of other entities which must legally act through an agent.
E. Any other authorized representative of a person or entity identified in subsections (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this definition, if the authorization specifies either an
individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager
or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the written authorization is submitted
to the director.
F. Any other person authorized by law to act on behalf of any entity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 2/439
BASELINE MONITORING REPORT: The report required by 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1-7).
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The analysis of BOD as described in Environmental Protection Agency methods.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside the wall
of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three feet (3’) outside the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER OR LATERAL SEWER: The sewer extending from the building drain to the connection with the POTW.
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's pretreatment facility.
CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (CBOD): The analysis of BOD as described in Environmental Protection Agency methods while
inhibiting the nitrogenous oxygen demand.
CATEGORICAL USER: A user subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD): The measurement of the susceptibility of a sample to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant expressed in mg/l and using
Environmental Protection Agency methods.
CITY: The political subdivision known as the city of Clive, Iowa, and also means the territory within the corporate boundaries of the city of Clive.
CITY SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM OR SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM: The local outfall sewers, trunk sewers, pumping stations, force mains, and wastewater
equalization basins, and all other structures, devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, which are used for collecting, conveying or storing wastewater and which
serve and are owned, operated and maintained by the city or by a sanitary district serving the city.
COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA: The formula as found in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
COMPOSITE SAMPLE; A representative sample using a minimum of three grab sample aliquots obtained over a period of time and mixed using either a flow
proportional or time proportional method.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT: BOD, COD, O&G, suspended solids, pH, ammonia nitrogen, total Kjeldahl nitrogen and fecal coliform bacteria.
DISCHARGE OR INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The introduction of treated or untreated wastewater into the POTW.
DISSOLVED SOLIDS: The concentration of residue left in an evaporating dish after evaporation and drying at defined temperatures using Environmental Protection
Agency methods or standard methods.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: All household-type waste discharged from places of human habitation, including toilet, bath, kitchen and laundry wastewater.
Domestic wastewater is further defined as waste which does not exceed daily maximum limits of 300 mg/l COD, 200 mg/l BOD, 250 mg/l suspended solids, 100
mg/l oil & grease, 30 mg/l TKN, and 15 mg/l NH3-N at a discharge rate of 100 gallons per capita per day. This loading is equal to 0.25 pound of COD, 0.17 pound of
BOD, 0.20 pound of suspended solids, 0.083 pound of oil & grease, 0.025 pound of TKN and 0.013 pound of NH3-N per capita per day.
DOMESTIC USER: A person discharging only domestic wastewater to the POTW, which wastewater is discharges from any building or parts of a building designed
for or occupied by one or more persons as a single housekeeping unit, including such units within multifamily dwellings and apartment buildings, which building or
premises is a source of wastewater discharge into a POTW.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 3/439
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY METHODS: Standard procedures for wastewater analysis approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
and prescribed in 40 CFR 136, and includes alternate methods approved by the approval authority.
E.COLI OR ESCHERICHIA COLI:Bacteria that are a member of the fecal coliform group and whose presence indicates fecal contamination in water.
FECAL COLIFORM: Bacteria common to the intestinal tracts of humans and animals whose presence in water is an indication of pollution.
FAT, OIL, AND GREASE OR FOG: Those substances which are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be
amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as “grease” or “greases”.
GARBAGE: Solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage and sale of
produce.
GRAB SAMPLE: A single aliquot sample collected either directly or by means of a mechanical device.
HEADWORKS: The main wet well at the WRF prior to any treatment process.
INDUSTRIAL USER: A person whose property, building or premises is a source of wastewater discharge into the POTW, other than a domestic user.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: The liquid waste from industrial users as distinct from domestic sewage.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, which both:
A. Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and
B. Causes a violation of any requirement of the WRA's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit (including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation) or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any federal, state or local regulations or permits.
LIMIT: The maximum allowable discharge of a given pollutant as in the following definitions:
Daily Maximum Limit or Daily Instantaneous Maximum Limit: The maximum allowable discharge
of pollutant as measured at any time during a calendar day, expressed as either a concentration limit or a daily mass limit. It is a violation if the
concentration limit on any single sample taken exceeds that discharge limits in the discharge permit for the user, or the discharge limits set forth in
section 8-3-11 of this chapter.
Monthly Average Limit: The maximum allowable value for the average of all measurements of a pollutant obtained during one calendar month.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS (NCPS): Any limitations on pollutant discharges to POTW promulgated by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency that apply to specified process wastewater of particular industrial categories.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A permit issued pursuant to the Act.
NEW SOURCE: A source as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(k).
NONCONVENTIONAL POLLUTANTS: All pollutants which are not included in the definition of conventional pollutants.
NH3-N: The ammonia nitrogen concentration in mg/l as determined using Environmental Protection Agency methods.
O&M: Operation and maintenance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 4/439
PASS THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into water of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from
other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the WRA's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation, or other permit issued to the WRA by the Iowa department of natural resources or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, association, joint stock company, society, corporation trust, estate, municipality, governmental
entity, group, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTION: The alteration of chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water as a result of human activity or enterprise.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the publicly owned treatment works which is designed to provide treatment, including recycling and reclamation, of
municipal sewage and industrial waste.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction, elimination, or alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
PRETREATMENT FACILITY: The equipment used to accomplish pretreatment.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment standards, imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, the prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in section 8-3-10 of this chapter, the specific
limitations on discharge as set forth in section 8-3-11 of this chapter, the state pretreatment standards or the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, whichever
standard is most stringent.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles are
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the POTW, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW: "POTW" treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, and which is owned by the Des Moines
Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority or any of Participating Communities that make up the WRA. This definition includes any devices and systems used
in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances if
they convey wastewater to a POTW Treatment Plant.
SAMPLING CHAMBER OR SAMPLING MAINTENANCE HOLE: A device or structure suitable and appropriate to permit sampling and flow measurement of a
wastewater stream to determine compliance with this article.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to a pretreatment facility causing it to become inoperable, or substantial and
permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss
caused by delays in production.
SEWAGE: Includes wastewater as herein defined.
SEWAGE SYSTEM: Sewers, intercepting sewers, pipes or conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and all other constructions, devices and appliances appurtenant
thereto used for collecting or conducting sewage to a point of treatment or ultimate disposal.
SIGNIFICANT USER:
A. All categorical users.
B. All industrial users that:
1. Discharge 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excludes sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater).
2. Contribute a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the WRF; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 5/439
3. Contribute a discharge that has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the director, to adversely affect the POTW treatment plant by causing
interference or pass through.
SLUDGE: The solids separated from the liquids during the wastewater treatment process.
SLUG OR SLUG LOAD: Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any pollutant, measured using a grab or composite sample, is more than
five times the allowable concentration as set forth in sections 8-3-10 and 8-3-11 of this chapter or in a user's most recent wastewater discharge permit or which
exceeds a slug concentration level specified in a wastewater discharge permit. A discharge with pH outside the allowable range by more than one standard unit (S.U.)
shall also be considered a slug.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC): A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, most recent edition.
STANDARD METHOD: The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest USEPA approved edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Wastewater prepared
and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation.
STORM SEWER: A sewer which carries stormwater, surface water and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial waste other than unpolluted cooling water.
T: when used as a portion of a chemical name, shall designate "total" such as in "cyanide-T" where "T" means "total" cyanide.
TKN: The Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen concentration expressed in mg/l as determined using Environmental Protection Agency methods or Standard Methods.
TOTAL METAL: The sum total of the suspended and dissolved concentrations of a metal specified in a wastewater discharge permit or as specified in section 8-3-
11of this chapter.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): The portion of total solids retained by a filter using Environmental Protection Agency methods or Standard Methods.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS (TTO): The summation of all quantified values greater than 0.01 milligram per liter for the toxic organics as specified in the applicable
regulation.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed in 40 CFR 403, appendix B.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water containing none of the following: free or emulsified oil and grease; substances that may impart taste, odor or color characteristics;
volatile, explosive, toxic or poisonous substances in suspension or solution; explosive, odorous or otherwise obnoxious gases. Such water shall not contain more than
25 mg/l of suspended solids, and not more than 25 mg/l of BOD.
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed pretreatment facilities, inadequate
pretreatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER: A person discharging anything other than domestic wastewater into the POTW, and includes categorical users as herein defined.
WASTE HAULER: A private contractor licensed by the WRA to deliver wastewater to the WRF or other locations approved by the WRA director, and includes all
persons required to have a license under section 8-3-22 of this chapter.
WASTEWATER: Means and includes sewage as defined in federal law and regulation, or a combination of the liquid and water-carried waste from residences,
commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present, whether treated or
untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 6/439
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: The document issued to a user by the WRA in accordance with the terms of this article which permits such user to
discharge wastewater to the POTW.
WATER OF THE STATE: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and
all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the
state or any portion thereof.
WRA OR WASTEWATER RECLAMATION AUTHORITY: The Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority, an entity organized and existing
under Chapters 28E and 28F of the Iowa Code, and established pursuant to the WRA Agreement. The term "WRA" means and includes the representatives of the
Participating Communities on the WRA Board, and the officers and employees of the WRA.
WRA AGREEMENT: The Amended and Restated Agreement for the Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority, approved and executed by the
WRA and its Participating Communities and effective as of July 1, 2004.
WRA DIRECTOR OR DIRECTOR: The person appointed by the WRA board, or by the WRA operating contractor upon consultation with the board, as provided in
Section 2.63 of the WRA operating contract, who is charged with the administration and management of the WRA system and of the provision of all services outlined
in operating contract. Unless otherwise indicated in the text, the director shall mean and include the person acting as the director's authorized designee in the
director's absence in carrying out the director's duties under this Article.
WRA OPERATING CONTRACTOR OR OPERATING CONTRACTOR: The city of Des Moines, pursuant to the Initial Operating Contractor executed by the city
of Des Moines and the WRA Board on and as of July 1, 2004, or such successor operating contractor as the WRA shall contract with to provide operation and
management services to the WRA.
WRA PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY:Individually or collectively, depending on context, the cities of Altoona, Ankeny, Bondurant, Clive, Cumming, Des Moines,
Johnston, Norwalk, Pleasant Hill, Polk City, Waukee, and West Des Moines, and Polk County, Warren County, the Urbandale Sanitary Sewer District, the Urbandale-
Windsor Heights Sanitary District and the Greenfield Plaza/Hills of Coventry Sanitary District, together with any other cities, counties, or sanitary districts that
become participating communities under the provisions of the WRA agreement.
WRA COLLECTION AND CONVEYANCE SYSTEM OR WCCS: The WRA sanitary sewer interceptors and extensions to same, detention basins, equalization
basins, storage facilities, pumping stations, force mains and all related property and improvements.
WRA WASTEWATER RECLAMATION FACILITY OF WRF: The wastewater treatment plant located generally at 3000 Vandalia Road, Des Moines, Iowa, as the
same may be expanded or improved in the future, and any other wastewater treatment plants hereafter acquired or constructed and operated by the WRA.
WRA SYSTEM: Includes the WRF, the WCCS,satellite wastewater and CSO treatment facilities hereafter constructed, all real and personal property of every nature
hereinafter owned by the WRA and comprising part of or used as a part of the WRA system, and all appurtenances, contracts, leases, franchises and other intangibles
of the WRA.
8-3-2: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings:
BETX
Benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and
xylenes(total)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 7/439
BMR Baseline monitoring report
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
C Celsius
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
F Fahrenheit
FOG Fat oil, and grease
GPD Gallons per day
IDNR Iowa Department of Natural Resources
lb/day Pounds per day
mgd Million gallons per day
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NCPS National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
or categorical standards
NH3-N Ammonia nitrogen
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System
O&G Oil and grease
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SCP Spill control plan
SIC Standard industrial classification
SNC Significant noncompliance
TCLP Toxicity characteristic leaching procedure
TFE Trichlorotrifluoroethane
TKN Total Kjeldahl nitrogen
TOH Total organic hydrocarbons
TRC Technical review criteria
TSS Total suspended solids
TTO Total toxic organics
USC United States Code
U.S. EPA United States Environmental Protection
Agency
VPH Volatile petroleum hydrocarbons
8-3-3: GENERAL ADOPTION:
The provisions of this chapter are enacted to aid in the enforcement of the pretreatment regulations set forth in this chapter. The City of Clive by enacting this chapter
the WRA and its operating contractor as the enforcement agency under this chapter. Employees, agents and officers of the WRA and of its operating contractor, while
acting to enforce this chapter for the WRA, are empowered to make such inspections, issue such ordered or permits and takes such actions within the corporate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 8/439
boundaries of the city as are authorized by this chapter. The WRA or its operating contractor is also authorized to impose and collect all fees or penalties authorized
by this chapter, and is authorized to directly bill and collect from contributors penalties, fees, charges and surcharges from all users within the city. A user’s failure to
pay any fee, charge, penalty or surcharge is a municipal infraction and shall also be grounds to discontinue sewer service to the user, all as hereafter more particularly
provided. The enforcement of this chapter in the city is not dependent upon passage of this chapter or a similar ordinance by other WRA participating communities.
8-3-4: INTENT AND CONSTRUCTION:
This chapter seeks to implement provisions of the act, the general pretreatment regulations found at 40 CFR, parts 403 and the Iowa administrative code, chapter 567,
sections 62.4 and 62.8. This chapter is to be construed and applied in accordance with the clean water act amendments, the general pretreatment regulations, the Iowa
administrative code and he purpose and policy provision set forth in section 8-3-3 of this chapter.
8-3-5: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter regulates the use of sanitary sewers; private wastewater disposal; the installation and connection of building sewers; and the discharge of wastewater or
waste into the POTW, and the deposit of wastewater and waste hauled to the WRF or to other locations approved by the WRA director for disposal and treatment.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that may interfere with the operation of the system or interfere with sludge management and
disposal.
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that may pass through the system inadequately treated and ultimately into receiving water, the
atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the system.
C. To protect workers’ safety and health and protect against damage to the POTW.
D. To provide for equitable distribution of treatment and industrial pretreatment costs resulting from pollutants introduced into the POTW.
8-3-6: JURISDICTION:
The sections of this chapter are applicable in their entirety to all users who contribute wastewater, directly or indirectly, into the POTW without regard to whether the
physical facilities of such users are situated within or outside the corporation limits of the city.
8-3-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any particular person or particular circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or application of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. To this end, the provisions of this article are severable.
8-3-8: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter shall be construed and interpreted to conform with 40 CFR I, and it is the intent of this chapter that it comply with the federal regulations.
8-3-9: USER REQUIREMENTS
A. Specific Requirements: The following requirements shall apply to all users of the POTW:
1. All users shall prompt notify the WRA director in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge.
2. New or increased contributions of pollutants or changes in the nature of pollutants discharged to the POTW shall require prior approval by the WRA
director.
3. Industrial users shall notify the WRA director, the environmental protection agency regional waste management division director, and state hazardous
waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR
261. The notification shall comply with the requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403. 12(p).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 9/439
4. Discharge of any pollutants without the notice and approval required by this section is prohibited. Upon the receipt of notice required by this section, the
WRA director shall within 180 days or less approve the discharge if he or she finds the proposed discharge meets applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements and would not cause the WRA to violate its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit. The WRA director shall deny
permission for the discharge if he or she finds applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not met or the discharge would cause a violation of
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit for the WRF. In lieu of denial of permission for discharge, the WRA director may allow such
discharge or contribution upon conditions which would not violate applicable pretreatment standards or requirements and would not cause a violation of
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit for the WRF.
5. Food Service Establishments shall be regulated first under Article A of this chapter but may be required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit and be
subject to the requirements of Divisions 1-4 if the WRA Director determines that additional pretreatment is required in order to comply with Fat, Oil, &
Grease discharge limits.
B. Permit: Any part of this section notwithstanding, upon receipt of the notice required by this section, the WRA director may require, in addition to the
requirements of this section, that an industrial user obtain a permit under this chapter. Users who are determined to be industrial users as herein defined and
who refuse to apply for or obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall be subject to termination of sewer services as provided in section 8-3-38 of this chapter.
8-3-10: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
The following general prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW unless the user is subject to a more restrictive National Categorical Pretreatment Standards,
the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, or wastewater discharge permit limit. The following substances are prohibited from discharge to the POTW:
A. Pollutants creating a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one
hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using test methods referenced in 40 CFR 261.21. Waste streams shall not be ignitable at ambient
temperatures. At no time shall (2) successive readings on a meter capable of reading LEL (lower explosive limit) at the nearest accessible point to the
POTW, at the point of discharge into the POTW or at any point in the POTW, be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading greater than ten
percent (10%).
B. Any substance which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 12.0.
C. Solid or viscous pollutants which will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference. Such pollutants include but are not limited
to grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (1/2”) any dimension, animal tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, wipes, spent
grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or
polishing waste, or tumbling and de-burring stones, and wastewater containing fat, wax, O&G, or other substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0 and 65 degrees Celsius).
D. Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference or pass-through at the WRF or which constitutes a slug load as defined in this article.
E. Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater or vapor having a temperature
higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) at the point of introduction into the POTW, and in no case wastewater or vapor which alone or
in concert with other discharges produces a temperature at the WRF greater than 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius).
F. Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
G. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety
problems or a public nuisance.
H. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the WRA.
I. Radioactive wastes unless they comply with Atomic Energy Commission Act of 1954 (68 Stat. 919 as amended and part 20, subpart D, Waste
Disposal, section 20.303 of the regulations issued by the Atomic Energy Commission, or amendments thereto).
J. Any wastewater containing concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of
dissolved solids, such as but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate, which exceed 3,000 mg/l nonvolatile or 3,000 mg/l total dissolved
solids unless approved by the WRA director.
K. Pollutants causing excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye waste and vegetable tanning solutions.
8-3-11: LOCAL LIMITS FOR SPECIFIC POLLUTANTS
A. Generally: Local limits for specific pollutants discharged pursuant to this article shall be as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 10/439
1. Dilution: Dilution of the discharge from a pretreatment facility or from a regulated process is prohibited as a method for treatment of wastes in
order to meet the limits set forth in this article.
2. Sample Location: Measurement of pollutant concentrations to determine compliance shall be made at the point immediately following the
pretreatment facility and before mixture with other waters, unless another point is designated by the WRA director. If necessary, the
concentrations so measured shall be recomputed to exclude the effect of any dilution that is improper using the combined waste stream
formula.
B. Headwork Limits; Average Mass: The average composite loading of all industrial users contributing the following specific pollutants to the POTW
shall not exceed the allowable total pounds. The allocation of pollutants between industrial and nonindustrial sources may be adjusted by the director provided
that the allowable total loading for any pollutant at the headworks of the WRF is not exceeded.
30-Day Average Allowable
Pounds/Day
Pollutant Total Industrial
BOD 195,600 135,153
TSS 300,400 208,463
NH3 13,000 6,959
TKN 27,760 16,950
Maximum Allowable
Headworks Loading
Pounds/Day
Maximum Allowable
Industrial Loading
Pounds/Day
Pollutant Total Industrial
Arsenic-T 7.58 3.81
Cadmium-T 3.65 2.16
Chromium-T 136.35 120.90
Copper-T 148.56 125.51
Cyanide-T 17.08 8.28
Lead-T 28.17 20.94
Mercury-T 0.999 0.747
Nickel-T 87.27 75.75
Silver-T 23.30 19.77
Zinc-T 360.59 283.53
C. Discharge Concentration Limits and Review Criteria: Discharge concentration limits and review criteria shall be as follows:
1. The discharge into the POTW of any materials, water or waste having a pollutant concentration greater than the limits in subsections C3, C4, and C5
of this section or containing pollutants not listed in this subsection shall be subject to the review and approval of the WRA director. After review of the
proposed discharges, the WRA director may:
a. Reject the waste for reasons consistent with section 8-3-5 of this chapter.
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable pollutant concentration for discharge to the POTW.
c. Require control of the quantities and rates of discharge of the water or waste.
d. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treatment of water and waste or any combination thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 11/439
e. Reduce the maximum or average mass loading of present and prospective individual users on any reasonable prorated basis to meet
headworks loading limits at the WRF.
f. Require the user to obtain a wastewater discharge permit and be subject to any of the rules and regulations contained therein.
g. Require the user to meet local limits when local limits are more restrictive than National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, provided that
headworks loading limits are met.
h. Initiate enforcement action in response to any noncompliance with this article using the enforcement procedures outlined in this article.
i. Take any combination of the steps in subsections C1a through C1g, as appropriate.
2. Industrial Users: Users discharging wastewater to the POTW whose pollutant concentrations or flows are greater than the following shall be
considered industrial users for purposes of sewer charges and may be regulated or permitted by the WRA director as appropriate:
Pollutant Daily
Maximum
(mg/l)
BOD 200
TSS 250
COD 300
O&G-T 100
TKN 30
NH3-N 15
An average daily flow greater than 5,000 gallons or having an unusual concentration of flow.
3. Pollutant limits: Average and maximum concentration limits for users without National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for these pollutants
shall be as follows:
Pollutant Daily
Maximum
(mg/l)
Monthly
Average
(mg/l)
Arsenic-T 0.38 0.25
Cadmium-T 0.08 0.05
Chromium-T 6.43 4.29
Copper-T 10.21 6.80
Cyanide-T 0.53 0.36
Lead-T 1.43 0.95
Mercury-T 0.042 0.028
Nickel-T 7.22 4.81
O&G-T 400.0 --
O&G-Mineral 100.0 --
Silver-T 1.30 0.87
VPH 10.0 --
Zinc-T 19.64 13.09
pH range – not lower than 5.0 or greater than 12.0
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 12/439
Temperature (liquids or vapors) – not greater than 150? at point of entry
4. Daily maximum pollutant limits for hauled waste: Wastes delivered to the WRF by truck or rail shall not exceed the following concentrations in
any load or overall daily loading limits unless otherwise approved by the WRA Director:
Pollutant Concentration (mg/l) Loading (pounds/day)
COD 100,000 --
O&G-T 50,000 --
VPH 10.0 --
Arsenic-T -- 0.014
Cadmium-T -- 0.93
Chromium-T -- 24.74
Copper-T -- 23.71
Cyanide-T -- 0.29
Lead-T -- 6.70
Mercury-T -- 0.12
Nickel-T -- 3.71
Silver-T -- 0.26
Zinc-T -- 87.62
pH range shall not be lower than 5.0 or greater than 12.0
5. Daily maximum limit for gasoline cleanup projects: Discharge of wastewater from sites where gasoline is being removed from the soil or
groundwater shall meet the following limits prior to discharge to the POTW:
Pollutant mg/l
Benzene 0.050
BETX 0.750
D. No subsection of this section shall be construed to provide lesser discharge standards than are or that may be imposed and required by U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or the Iowa department of natural resources, nor to allow the average allowable total loading for any pollutant at the headworks of the
WRF to be exceeded.
8-3-12: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
Users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (NCPS) as contained in 40 CFR I, subchapter N, part 405-471 shall comply with the standards
and applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. New sources of categorical discharge shall meet National Categorical Pretreatment Standards in the
shortest feasible time, but in no case longer than 90 days from the commencement of discharge. Failure to comply shall be a violation of this article and subject the
user to enforcement action. The WRA is required to notify all known affected categorical users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. Failure
of the WRA to notify a user shall not relieve the user of the duty, if any, to comply with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
8-3-13: STATE REQUIREMENTS:
State of Iowa requirements and limitations on discharges pursuant to this article shall apply when they are more stringent than U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or WRA requirements and limitations unless allowed by the Iowa department of natural resources.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 13/439
8-3-14: CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION:
The city, acting at the direction of the WRA, reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW than those
contained in this article if deemed necessary to comply with the purpose and policy objectives presented in section 8-3-5 of this chapter.
8-3-15: PRETREATMENT:
A. Facility’s Requirements: A user discharging or with potential to discharge any waste into the POTW as set forth in section 8-3-10, 8-3-11 or 8-3-12 of this
chapter shall be required by the WRA director to construct, install and operate, at the user's sole expense, such pretreatment facilities as may be required in
order to:
1. Reduce the objectionable characteristics or constituents of wastewater to within the maximum limits provided for in sections 8-3-10, 8-3-11, and 8-3-
12 of this chapter.
2. Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such wastewater.
3. Reduce the pollutants to such concentration and flows as may be contained in the user's wastewater discharge permit.
4. Prevent the discharge of liquid waste containing FOG, sand in excessive amounts, any flammable waste, or other harmful pollutants. All traps or
similar devices shall be of a type and capacity needed to perform effectively and shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All
traps or devices shall be provided and maintained in efficient operating condition at all times. Materials removed from traps shall be considered
unacceptable for disposal at the WRF unless specifically approved by the WRA director.
B. Review and Approval of Plans: All plans, specifications, technical operating data and other information pertinent to the proposed operation and maintenance
of pretreatment facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the WRA director prior to construction. Design and installation of such facilities shall be subject
to the requirements of all applicable codes, chapters and laws, including local zoning regulations. The review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall, in no way, relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the WRA
director under this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operations shall be reported to and be acceptable to the WRA
director prior to the user's initiations of the changes.
C. Users shall continuously maintain all pretreatment facilities required by this article in satisfactory and effective operating condition at the sole expense of such
user.
D. No section contained in this article shall be construed to prevent or prohibit a separate or special agreement between the WRA and any user whereby
wastewater containing waste of unusual strength, character or composition may be accepted for treatment, subject to additional payment by such user;
provided, however, that such agreement shall have the prior approval of the WRA Board, shall not conflict with the Iowa department of natural resources and
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency requirements, and shall be consistent with subsection 8-3-11B and sections 8-3-12 and 8-3-13 of this chapter, and
subsection F of this section.
E. The WRA director may reject any waste which, in the opinion of the director, may cause interference or pass-through.
F. Users shall obtain the specific approval of the WRA director prior to discharging any waste resulting from a pretreatment facility to the POTW. The WRA
director may develop a documentation system to track the transportation and final disposition of any pretreatment waste. Pretreatment waste regulated by this
subsection shall include waste generated as a result of pretreatment processes used to comply with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits,
air pollution permits, wastewater discharge permits, soil/groundwater reclamation processes, and pollutants resulting from a spill of any liquid or solid
material or the cleanup of any such spill. Pretreatment waste is prohibited from disposal to the water of the state except as specifically permitted by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources.
8-3-16: DILUTION PROHIBITED:
Users shall not increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to
achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or with any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the
WRA or its Operating Contractor.
8-3-17: SPILL CONTAINMENT:
A. Prevention of Accidental Discharge: Users having the ability to cause interference or pass through or to discharge a slug shall provide protection from
accidental discharge to the POTW of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained at the user's sole cost and expense.
B. Users meeting the criteria in subsection A of this section shall develop a spill containment plan. The plan shall require the approval of the WRA director and
shall contain the following:
1. A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 14/439
2. A description of stored chemicals.
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the WRA of slug discharges, including any that would violate the discharge prohibitions in section 8-3-10 of
this chapter. Notification procedures shall comply with subsections C and D of this section.
4. A description of procedures and structures necessary to prevent adverse impacts upon the POTW from accidental spills including inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants including solvents, and/or measures and equipment
for emergency response.
5. A schedule for the completion or implementation of necessary procedures and structures. Complete implementation and installation of any
procedures or structures shall be according to the shortest possible schedule, but in no case longer than one year. Review and approval of such plans
and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify and operate its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of
this chapter.
C. Notify WRA of Illegal Discharge: Users shall immediately telephone and notify the WRA of any accidental or deliberate discharge of pollutants which
violates section 8-3-10 of this chapter or which is a slug load. Any discharge into the POTW of a substance which is a listed or characteristic waste under
section 3001 of RCRA must be immediately reported to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Regional Director, the Iowa department of natural
resources, and the WRA. Notifications required in this subsection shall include the name of caller, location and time of discharge, pollutant concentration,
volume and the corrective actions taken.
D. Report Required: Users shall submit a written report to the WRA director within (5) days following such an accidental or deliberate discharge describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Users shall submit follow-up reports as may be required
by the WRA director. Such report shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such report relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be
imposed by this article or otherwise. Failure to report accidental or deliberate discharges may, in addition to any other remedies available to the city, result in
the revocation of the discharger's wastewater discharge permit.
E. Users to Control Production: Users shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations
upon reduction, loss, or failure of its pretreatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of pretreatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power to the user's pretreatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
F. Posting Emergency Notification Procedures: Users required to have a spill containment plan must permanently post a notice in English and the language of
common use on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call if a prohibited discharge occurs. Users shall ensure that all
employees who are in a position to cause, discover, or observe such an accidental discharge are advised of the emergency notification procedures.
8-3-18: TREATMENT UPSETS:
Users shall inform the WRA director within one hour of becoming aware of an upset in operations that places it in a temporary state of noncompliance with
the pollutant limits in this article. Users shall provide a follow-up written report to the WRA director within (5) days. The report must demonstrate that the
pretreatment facility was being operated in a prudent and appropriate manner and shall contain:
A. A description of the upset, its cause, and impact on the user's compliance status.
B. The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and, if the sjkflaksjdnoncompliance is continuing, the time by which
compliance is reasonably expected to be restored.
C. All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of such an upset.
8-3-19 TREATMENT BYPASS:
A. Bypass Prohibited; Exceptions: Under this chapter, bypass is prohibited unless it is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property
damage or no feasible alternatives exist such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance during normal periods of
equipment downtime.
B. Maintenance: The user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause a violation of pretreatment standards, but only if it is for essential maintenance to
ensure efficient operation.
C. Notification Procedure: Notification of bypass shall be submitted in accordance with the following:
1. Anticipated Bypass: If the user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice, at least (10) days before the date
of the bypass, to the WRA director.
2. Unanticipated Bypass: The user shall immediately notify the WRA director and submit a written report to the WRA within (5) days. This report
shall specify the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 15/439
a. A description of the bypass, its cause, and the duration.
b. Whether the bypass has been corrected.
c. The steps being taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent a reoccurrence of the bypass.
D. Liability of User: Proper notification shall not relieve the user of liability for treatment costs and fees or other remedies as provided for in section 8-3-
15 of this chapter.
8-3-20: FEES:
To provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW and for the implementation of the pretreatment program established by this article, the following
fees are hereby established and shall be applicable to discharges by all users:
A. Fees and Changes Enumerated: All users shall be subject to the following fees and charges:
1. The wastewater discharge permit application fee shall be ($200.00) for a class A permit, ($100) for a class B permit, and ($100) for a
soil/groundwater remediation permit.
2. The annual fee for a class A wastewater discharge permit shall be ($1000.00).
3. The annual fee for a class B wastewater discharge permit shall be ($400.00).
4. The fee paid by each industrial user when an accidental discharge or slug load occurs shall be up to ($1,000.00). The fee shall reimburse the
WRA for any costs incurred as a result of the discharge.
5. The fee for sampling a user's discharge shall be ($50.00) per day when using a (24) hour automatic sampler. The fee for subsequent
consecutive days and for collecting grab samples shall be ($25.00) per day. When a sampling event must be rescheduled due to failure of the
user's sampling equipment or due to a sampler seal (used to detect sample tampering) being broken, a trip charge of ($25.00) and a rescheduling
fee of ($50.00) shall be assessed. The trip charge fee may be waived if the user informs the WRA of sampling equipment failure prior to (8:00)
A.M. of a scheduled sampling day.
6. Laboratory analysis fees for those analyses performed by the WRA shall be as follows:
LABORATORY ANALYSIS FEES
Test Cost/
Sample
BOD $ 20.00
COD 20.00
Total Organic Carbon (TOC) 20.00
TSS 10.00
pH 5.00
Oil and grease – Total 35.00
Mineral/nonmineral 35.00
Nitrogen, ammonia 15.00
Nitrogen, nitrate 15.00
TKN 30.00
Phosphorous, total 25.00
Potassium 12.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 16/439
Calcium carbonate equivalent 15.00
Soil analysis, each pollutant 20.00
Phenols 28.00
Cyanide 30.00
Metals:
Arsenic 20.00
Selenium 20.00
Mercury 25.00
Other metals (per parameter) 15.00
BETX (OA-1) 40.00
VPH (OA-1) 40.00
BETX & VPH (OA-1) 45.00
USEPA Tests:
608 Organochlorine Pesticides
& PCBs
70.00
624 Volatile Organic
Compounds
140.00
625 Base/Neutral Organic
Compounds
and/or
290.00
625 Acid/Organic Compounds 290.00
7. Fees for analysis performed by laboratories other than the WRA laboratory shall be the full cost of each analysis.
8. Fees for annual or biannual inspections of permitted users shall be ($100.00) for those holding a class A permit and ($50.00) for those holding a
class B permit.
9. Fees for copying and mailing documents shall be ($1.00) for the initial page and ($0.25) for each additional page plus postage. No charges shall
be assessed for requests for copies received from individuals or agencies served by the WRA, provided the number of pages requested does not
exceed (10).
10. Fees for past due reminders sent each (30) days that a balance remains unpaid shall be ($5.00).
11. Prohibitive waste charges for each pollutant discharged in excess of permit or ordinance limits shall be ($25.00) per day for class B permit
holders and ($50.00) per day for class A permit holders. High strength charges shall double if discharges are slug loads. Payment of fees does
not preclude other enforcement action and may not be paid in lieu of compliance with discharge limitations.
12. Fees for inspection of a food service establishment as defined in Article A of this Chapter, regulation of fats, oils, and grease discharge by food
service establishments, shall be ($50.00) per visit.
B. Surcharges:
1. All users contributing wastewater in excess of the following concentrations shall be assessed a surcharge, which shall be in addition to the rates
and charges ordinarily billed to such users for sewer use:
Pollutant Surcharge
(per pound)
Suspended solids in excess of 250 mg/l $0.16
BOD or CBOD in excess of 200 mg/l 0.11
TKN in excess of 30 mg/l 0.61
Oil and grease in excess of 100 mg/l 0.06
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 17/439
2. Chemical oxygen demand (COD) in excess of three hundred milligrams (300 mg/l) may be used at the discretion of the WRA director in lieu of
CBOD. In such case, the excess COD concentration shall be multiplied by the known CBOD/COD ratio or by a ratio of two-thirds (2/3) to
establish an equivalent CBOD concentration. Ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N) in excess of fifteen milligrams (15 mg/l) may be used at the discretion
of the WRA director in lieu of TKN by multiplying the excess NH3-N concentration times two (2) to establish an equivalent TKN concentration.
A. Effective Date: The establishment and imposition of new or different fees or charges, in addition or in substitution for those provided above in this
section, shall be by ordinance amending this chapter. The amounts of the fees and charges established in this section shall be and remain in effect until
such time as the WRA Board shall by resolution revise said fee amounts. Said revised fees and charges shall take effect after the board causes said
resolution to be sent to this city council and thereafter causes same to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in each county in which
participating communities are located.
8-3-21: CLASSES OF PERMITS:
Discharge permit classifications shall be as follows:
A. Class A permit issued to a user discharging twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excludes sanitary, noncontact
cooling, and boiler blowdown).
B. Class B permit issued to a user discharging less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of process wastewater.
8-3-22: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
A. All new industrial users shall notify the WRA director of the nature and characteristics of their proposed discharge one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to commencing discharge. A notification form prescribed by the WRA shall be used for this purpose
B. Significant users shall discharge wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the POTW only after obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the
WRA director. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a user of the obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state, or
local law.
C. Other users, including waste haulers, shall obtain permits as required by the WRA director.
8-3-23: PERMIT APPLICATIONS; BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS:
Users applying for a wastewater discharge permit or submitting a baseline monitoring report shall submit the following information as required by 40 CFR
403.12 or by the WRA director:
A. Users applying for a wastewater discharge permit must submit an application form prescribed by the WRA and accompanied by the application fee.
All new significant users must submit such application one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date of any wastewater discharge. Existing users
subject to new National Categorical Pretreatment Standards must, within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of the standard, submit
such an application. The following information is required:
1. Name, address, and location of the facility, if different from the mailing address.
2. The name of a person or agent authorized to accept legal service of process.
3. Standard industrial classification (SIC) code of both the industry as a whole and any processes for which National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards have been promulgated and a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
4. Wastewater constituents and characteristics including any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any federal, state, or local standards
with sampling and analysis performed in accordance with Environmental Protection Agency approved methods, and meeting the following
requirements:
a. The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process if the user is a categorical user.
b. All samples shall be representative of daily operations
c. A minimum of four (4) grab samples, if required, must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics.
For all other pollutants required, (24) hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques
where feasible. The WRA director may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any user who demonstrates that flow-proportional
sampling is not feasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional techniques or through a minimum of four (4) grab
samples where the user demonstrates that such sampling will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 18/439
d. Where the flow of the stream being sampled is less than or equal to two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) gallons per day, the user
must analyze three (3) samples within a two (2) week period. Where the flow of the stream being sampled is greater than two hundred fifty
thousand (250,000) gallons per day, the user must analyze six samples within a two (2) week period.
e. Samples must be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated
process if no pretreatment exists and prior to mixing with other waste. If non-regulated wastewater is mixed with regulated wastewater prior to
pretreatment, the user must measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR
403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentrations or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the WRA director. Users not subject to
categorical standards shall submit analysis of wastewater representative of the effluent discharged to the POTW.
f. The WRA director may allow the submission of an application which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for pretreatment.
g. A statement indicating the time, date and place of sampling, methods of analysis, and certifying that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW shall accompany each application/baseline monitoring
report unless such sampling and analysis was performed by WRF.
5. Time and duration of all discharges.
6. Daily maximum, daily average, and monthly average wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any.
7. Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes at the site, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at the facility which
are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the POTW.
8. The site plans, floor plans and mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation. The plans shall include a schematic process diagram which indicates all points of discharge to the POTW. All plans must be
certified for accuracy by a professional engineer registered in the state.
9. Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production.
10. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day).
11. Number and type of employees and hours of operation and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment facility.
12. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the user and certified to by a professional engineer registered in the state, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not whether additional operation and maintenance or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet pretreatment standards and requirements.
13. If additional pretreatment or O&M will be required to meet pretreatment standards or requirements, the user shall supply a compliance schedule
indicating the shortest time schedule necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of such additional pretreatment or O&M. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions
apply to this schedule:
a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading
to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. Such
schedule shall include, where applicable, but shall not be limited to dates for the hiring of an engineer, completing preliminary plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, beginning operation, and conducting routine operations.
b. No increment referred to in subsection A13a of this section shall exceed nine (9) months, nor shall the total compliance period exceed
eighteen (18) months.
c. No later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the WRA director, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any
delay, and if appropriate the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9)
months elapse between such progress reports to the WRA director.
14. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the limits on discharge into the POTW set forth in section
8-3-10, 8-3-11 and 8-3-12 of this chapter, or any other limits set by the WRA director, a plan shall be provided by the user giving the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide the needed equipment, operation, or maintenance changes and additions to meet such limits. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. For
a compliance schedule for meeting National Categorical Pretreatment Standards the following condition shall apply:
a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading
to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required to meet the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards. Such schedule shall include, where applicable, but not be limited to dates for the hiring of an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction and completing
construction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 19/439
b. No time increment in the schedule may exceed nine (9) months.
c. No later than fourteen (14) days after each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the WRA director stating whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date
on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return to the
schedule established. In no case shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the WRA.
15. Any additional information required by the WRA director to evaluate a permit application.
B. Certification: All applications and reports must contain the certification statement and be signed in accordance with section 8-3-27 of this chapter.
8-3-24: REPORT ON COMPLIANCE BY CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIES:
Users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall submit a report to the WRA director containing the information described in subsections 8-
3-23A3, A4, A5 and A11 of this chapter within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
or, if a new source, following commencement of discharge. Users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits shall provide a reasonable measure of the user's
long term production rate. For all other users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production or other measure of operation, this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All reports must contain the
certification statement and be signed in accordance with section 8-3-27 of this chapter.
8-3-25: PERMIT CONDITIONS, RESTRICTIONS, MODIFICATIONS:
A. Permit Contents: Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the WRA director to prevent pass
through or interference; protect the quality of the water body receiving effluent from the POTW; protect worker health and safety; facilitate the WRA's
sludge management and disposal program; protect ambient air quality; and protect against damage to the POTW. The WRA director may include the
following items in the permit, and such additional items as the director determines necessary or prudent:
1. Limits on the average or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
2. Limits on the average or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater constituents or properties.
3. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce, eliminate,
or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW.
4. Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including additional management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or prohibited discharges.
5. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
6. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection, sampling, and flow monitoring facilities and equipment for each separate discharge into
the POTW.
7. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and
reporting schedules.
8. Compliance schedules.
9. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports and which may include production data.
10. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the WRA director and affording the director
or the director's representatives access thereto.
11. Requirements for the notification of any substantial change in the manufacturing processes, pretreatment processes, quantity or quality of waste
discharged to the POTW ninety (90) days prior to such change. The WRA director shall approve, deny or condition a changed discharge prior to a
change occurring in accordance with subsection 8-3-9A4 of this chapter.
12. Requirements for notification of excessive, accidental, or slug discharges.
13. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the WRA director to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 20/439
14. A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the term of the permit.
B. Permit Duration and Renewal: Permits required under this division shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. Permit fees shall
be due annually to the WRA regardless of the term of the permit. Permitted users shall apply for a new permit by submitting a completed permit
application a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit.
C. Continuation of Expired Permits: Expired permits issued pursuant to this division shall remain effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued unless the
user is notified of permit termination by the WRA director.
D. Permit modifications:
1. The WRA director may modify the permit issued pursuant to this division for good cause, including but not limited to the following:
a. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standard or requirement. After becoming aware of more stringent standards
or requirements, the WRA will, as necessary, update permits within ninety (90) days.
b. To make material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's operation processes, or discharge volume or character which were not
considered in drafting the effective permit;
c. To make a change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or
elimination of the authorized discharge;
d. Upon receipt of information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, to the city, the WRA or operating contractor
personnel, or to the receiving water;
e. Upon occurrence of a violation of any terms or conditions of the permit;
f. Misrepresentation of, or grant of variance from, such categorical standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
g. To correct typographical or other errors in the permit;
h. To reflect transfer of ownership or operation of the permitted facility to a new owner or operator; or
i. Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and
regulations.
2. The filing of a request by the permittee for permit modification, revocation and reissuance, termination, or a notification of planned changes or
anticipated noncompliance shall not have the effect of staying or delaying the implementation or effective date of any permit condition.
E. Permit transfer: An industrial wastewater discharge permit is not transferable to any other person or entity. A new owner or operator must apply for a new
wastewater discharge permit sixty (60) days prior to taking ownership or undertaking operation of a permitted facility.
F. Denial of permit: The WRA director may deny a wastewater discharge permit to any user whose discharge of material to the POTW, whether shown upon
application, including test results submitted by the applicant, or determined after inspection or testing conducted by the WRA or its operating contractor, is
not in conformity with this article or whose application is incomplete or does not comply with the requirements of section 8-3-23 of this chapter.
G. Permit violations: Any violation of the terms, conditions, or limits of a user's wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and
shall subject the user to all enforcement procedures outlined in this article.
8-3-26: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS:
Under this division, periodic compliance reports are required as follows:
A. Significant users shall submit to the WRA director, during the months of January and July, a report indicating the nature, concentration, and flow of pollutants
in the effluent which are limited by permit or pretreatment standards for the preceding six (6) month period. This report shall include a record of the monthly
average flows and the daily flow for each analysis date during the reporting period. At the discretion of the WRA director and in consideration of such factors
as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the WRA director may agree to alter the months during which the reports are to be submitted.
More frequent reports may be required by the WRA director.
B. The WRA director may impose mass limitations on users. In such cases, the report required by subsection A of this section shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. All analyses shall be performed using Environmental Protection Agency approved
methods using sampling techniques approved by the Iowa department of natural resources.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 21/439
C. Users shall meet the certification and signatory requirements in section 8-3-27 of this chapter for each report submitted under this section. Where the WRA
itself collects all the information required for the report, including flow data, the industrial user will not be required to submit a periodic compliance report.
D. A user must notify the WRA director of all violations identified as a result of self-monitoring to the POTW by telephone, during normal business hours,
within 24 hours of the time the user becomes aware of such violation. The user must also submit the results of repeat analyses to the WRA within 30 days
after becoming aware of the violation, together with a complete report on all steps taken to resolve the violation. The user need not repeat the analyses if:
1. The WRA performs sampling of the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month; or
2. The WRA performs sampling of the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results
of this sampling.
E. A user who monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the WRA or who self-monitors in addition to WRA monitoring, using Environmental
Protection Agency methods or standard methods, shall report the monitoring results to the WRA director in accordance with subsections A, B and D of this
section.
8-3-27: CERTIFICATION AND SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS:
A. All applications or reports submitted by a user pursuant to this division shall contain the following certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the
system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations."
B. All applications and reports shall be signed by an authorized representative of the “user” as defined herein. A user shall maintain a current and accurate
authorization on file with the WRA director.
8-3-28: MONITORING FACILITIES:
A. Facilities Required: When required by the WRA director pursuant to this division, each permitted user shall at its expense provide and operate monitoring
facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems. The WRA director may require the
placement of such monitoring facilities at the end of each process where pollutants are used, produced, or treated. The monitoring facility should normally
be situated on the user's premises and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
B. Sampling Requirements: When required by the wastewater discharge permit and within ninety (90) days of written notification, a user shall install a
sampling chamber for each separate discharge of the building sewer in accordance with plans and specification approved by the WRA director. A user
shall provide ample room in or near such sampling chamber to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. Each user shall at its
expense maintain all sampling and measuring equipment in a safe and proper operating condition at all times, which equipment shall be safely, easily and
independently accessible to authorized representatives of the WRA. Users shall certify all flow measuring devices to be in proper working condition at a
frequency specified in the permit or in writing by the WRA director, using a qualified technician acceptable to the WRA director. Sampling shall be in
accordance with the following:
1. Each sampling chamber shall contain a flume unless another device is approved by the WRA director, with a recording and totalizing device for
measurement of the liquid quantity.
2. At the discretion of the WRA director, metered water supply to a user may be used as the volume quantity where it is substantiated that the metered
water supply and waste quantities are approximately the same, or where a measurable adjustment agreed to by the director is made in the metered
water supply to determine the liquid waste quantity. Separate meters may be used to subtract water which is not discharged to the POTW or is
discharged to a sewer other than the sampled location.
3. Samples shall be taken at a frequency and volume determined by the WRA director and shall be properly refrigerated and preserved in accordance
with Environmental Protection Agency approved methods. The sample shall be composited in proportion to the flow for a representative twenty-four
(24) hour sample. A time proportioned twenty-four (24) hour sample may be used if flow proportioned sampling is determined by the WRA director to
be impractical. Grab samples shall be used where appropriate.
C. A user must inform the WRA director prior to breaking a sampler seal, used by the WRA to detect sample tampering, unless necessary to prevent loss of
life, personal injury, or severe property damage. A user shall not place additional seals or locks upon a sampler which may be used by the WRA without
first obtaining approval from the WRA director.
8-3-29: INSPECTION, SAMPLING AND RECORD KEEPING AUTHORITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 22/439
Under this chapter, users shall give the following authorities to the WRA and its operating contractor:
A. Right Of Entry: Users shall permit authorized representatives or agents of the WRA to enter upon all properties and all parts of the premises, or upon
properties of users with wastewater discharge permits for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, records copying, or the performance of
any of their duties. This shall include the right to set up, on the user's property, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance
monitoring, or metering operations as may be required in pursuance of the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
B. Security Measures: Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the
user shall make necessary arrangements in the security measures so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, WRA or operating contractor personnel
will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
C. Records Retention: All users subject to any of the reporting requirements of this chapter shall maintain copies of reports and records of all information as
required in 40 CFR 403.12(o) resulting from any monitoring activities required by this chapter for a minimum of three (3) years and shall make such records
available for inspection and copying by the WRA and its operating contractor. This period of retention shall be extended until the completion of any
unresolved negotiation, hearing or litigation involving a purported violation.
8-3-30: CONFIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS, DATA AND INFORMATION:
A. Expect as provided in this section, documents, data and information be obtained from user reports, questionnaires, permit applications and inspections
pursuant to this chapter shall be made available to the public or other government agencies without restriction. If the user specifically requests and is able
to demonstrate that the release of such information would divulge information concerning processes or methods of production entitled to protection under
law as trade secrets of the use or would give the advantage to competitors and serve no public purpose, the WRA director may determine that such
information should be kept confidential and not made available for public examination, but such information shall be available in the U.S. environmental
protection agency or the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
B. Decisions by the WRA director to deny confidential status for information may be appealed using the procedures in section 8-3-31 of this chapter. In
determining whether information is confidential, the provisions of chapter 22 of the code of Iowa shall prevail.
C. Effluent data and enforcement actions by the WRA or its operating contractor will not be considered confidential records or information.
8-3-31: APPEAL OF DENIAL OF CONFIDENTIAL STATUS:
A. Any person aggrieved by the WRA director's decision to release information or data obtained as provided in subsection 8-3-30A of this chapter and who
can demonstrate a direct and substantial interest in the information or data sought to be kept confidential may appeal the WRA director's decision. A
request for appeal shall be filed in writing with the WRA director not less than five (5) days after the WRA director's decision to deny confidential status
to such information or data. The appeal request shall include a statement of the basis upon which the request for confidential status is made, as well as the
appealing party's interest in the information or data sought to be kept confidential. The WRA director may request additional information from the
appealing party.
B. Based upon the information provided by the appealing party, the WRA director shall make a determination with respect to the confidentiality of the
information or data at issue. The WRA director shall notify the parties, in writing, of the WRA director's decision within seven (7) days after receipt of the
appeal.
C. If still aggrieved by the WRA director's determination on appeal, a party may file an action in Polk County district court, seeking a declaratory ruling with
respect to the confidentiality of such documents, data and information, or seeking an injunction to prevent the disclosure of same.
D. During the pendency of an appeal to the WRA director, the documents, data or information at issue shall be kept confidential. However, if during the
pendency of such appeal, a request for examination or copying of such documents, data or information is made of the WRA or its operating contractor
pursuant to chapter 22, the WRA or its operating contractor will notify the appealing party of such request for disclosure and will keep confidential the
requested documents, data or information, pending action by the appealing party to defend its confidentiality request. In that notification, the appealing
party requesting confidentiality will be given not more than five (5) calendar days within which to file suit in Polk County district court seeking the entry
of a declaratory order and/or injunction to protect and keep confidential such documents, data or information. If the appealing party fails to initiate suit
within the time requested, the WRA director shall release the documents, data or informational issue for public examination.
E. If during the pendency of such appeal, a lawsuit is initiated pursuant to chapter 22 seeking the release of such documents, data or information, the
appealing party shall take action to defend its confidentiality request in said lawsuit. If the appealing party fails to defend its confidentiality request in said
suit, the WRA director shall release the documents, data or information at issue for public examination.
8-3-32: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 23/439
The WRA will annually publish, in the largest daily newspaper published in the WRA community, a list of users who at any time during the previous twelve
(12) months were in significant noncompliance as defined in section 8-3-33 of this chapter.
8-3-33: SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
A. Instances of Noncompliance: Any violation of pretreatment requirements under this article (i.e. including but not limited to those relating to limits, sampling,
analysis, reporting, meeting compliance schedules, and regulatory deadlines) is an instance of noncompliance for which the user is liable for enforcement,
including penalties and injunctive relief. Instances of significant noncompliance are user violations which meet one or more of the following criteria:
1. Violations of wastewater discharge limits as follows:
a. Chronic Violations. Sixty-six percent (66%) or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in
a six (6) month period (any magnitude of exceedance).
b. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) Violations. Thirty-three percent (33%) or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum
limit or the same average limit by more than the TRC in a six-month period. (e.g., limit x TRC = the point at which a violation becomes a
TRC violation). There are two groups of TRCs as follow:
Group I for conventional pollutants (BOD, TSS,
FOG)
TRC = 1.4
Group II for all other pollutants TRC = 1.2
c. Other Violations: Any other violation of a wastewater discharge permit limit (average or daily maximum) that the WRA director believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference, including slug loads, or pass through or which endangers the health of city,
WRA or operating contractor personnel or the public.
d. Pollutant Causing Danger to Humans OR Environment: Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human
health/welfare or to the environment and has resulted in the WRA's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
2. Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule date.
3. Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring data, or any other report required by the WRA within forty-five (45) days from
the due date.
4. Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
5. Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of Best Management Practices that the WRA director considers to be
significant.
B. Duties of the Director: When a user is in significant noncompliance, the WRA director is directed to:
1. Report the information to the Iowa Department of Natural Resources as part of the annual pretreatment performance summary of permitted user
noncompliance.
2. Include the user in the annual public notification according to section 8-3-32 of this chapter.
3. Address significant noncompliance through appropriate enforcement actions or document in a timely manner the reasons for withholding
enforcement.
8-3-34: ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS:
A. Notice of Violation: The WRA director may issue a written notice to the user giving the specific nature of violations which shall include the frequency,
magnitude and impact of the violation upon the POTW. The notice may also include the following:
1. An order requiring a plan of action for preventing reoccurrence of the violation.
2. An order requiring specific action for accomplishing remediation.
3. An order requiring the user to respond in writing within thirty (30) days.
B. Corrective Action: The WRA director is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the user responsible for any noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct
noncompliance within a time period specified by the order.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 24/439
C. Compliance Schedule: The WRA director may issue enforceable orders or schedules to require compliance with pretreatment standards including
appropriate interim limits. Such orders and schedules may be incorporated as a revision to an existing wastewater discharge permit and shall not require
the consent of the user.
8-3-35: ACTIONS AUTHORIZED:
A. Where there has been noncompliance with any section of this article, the WRA director may request the WRA operating contractor's attorney, or the
attorney retained by the WRA for that purpose, to bring an action in equity or at law to seek the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both,
or such other relief as may be appropriate, to compel the user's compliance with this article.
B. In addition to other remedies provided under this section or other sections of this article, in any action brought at the request of the WRA director to
enforce this article, the WRA operating contractor's attorney or the attorney retained by the WRA is authorized to seek to recover all actual damages
suffered by the city or the WRA, including all actual damages and losses related to costs of repair and remediation of the POTW, costs of investigation and
administration reasonably related to any particular violation and attorneys' fees.
8-3-36: CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. Each violation of any section of this article or of a permit issued under this article is declared to be a municipal infraction. Each day that a violation of a
section of this article continues, and each day that a violation of a permit issued under this article continues, shall be considered a separate municipal
infraction.
B. Any person who knowingly makes a false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or
required to be maintained pursuant to this article or a wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this article, commits a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty as hereafter provided by subsection
D of this section.
C. Any person who fails to perform an act required by the provisions of this chapter, or who commits an act prohibited by the provisions of this chapter,
commits an environmental violation and shall be guilty of a municipal infraction, punishable by a civil penalty as provided by subsection D of this section.
Violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40 CFR 403.8 is an environmental violation punishable by a civil penalty as hereafter
provided in subsection D of this section.
D. Whenever in this chapter, any act is prohibited and is declared to be a municipal infraction or whenever in this chapter the doing of any act is required and
the failure to do that act is declared to be a municipal infraction, the violation of any such provision shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation or, if the infraction is a repeat offense, by a civil penalty of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each repeat offense. However, a municipal infraction which is classified as an environmental violation or which arises from noncompliance
with a pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 CFR 403.8, by an industrial user may be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or continues. Each day a violation of a provision of this chapter continues shall be considered a
separate municipal infraction.
(State law reference(s) – Authority for
Enhanced penalties in pretreatment violations,
Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1]).
8-3-37: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The WRA director may decline to reissue a permit to any user who has failed to comply with this article or any order or previous permit issued under this
article unless such user first files a satisfactory bond payable to the WRA in a sum not to exceed the value determined by the WRA director to be necessary to achieve
compliance giving due consideration to the number and magnitude of previous violations, potential need for remediation and stating the reasons which support the
amount of bond in a written order directed to the user, but in no case shall the bond be required to be greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The
user shall use a bond form prescribed by the WRA.
8-3-38 REVOCATION OF DISCHARGE PERMIT; TERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE:
A. Grounds For Revocation Of Discharge Permit And/Or For Termination of Sewer Service: Any user who violates this article, any condition of its
wastewater discharge permit, or any of the following is subject to having its discharge permit revoked and/or its sewer service terminated in accordance
with the procedures of this section:
1. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge.
2. Failure of the user to report substantial changes in process activity or in volume or character of pollutants being discharged into the POTW at least
ninety (90) days prior to such change.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 25/439
3. Tampering with monitoring equipment.
4. Refusal to allow reasonable access by WRA or operating contractor personnel to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or
sampling.
5. Violation of permit conditions.
6. Failure to report an upset, failure, or bypass of the user's pretreatment facilities.
7. Failure to pay fines, fees, or sewer user charges.
8. Failure to follow enforcement orders or compliance schedules.
9. Failure to correct a condition that impedes or alters the WRA's ability to monitor the user's discharge or has the potential to cause interference or passthrough.
10. Failure to obtain a wastewater discharge permit as required by this article after notification by the WRA director that such permit is required.
B. Procedure For Revocation Of Discharge Permit And For Termination Of Sewer Service: The procedure for revocation of a discharge permit and
termination of sewer service shall be as follows:
1. Any permit issued to a user pursuant to this article may be revoked, and sewer service terminated, by written order of the WRA director, specifying
the grounds for such revocation and termination as outlined in subsection A of this section, which order shall not take effect until hearing thereon as
hereafter provided. Upon determining that grounds exist for an order to revoke a user's discharge permit and terminate sewer service, the WRA
director shall cause a notice of hearing to be prepared, specifying the violations of subsection A of this section which are deemed to have occurred, and
the time, date and place that such hearing will be held. The notice shall be sent to the user by regular mail addressed to the user's address listed on the
wastewater discharge permit a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, and shall be deemed delivered when placed in the mail.
2. Sewer service may be terminated by written order of the WRA director, specifying the grounds for such revocation and termination as outlined in
subsection A of this section, which order shall not take effect until hearing thereon as hereafter provided. Upon determining that grounds exist for an
order to terminate sewer service, the WRA director shall cause a notice of hearing to be prepared, specifying the violation of subsection A of this
section which is deemed to have occurred, and the time, date and place that such hearing will be held. The notice shall be sent to the user by regular
mail addressed to the user's address a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, and shall be deemed delivered when placed in the
mail.
3. If after such a hearing the WRA director makes a finding based on substantial evidence that violations under subsection A of this section have
occurred as alleged, the director may issue an order immediately revoking the permit, if a permit had previously been issued, and terminating sewer
service to the user's premises. The determination to revoke such permit and terminate service, shall be in the discretion of WRA director and shall be
dependent upon the circumstances surrounding the user's violations of subsection A of this section and the severity of those violations. If the user does
not appear for the hearing, the WRA director shall issue the order revoking the discharge permit and/or terminating sewer service, which shall take
effect immediately.
4. The decision and order of the WRA director to revoke the permit of a user may be appealed to the WRA appeal committee. Such appeal request shall
be in writing, shall include the grounds for appeal including any factual findings which are disputed, and shall be delivered to WRA not less than ten
(10) days after the director’s entry of the order of revocation of permit and/or termination of sewer service. Such appeal request shall be considered
delivered when placed in the mail, return receipt requested, addressed to:
WRA Appeal Committee
c/o Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, Iowa 50317
5. The chair of the appeal committee shall schedule the appeal and shall cause notice of the time, date and place of the hearing to be mailed to the
appealing user. Such appeal shall be decided by majority vote of the appeal committee. If the appeal committee affirms the order of the WRA director
revoking the permit and/or terminating sewer service, the appeal committee shall so state and order in its written decision.
6. A user whose permit has been revoked shall not be eligible for another permit until thirty (30) days after the violating conditions have been corrected
to the satisfaction of the WRA director.
7. Upon determination by the WRA director that the user's sewer service connection to the POTW be terminated, the director's written order shall be
sent to the city public works department who shall cause the user's connection to the sewer to be severed or plugged. The manner of severance and
procedure for disconnection shall be determined by the city public works department. Upon completion of the disconnection, the city public works
department shall certify to the WRA director the city's cost to disconnect the user's sewer service. Upon receipt of such certification of costs, the WRA
director shall forward to the user whose service was disconnected by registered mail return receipt requested, certified mail, or personal service a bill
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 26/439
for the cost of making the disconnection, including all costs for labor and materials, and a service charge of on hundred dollars ($100.00) for WRA
supervision.
8. Any building at which sewer service is disconnected as herein provided shall be inspected by the city building official and if appropriate shall
be red-tagged as unfit for human occupancy.
8-3-39: REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE:
If service is severed pursuant to this chapter, the service may be reinstated in the following manner:
A. Upon payment to the WRA of any delinquency in full, supervision fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and an inspection by the WRA director to
determine whether the original cause for termination has been corrected, the WRA will issue a permit for reconnection of the building service line
to the POTW. Such reconnection costs, plus inspection fees for the city in accordance with this Code, shall be at the sole expense of the user.
B. Upon reconnection and payment of all costs described in subsection A of this section, the city/county, through its agents, shall remove the red tag
from the building, and the building shall, so far as the city is concerned, be fit for human occupancy.
8-3-40: EMERGENCY DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE:
A. Conditions For Immediate Disconnection of Service: The WRA director may, after informal notice, suspend the wastewater discharge permit of, and
sewer service to, a user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW, or the environment.
B. Procedures for Immediate Disconnection: The procedure for immediate disconnection shall be as follows:
1. When the WRA director determines that a discharge as described in subsection (a) of this section exists, an oral order shall be issued, followed
immediately by a written order, to the user stating the problem and requiring immediate cessation of the discharge. A user orally notified of a
suspension of its wastewater permit or sewer service shall immediately stop or eliminate all discharges. If a user fails to immediately and voluntarily
comply with the suspension order, the WRA director shall take immediate action to eliminate the discharge, including disconnection from the POTW.
Methods of informal notice to a user shall include but not be limited to any of the following: personal conversations between user and personnel or the
WRA or its operating contractor, telephone calls, letters, hand-delivered messages or notices posted at the user's premises or point of discharge.
2. A user responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment shall submit to the WRA director, prior to the hearing described in
subsection 8-3-38B of this chapter, a detailed written report describing the causes of the endangerment and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence.
8-3-41: ELIMINATION OF DISCHARGE; REINSTATEMENT OF PERMIT:
A user notified by the WRA director of revocation of its discharge permit and/or disconnection of its sewer service under section 8-3-38 or 8-3-40 of this
chapter shall immediately cease discharging wastewater to the POTW. If the user fails to comply voluntarily with the revocation and/or disconnection order, the
city/county shall take such steps as are deemed necessary by the WRA, including immediate severance of the sewer connection. The WRA director shall reinstate the
wastewater discharge permit or the sewer service upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying discharge.
8-3-42: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
A. In addition to remedies available to the WRA set forth elsewhere in this article, if the WRA is fined by the Iowa department of natural resources or the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for violations of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit for the WRF, or for violations of
water quality standards as the result of a discharge of pollutants by an identifiable user, the fine, and all legal, sampling, analytical testing costs and any
other related costs, shall be charged to the responsible user. Such charge shall be in addition to any other remedies the WRA may have under this article at
law or in equity.
B. If the discharge from any user results in a deposit, obstruction, damage or other impairment to the POTW, the user shall become liable to the city/county
and/or the WRA for any expense, loss, or damage caused by the violations or discharge. The WRA may add to the user's charges and fees the costs
incurred by the WRA and by the city/county for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violations or discharge.
C. The remedies provided in this article shall not be exclusive, and the WRA may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by statute, at law or in equity
against any persons violating this article.
D. In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, the city/county and/or the WRA may initiate an action, either in law or in equity, to obtain an
injunction against further violations of this article and for judgment for all costs incurred by the city and/or the WRA occasioned by the user's violation of
any requirements of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 27/439
8-3-43: NOTICES TO WRA; WRA BOARD, DIRECTOR, OR APPEAL COMMITTEE:
Notices which are required to be given or which may be given to the WRA, the WRA board, the WRA director or the WRA appeal committee, as provided in
sections 8-3-9 through 8-3-43 of this chapter, shall be mailed to such entity, body or person at the following address:
Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
Des Moines Wastewater Reclamation Facility
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, Iowa 50317
ARTICLE A. FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS, GREASE INTERCEPTORS
8-3A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article shall be to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contribution and accumulation of fat, oil, and grease
into the POTW. Such discharges from commercial kitchens, restaurants, food processing facilities and all other establishments, where fat, oil, and grease of vegetable
or animal origin are discharged directly or indirectly into the POTW, can contribute to line blockages and/or spills in violation of title 40, code of federal regulations
(40 CFR), part 403.
8-3A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions found in section 8-3-1 of this chapter shall apply to the provisions of this article; provided, however, that the following words, terms and phrases,
when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPs: Means and includes schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the state. For purposes of this article, best management practices include procedures and
practices that reduce the discharge of (FOG) to the building sewer, to the city sanitary sewer system and to the POTW
DESIGN LIQUID DEPTH: means the maximum depth of liquid when the tank is filled with water.
EFFECTIVE DATE: means the date set forth in section 8-3A-3 of this article upon which the regulatory provisions of this division take effect.
FOOD SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT OR FSE: means an operation or enterprise that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for
human consumption. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, those that process meat or other food ingredients as an intermediate step or for final human
consumption, food service operations in a summer camp, residential substance abuse treatment facility, halfway house, correctional facility, school, restaurant,
commercial kitchen, caterer, church, hotel, bars, hospital, prison, care institution or similar facility.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR: means a tank that serves one or more fixtures and is remotely located. Grease interceptors include, but are not limited to, tanks that
capture wastewater from dishwashers, garbage disposals, floor drains, pot and pan sinks and trenches as allowed by local plumbing codes. For purposes of this
ordinance, a grease interceptor is a multi-compartment tank located underground outside of a building that reduces the amount of FOG in wastewater prior to its
discharge into the POTW.
GREASE TRAPS: means a device designed to retain grease from one to a maximum of four (4) fixtures. Not all grease traps are approved by the manufacturer for
use on heated water (e.g., dishwasher) or in-line to a waste disposal unit (e.g., garbage disposal and grinders). For purposes of this ordinance, a grease trap is a small
device located within a building.
MINIMUM DESIGN CAPABILITY: means the design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases
from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the POTW.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 28/439
NONROUTINE INSPECTION: means an impromptu, unscheduled inspection of an FSE made without prior notification or arrangement.
ROUTINE INSPECTION: means an inspection of an FSE which is scheduled in advance or according to a pre-arranged schedule.
USER: as used in this division has the same meaning as the definition in section 8-3-1 of this chapter, but also includes persons who discharge wastewater to the
POTW from mobile sources, such as mobile food vendors.
8-3A-3: EFFECTIVE DATE OF FOG REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this division shall be effective on and after April 1, 2019.
8-3A-4: GREASE INTERCEPTOR INSTALLATION REQUIRED; EXEMPTION:
A. Required: The owner of a building or facility in which as FSE is located, and the owner or operator of an FSE shall be required to install an approved grease
interceptor, and to thereafter operate and maintain same as provided in this article.
B. Exemption: The requirements of subsection A shall not apply to that portion of a building or facility within which an FSE is in existence on the effective date
if:
1. The FSE has an existing grease interceptor or grease trap in place as of the effective date and provided that: a) the owner or occupant of the FSE
continues to use the interceptor or trap; b) the interceptor or trap is of sufficient capacity and design; and c) the interceptor or trap is operated and
maintained so as to comply with FOG discharge limits; and
2. Any repair, remodeling or renovation of the wastewater plumbing system in the existing FSE involves only: a) the repair of leaks or the clearing of
stoppages in drains, soil, waste or vent piping; or b) the removal and reinstallation of a sink, toilet or hot water heater; provided that such work does
not involve replacement, rearrangement or moving of wastewater pipes floor sinks, drainage fixtures or grease traps; and
3. None of the following conditions are present:
a. A building or facility exists on the effective date and is thereafter expanded or renovated, or a portion thereof, to include an FSE where such
FSE did not previously exist; or
b. An FSE exists on the effective date within a building or facility, or portion of a building or facility, and application is thereafter made for a
building permit(s) for such building or facility with valuation of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or more within a twelve (12) month period; or
c. A building or facility, or portion thereof, that contained an FSE on the effective date but in which an FSE ceases to operate for one year or
more, as determined by Iowa Department of Inspections & Appeals, Food and Consumer Safety Bureau records.
8-3A-5: COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES:
A. Certificate Of Compliance Or Occupancy: After the effective date, any permitted construction under subsection 8-3A-4A of this article shall be deemed
compliant upon issuance of a certificate of compliance or certificate of occupancy for such construction by the city building official or designee.
B. Inadequate Grease Interceptor: An FSE shall be deemed compliant, unless the WRA director or local building official or designee determines that an
existing grease trap or grease interceptor is incapable of adequately retaining FOG. In such cases, the Director may order the FSE to install an adequate
grease interceptor within a specified time period if:
1. the FSE is found to contribute FOG in quantities above FOG discharge limits; or
2. the FSE discharges necessitate increased maintenance on the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) in order to keep stoppages from occurring
therein; or
3. The FSE's discharge to the POTW is at any time determined to exceed four hundred (400) mg/l total FOG.
C. Order to Install: An order directing an existing FSE or the owner or operator of the FSE or the owner of the building or facility in which the FSE is
located to install a grease interceptor shall be in writing from the WRA Director in the form of a notice of violation including a corrective action order, as
provided in section 8-3A-11 of this article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 29/439
D. Exceptional Physical Constraints Or Economic Hardship: FSEs or owners of buildings or facilities within which an FSE is located which are unable to
install or replace a grease interceptor due to exceptional physical constraints or economic hardship may appeal to the WRA director for approval of an
alternative grease control technology by requesting a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this division. Such requests shall be submitted in writing
and shall include detailed descriptions of the FSE's physical or financial constraints and the alternative grease control technology which it proposes to
install and utilize.
1. In order to demonstrate exceptional economic hardship, the owner or operator of the FSE shall submit to the WRA director balance sheets and profit
and loss statements for FSE for the preceding three (3) years. A new FSE shall submit profit/loss projections or a detailed business plan with
projections for twenty-four (24) months. Each request shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
2. Notwithstanding approval of alternative grease control technology, when the WRA director determines that such alternative is not performing
adequately, the FSE or owner of the building or facility in which the FSE is located shall be required to take additional grease control measures, which
may include the installation of a grease interceptor.
3. In order to demonstrate exceptional physical site constraints preventing the installation of a grease interceptor, the owner or operator of the FSE or
owner of the building or facility in which the FSE is located shall submit to the WRA director documentation and plats showing the location of
city/county sanitary sewer and any private easements in relation to the building sewer for the building housing the FSE, and showing available space
inside or outside the building and drawings of existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for all services at that site.
4. An FSE that is given an exemption from installing a properly sized grease interceptor is prohibited from installing or using a dishwasher or garbage
disposal without approval of the director and must comply with the conditions of such approval, if any.
8-3A-6: INSTALLATION OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND GREASE TRAPS:
Grease interceptors and grease traps, when required, shall be installed as follows:
A. Grease interceptors and grease traps shall be installed at the expense of the owner or operator of the FSE or owner of the building or facility in which the
FSE is located which is contributing wastewater to the POTW.
B. All wastewater streams containing FOG or reasonably likely to contain FOG within FSEs or other FOG generating operations shall be directed into one
or more appropriately sized grease interceptor before discharge to the POTW. Grease interceptors shall be either sized by adding the peak design flow rates
for all fixtures leading to the grease interceptor and allowing a minimum retention time of thirty (30) minutes or as follows:
Grease Interceptor Sizing
1. Peak meals per hour
a. Seating capacity of FSE _________
b. Occupancy of FSE
________*
c. Seating or occupancy x meal factor of 1.3 (45 minute meal) or 1.0
(intermittent-use FSEs) = Peak meals per hour
* Church: include all area(s) used for meal service
* Assisted Living / nursing facility: equal to maximum number of residents (per
State license)
2. Waste flow rate, gallons of flow
a. Commercial, equipped kitchen with dishwasher & one garbage disposal*
7
b. Commercial, equipped kitchen with dishwasher, no garbage disposal
6
c. Commercial, equipped kitchen with no dishwasher, one garbage disposal*
6
d. Commercial, equipped kitchen with no dishwasher, no garbage disposal
5
e. Single service kitchen**
2
* Each additional garbage disposal, add one (1) gallon
** Single service kitchen = no garbage disposal, no dishwasher and all service is single
use
3. Retention time, hours
a. Commercial kitchen 2.5
b. Single service kitchen 1.5
4. Storage factor
a. Commercial Kitchen up to 8 hours of operation 1
b. Commercial kitchen up to 12 hours of operation 1.5
c. Commercial kitchen up to 16 hours of operation 2
d. Commercial kitchen up to 20 hours of operation 2.5
e. Commercial kitchen up to 24 hours of operation 3
f. Single service kitchen 1.5
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 30/439
Peak Meals Waste Flow Retention Storage
Calculated
per Hour X Rate X Time X Factor = Interceptor
Size
C. Concrete grease interceptors whether precast or poured in place, shall be designed and manufactured in accordance with ASTM C 1613-08 Standard
Specification for Precast Concrete Grease Interceptor Tanks or IAPMO/ANSI Z1001 grease interceptors and shall be installed in accordance with the
codes adopted by the jurisdiction in which the FSE is located. Grease interceptors using materials other than concrete require approval by the director, and
shall comply with the conditions of such approval, if any.
D. The building official or other designated official of the governmental subdivision within which the FSE is located shall inspect each grease interceptor
installation made pursuant to this article, shall review all relevant information regarding the rated performance of the grease interceptor, and the building
plan and facility site plan for the building and site where the grease interceptor has been installed, and shall approve such grease interceptor installation
upon determination that the grease interceptor meets all applicable standards and requirements.
E. Grease interceptors shall have a minimum capacity of one thousand (1000) gallons and shall not exceed five thousand (5000) gallons for a single unit.
Where a capacity greater than five thousand (5000) gallons is required, several smaller units shall be installed in series, however the capacity shall not
exceed ten thousand (10,000) gallons for any single series of interceptors without approval of the director.
F. Grease interceptors shall be installed outside the building housing the FSE and below surface grade, and shall have access manholes, with a minimum
diameter of twenty-four inches (24”), over each chamber and sanitary tee. Access manholes shall extend from the grease interceptor to at least the finished
surface grade and be designed and maintained to prevent storm or surface water inflow and groundwater infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily
removable covers to facilitate inspection and grease removal.
G. Sewer lines which are not grease laden, which are not likely to contain FOG, or which contain sanitary wastes shall not be connected to a grease
interceptor.
H. Grease interceptors shall be equipped with an accessible discharge sampling port with a minimum six inch (6”) diameter, which shall extend from the
grease interceptor to at least the finished surface grade.
I. Where grease interceptors are shared by more than one FSE, the building owner shall be the responsible party for record keeping and cleaning of the
interceptor.
8-3A-7: OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND CLEANING OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND GREASE TRAPS AND GREASE HAULER
CERTIFICATION:
A. Wastewater Limitation: The owner or operator of an FSE which is required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor or trap shall operate and
maintain the grease interceptor or trap so that wastewater exiting the grease interceptor or trap shall not exceed four hundred milligrams per liter (400
mg/l) of FOG.
B. Cleaning Schedule: The owner or operator of the FSE shall cause the grease interceptor or trap to be cleaned as hereinafter required when FOG and
solids reach twenty-five (25%) of the design liquid level of the grease interceptor or trap, or sooner if necessary to prevent carry over of FOG from the
grease interceptor or trap into the city sanitary sewer system. Interceptors and traps shall be cleaned at three (3) month intervals or less. A longer cleaning
interval must be approved by the WRA Director. If the owner or operator of the FSE, or an employee of the owner or operator, has a current grease hauler
certification from the WRA indicating satisfactory completion of the course of training offered by the WRA on the cleaning of grease interceptors and
traps, such person or persons may clean the grease trap in the facility included in such grease hauler’s certification Failure to adequately clean the grease
trap, properly dispose of all grease trap waste, or maintain clean out records and measurements may result in revocation of a grease hauler certification
pursuant to Sec. 8-3B-13. Alternatively, the owner or operator of an FSE may employ a waste hauler licensed by the WRA pursuant to Article B of this
chapter to clean the grease interceptor or trap, provided that the waste hauler personnel performing the cleaning has a current grease hauler certification
from the WRA indicating satisfactory completion of the course of training offered by the WRA on the cleaning of grease interceptors and traps.
C. Cleaning Requirements: Any person who cleans a grease interceptor or trap shall do so in accordance with the following procedures and requirements.
The person cleaning the grease interceptor or trap shall:
1. Completely empty and remove the contents (liquids and sludge) of all vaults of the grease interceptor or trap, and remove the grease mat and
scrapings from the interior walls. As part of each cleaning of a grease interceptor or trap, the owner or operator of the FSE, or the licensed waste
hauler employed by the FSE owner or operator, shall perform the following maintenance activities:
a. Check that the sanitary “tees” on the inlet and outlet sides of the grease interceptor are not obstructed, loose, or missing.
b. Verify that the baffle is secure and in place.
a. Inspect the grease interceptor or trap for any cracks or other defects.
b. Check that lids are securely and properly seated after completion of cleaning.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 31/439
2. Not deposit waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor/trap back into the grease interceptor/trap from which the waste or wastewater
was removed or into any other grease interceptor/trap, for the purpose of reducing the volume of waste and wastewater to be disposed of.
3. Not introduce enzymes, emulsifying chemicals, hot water or other agents into a grease interceptor or trap to dissolve or emulsify grease or as a
grease abatement method. Introduction of bacteria as a grease degradation agent is permitted with prior written approval by the WRA director.
4. Dispose of waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor or trap at the WRF or at a facility approved for disposal of such waste by the
WRA director. Waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor or trap shall not be discharged to any private sanitary or storm sewer or to
the city sanitary or storm sewer system. The waste hauler shall provide a copy of the disposal receipt for all waste and wastewater removed from a
grease interceptor or trap to the owner or operator of the FSE.
5. Not use an automatic grease removal system to clean a grease interceptor without prior written approval of the WRA director, and if, the use of an
automatic grease removal system is approved, shall operate same in a manner that the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the
system’s outlet, is consistently achieved.
D. The WRA director may make exceptions to the above requirements, or may approve alternative operational requirements or cleaning and maintenance
methods, provided that such exceptions or approvals shall be made in writing by the WRA director.
E. The WRA Director may issue a grease hauler certification upon satisfactory completion of the course of training offered by the WRA on the proper
maintenance and cleaning of grease interceptors and traps, disposal procedures and record keeping. Such certification shall be for a period of 5 years and
shall be in effect for the person receiving such training and for the FSE site for which such person is the owner, operator or employee thereof.
8-3A-8: RECORDS AND RECORDKEEPING:
A. Required Records: The owner or operator of an FSE which is required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor or trap shall maintain a written
record of grease interceptor or trap maintenance, including a log showing the dates upon which the grease interceptor or trap was inspected and the
estimated amount of FOG present in the grease interceptor or trap at each inspection, the date upon which waste and wastewater was removed from the
grease interceptor or trap and disposed of, and the location and means of such disposal of waste and wastewater, and the name and employer or the person
or persons performing each of said tasks. The log shall further include a record of the placement of any approved or unapproved additive into the grease
interceptor, grease trap or building sewer on a constant, regular or scheduled basis, including the type and amount of additive placed on each such
occasion. Only additives approved by the WRA director pursuant to subsection 8-3A-7C of this article may be used in a grease interceptor.
B. Record Keeping: The log shall at all times be kept and maintained on a day-to-day basis, so as to show a record of waste and wastewater removal, waste
and wastewater disposal and approved additive placement for a continuous period of three (3) years. All such records shall be kept secure at the premises
of the FSE for a continuous period of three (3) years and shall be made available for non-routine inspection by the city/county, the WRA and its operating
contractor, or the employees and agents of any of them at any time during normal business hours.
8-3A-9: INSPECTION OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND RELATED SEWERS AND EQUIPMENT; FEES:
A. The owner or operator of an FSE shall:
1. Provide, operate and maintain, at its expense, safe and accessible monitoring facilities (such as a suitable manhole), and shall make such monitoring
facilities available for inspection, and for sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems. There shall be ample room
in or near such monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
2. Shall allow personnel authorized by the WRA director or by the city/county building official or designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, to
enter upon or into any building, facility or property housing an FSE at any reasonable time and without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, testing or record review, in accordance with this division.
3. Shall, upon request by the WRA director’s authorized representative, open any grease interceptor or grease trap for the purpose of confirming that
maintenance frequency is appropriate, that all necessary parts of the installation are in place including, but not limited to, baffles, and effluent tees, and
that all grease interceptors, traps, and related equipment and piping is maintained in efficient operating condition.
4. Shall accommodate compliance inspections and sampling events by the authorized representatives of the WRA director or of the city/county building
official. Staff may conduct routine inspections and sampling events of any food service establishment. Non-routine inspection and sampling events shall
occur more frequently when there is a history of non-compliance with this division and when blockages occur in the city's sanitary sewer system
downstream of the FSE.
B. Inspections Fees: The fees for inspection of an FSE shall be as provided in section 8-3-20 of this chapter, and shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the
date of the invoice for such fees.
8-3A-10: ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 32/439
The WRA director is authorized to enforce this division as hereinafter provided. The city/county building official or designee, or such other governmental
official hereafter designated by the WRA, is also authorized to enforce this division.
8-3A-11: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES; CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDERED:
A. Notice; Corrective Actions: The director, or such other designated officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in section 8-3A-10 of this
article, are authorized to issue a notice of violation imposing an administrative penalty upon any person who fails to perform an act required by this division or
who commits an act prohibited by this article. Such notice may include a corrective action order requiring the user to take one or more of the following
corrective actions within thirty (30) days:
1. Conform to best management practices;
2. Submit copies of the grease interceptor or trap maintenance log;
3. Develop, submit and implement a FOG compliance plan to be approved by the director or designated enforcement official; or
4. Install a compliant grease interceptor.
B. Administrative Penalty: The administrative penalty for such violations shall be as provided in the schedule of administrative penalties adopted by the city
council/county board by resolution.
C. Service Of Violation Notice: Notice of violation, with the applicable penalty for such violation noted thereon, shall be issued to and served upon the violator.
Service of the notice may be by regular mail or by delivery in person.
D. Time Limit For Payment Of Penalty: Penalties assessed pursuant to notice of violation shall be paid by the violator in full as directed in the notice within thirty
(30) days of its issuance.
E. Penalty Imposed; Records Kept: The administrative penalties set out in the schedule of administrative penalties shall be charged in lieu of the fines and
penalties provided for in section 8-3A-12 of this article, unless the violator refuses to correct the violation and pay the scheduled administrative penalty, or the
WRA director determines that immediate enforcement action by misdemeanor or municipal infraction prosecution is, in view of the particular circumstances
of the case, necessary to achieve compliance with the requirements of this article. A record of all violations, administrative penalties charged or other
enforcement actions taken shall be maintained by the WRA for a period of three (3) years.
8-3A-12: PENALTIES:
A. Violations: Any person who fails to perform an act required by this article or who commits an act prohibited by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by fine or imprisonment or shall be guilty of a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty.
B. Noncompliance With Pretreatment Standards: Any person who fails to comply with a pretreatment standard applicable to an FSE shall be guilty of a municipal
infraction punishable by a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the violation exists or continues, as provided by section
364.22 or 331.307 of the Iowa Code.
C. Remedial Actions: When enforcement is sought through a municipal infraction proceeding, the director, or such other designated officers or officials with
enforcement authority as provided in section 8-3A-10 of this article, may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with the user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct
the noncompliance within a time period specified by the order.
8-3A-13: ORDER TO CEASE OPERATION OF FSE:
A. Authority To Issue Cease And Desist Order: Where a violation of this division has not been timely corrected, and results in or threatens interference or pass
through as herein defined, the WRA director, or such other designated officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in section 8-3A-10 of this
article, shall have the authority to issue an order in writing to the owner or operator of the FSE, ordering such person or persons to cease and desist from
further operation of the FSE and from further discharge of wastewater to the sanitary sewer system. The order shall be delivered by personal service unless
the owner or operator cannot be found within the city/county, in which event notice shall be by ordinary mail addressed to the owner’s or operator’s last
known address and by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the FSE.
B. Discontinuance Of Operation: Operation of the FSE shall cease on the date stated in the order and shall not recommence without the prior written approval of
the WRA director.
C. Request For Reconsideration And Hearing: The applicant may make a written request to the director for a reconsideration and hearing on the cease and desist
order within ten (10) days from the issuance of the order, provided, however, that operation of the FSE shall cease pending the outcome of the hearing.
D. Contents Of Request For Hearing: The owner’s or operator’s request for hearing shall identify the appealing party, include the address of the person requesting
the hearing and to which all further notices shall be mailed or served, and shall state the basis for the appeal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 33/439
E. Schedule Of Hearing: The hearing shall be scheduled to be held as soon as practicable and no later than fourteen (14) days after the request for hearing was
filed with the WRA director. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified in writing or by telephone of the date and place of such hearing at least three
(3) days in advance thereof. At such hearing the director and the person requesting the hearing may be represented by counsel, examine witnesses, and
present evidence as necessary.
F. Final Determination; Appeal: The determination by the director or by that the violation occurred shall be considered a final administrative decision, unless
appealed to the WRA.
8-3A-14: APPEAL OF CORRECTIVE ORDER OR CEASE AND DESIST ORDER:
A. Filing Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by a corrective action order or a cease and desist order issued by the WRA director or by such other designated
officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in section 8-3A-10 of this article, may file an appeal and request a ruling that such order be
modified or rescinded.
B. Contents Of Request: Such appeal request shall be in writing, shall include the grounds for appeal including any factual findings which are disputed, and shall
be delivered to the WRA within ten (10) days after the WRA director's issuance of the order. Such appeal request shall be considered delivered when placed
in the mail, return receipt requested, addressed to:
WRA Appeal Committee
Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, Iowa 50317
C. Scheduling Of Appeal; Committee Decision: The chair of the appeal committee shall schedule the appeal and shall cause notice of the time, date and place of
the hearing to be mailed to the appealing party. Such appeal shall be decided by majority vote of the appeal committee. The appeal committee may affirm,
modify or rescind the order of the director and shall so state and order in its written decision.
8-3A-15: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
The WRA or the city/county is not precluded from seeking alternative relief from the court, including an order for abatement or injunctive relief or for recovery of
investigational or remedial costs resulting from a non-complying discharge, in the event that the WRA or the city files a misdemeanor citation, notice of
administrative penalty, and/or files a municipal infraction for the same violation of this division.
ARTICLE B. HAULED WASTE
8-3B-1: DEFINITION:
The definitions found in sections 8-3-1 and 8-3A-2 of this chapter shall apply to the provisions of this division, provided however that the following words, terms and
phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
VEHICLE: A commercial device equipped with a tank and used to remove or transport waste.
WASTE: human excreta, water, scum, sludge, septage, FOG, food waste or grease solids, and non-hazardous industrial wastewaters and solids removed from public
and private wastewater disposal systems, holding tanks, impervious vaults, portable or chemical toilets, or from devices used to trap grease resulting from food
preparation. Waste also means liquid wastes resulting from spill clean-up.
8-3B-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Required; Exceptions: No waste hauler shall remove waste from within the city/county or shall dispose of waste, whether from a source inside or outside the
city/county, into the POTW without first obtaining a waste hauler license from the WRA, with the following exceptions:
1. WRA participating communities that operate vehicles to remove waste from their sewer systems.
2. Waste haulers hired by WRA participating communities to remove waste from their sewer systems and which bring no other wastes to the WRF.
3. Waste haulers utilized by industrial users issued a wastewater discharge permit by the WRA.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 34/439
4. Waste haulers granted temporary authorization by the WRA director in order to deal with an emergency.
B. Issuance Of License; Requirements; Fees; Bond: The waste hauler's license shall be issued by the WRA director upon written application that shall consist of
the following minimum requirements:
1. Inspection: The WRA director, upon application, shall inspect the trucks, hoses, valves, and associated equipment of the applicant for a waste
hauler's license and determine if they meet the minimum qualifications for complying with the conditions of this article.
2. License Fee And Bond: An application shall require the payment of a fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) for each vehicle used by the applicant and the
posting of a bond with reasonable surety in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the faithful compliance with this division, including
prompt payment of fees, fines and damages. WRA participating communities that contract with waste haulers in order to clean and rehabilitate storm
and sanitary sewers owned by the community or that own and operate waste hauling vehicles may provide proof of self-insurance or provide a letter
guaranteeing payment of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in lieu of providing a surety bond.
3. Renewal: A waste hauler license shall expire on June 30 next after its issuance. The renewal application must be made in the same manner as the
initial application and must be received by the director thirty (30) days prior to expiration. Failure to apply thirty (30) days prior to expiration may
result in an interruption in the license and the privileges of such license.
4. Transferability: Waste hauler licenses are not transferable.
8-3B-3: STANDARDS FOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT:
As to all vehicles and equipment used by a waste hauler, the licensee shall:
A. Prevent waste and wastewater from leaking, spilling, or discharging onto roads or rights-of-way.
B. Ensure proper construction and repair of the equipment to allow cleaning.
C. Maintain vehicles and equipment in an essentially rust free and sanitary condition and appearance.
D. Display the business name as it appears on the waste hauler license in three-inch or larger letters on the left and right sides of the vehicle.
8-3B-4: DISPOSAL:
Hauled waste shall only be disposed at the WRF at the designated disposal station or as authorized by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources for land
application. Waste haulers shall maintain the WRF designated disposal location in a clean and orderly condition to avoid noxious odors and unsanitary conditions.
Hours of operation at the WRF disposal station shall be set by the WRA director. In the event of emergency situations, special arrangements between the waste
hauler and the WRA director regarding disposal at an alternative disposal site shall be allowed to permit response to such emergency. Any violation of an Iowa
Department of Natural Resources rule or regulation for land disposal of hauled wastes by a waste hauler shall be grounds for rejection of a hauled waste load in
section 8-3B-8 of this article by such waste hauler or shall be grounds for denial, suspension and revocation of such waste hauler’s license in section 8-3B-13 of this
article.
8-3B-5: IDENTIFICATION OF SOURCE:
Waste haulers must document the nature and origin of wastes collected and the site and method of disposal for wastes that are removed from any locations or are
delivered to the WRF. Such information shall be provided on a manifest form provided by the WRA director. The manifest shall also include: a) the name, address
and phone number of the waste generator, b) the type of waste collected, c) the approximate volume of the load, d) any other information consistent with
identification and tracking of wastes. The WRA director or his or her designee shall have the right to verify all information required by this section, including the
right to measure, sample and analyze any waste regulated by this division. The waste hauler shall obtain approval from the WRA director or his or her designee prior
to loading wastes originating from an industrial/commercial source unless prior approval is on record with the WRA.
8-3B-6: MIXING WASTES:
A. For the purposes of this division, wastes from residential and nonresidential sources shall not be mixed. Wastes from an industrial/commercial source shall not
be mixed with wastes of any type from another location. Portable toilet and FSE grease trap wastes may be mixed with similar wastes from different locations.
Residential wastes from several sources may be mixed as long as each source is identified.
B. Any tanks or equipment used for hauling waste to the WRF shall not be used for hauling hazardous wastes or hazardous substances, as defined in I.C. § 567.1
et seq., chapter 131 of the Iowa Administrative Code and in 40 CFR 261, or other wastes detrimental to the WRF.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 35/439
8-3B-7: STANDARDS OF DISPOSAL AT WRF:
Under this division, disposal of wastes at the WRF shall be carried out in accordance with pretreatment standards and requirements established by federal, state,
county and city governments including categorical standards developed for the waste generator's industrial category. The WRA director may reject wastes from waste
haulers who do not comply with this section or with any other section of this division. Waste haulers shall not deliver wastes to the WRF, or to any other disposal
location approved by the WRA director which are:
A. Prohibited by section 8-3-10 of this chapter or exceed the limits found in subsection 8-3-11C4, sections 8-3-12 and 8-3-13 of this chapter.
B. Hazardous wastes or hazardous substances as defined in 40 CFR Part 261 or 567 IAC., Chapter 131.
C. Originate from mineral oil unless first treated to remove the oil and grease.
D. Not completely identified or are from industrial/ commercial sources that are not approved by the director as required in section 8-3B-5 of this article.
E. Mixed in a manner prohibited in section 8-3B-5 of this article.
F. Wastes other than residential from outside the WRA, except through requests to the director.
8-3B-8: REJECTION OF WASTE LOADS:
A. The WRA director may reject any hauled waste load that violates or is suspected of violating the requirements of this division or that fails to meet any other
guidelines established by the WRA director to protect personnel, equipment, and the WRF. Waste haulers must:
1. Remove rejected waste from the WRF.
2. Immediately remove any additional wastes contaminated by the rejected waste while contained at the WRF prior to introduction into the sewer.
3. Properly dispose of all rejected wastes in accordance with state and federal law.
4. Provide the WRA director with a written statement, signed by the waste hauler license holder, stating the location, date, and time the rejected load
was disposed of. The statement is due within five calendar days after the waste is rejected.
B. A vehicle used to haul rejected wastes shall not thereafter be allowed to dispose of additional wastes at the WRF until the statement required by this section is
delivered to the WRA director.
8-3B-9: TREATMENT FEES FOR HAULED WASTE:
A. Treatment Through Headworks:
1. A treatment fee shall be charged per pound of hauled waste received at the WRF for all wastes originating within WRA participating
communities which are treated through the headworks at the WRF using all treatment processes at the WRF, which fee shall be equal to the cost of
disposal and treatment of an equivalent volume and mass of pollutants otherwise delivered into the POTW. The treatment fee shall include: a) the
volume charge component, b) a treatment surcharge component for each pollutant as found in section 8-3-20 of this chapter, and c) a program cost
component. The program cost component shall be calculated by dividing the annual administrative costs of the waste hauler program by the total
gallons of hauled waste treated in the previous calendar year. The surcharge component shall be calculated using the average concentration of
pollutants found in hauled wastes delivered to the wastewater reclamation facility. The treatment surcharge and program cost components shall be
reviewed and updated annually based on the most recent data collected by the operating agency.
2. The treatment fee for loads originating outside the corporate limits of the WRA participating communities shall be one and one-half (1.5) times
the fee for loads originating within the WRA participating communities.
B. Using Portion Of Treatment Processes:
1. A treatment fee shall be charged for hauled wastes originating within the WRA participating communities which are treated using only a
portion of the treatment processes at the WRF, which fee shall be calculated to recover the cost of treatment. The cost of treatment shall include
electrical, chemical, personnel, and any capital costs associated with the treatment processes utilized, and a program cost component which shall be
calculated by dividing the annual administrative costs of the waste hauler program associated with partial process treatment by the total gallons of
hauled waste treated using only a portion of the treatment processes in the previous calendar year. Treatment costs shall be reviewed and updated
annually based on the most recent data collected by the operating agency.
2. The treatment fee for loads originating outside of the WRA participating communities shall be 1.5 times the fee for loads originating within the
WRA participating communities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 36/439
C. Computation, Recording and Payment Of Fees: Fees shall be computed and recorded at the disposal station and shall be paid by the waste hauler on the basis
of monthly billings by the operating contractor. Limits of credit shall not exceed sixty (60) days. Abuse of such credit shall be grounds for liability on the
waste hauler's bond and for refusal of disposal services to any waste hauler under this division.
D. Testing Of Loads: Waste haulers may elect to have their loads tested for actual concentration at their expense as set out in section 8-3-20 of this chapter. When
a waste hauler has elected to have loads tested for actual concentration, the treatment fee will be based on the actual concentration whether it be higher or
lower than the average concentration treatment fee. Said testing will be done at least once a month or more often as required by the WRA director.
8-3B-10 ENFORCEMENT:
The WRA director, the city/county building official, or such other governmental official hereafter designated by the WRA, shall be authorized to enforce this division
as hereinafter provided.
8-3B-11: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES; CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER:
A. The director, or such other designated officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in section 8-3B-10 of this article, are authorized to issue a
notice of violation imposing an administrative penalty upon any person who fails to perform an act required by this division or who commits an act prohibited
by this division.
B. The administrative penalty for such violations shall be as provided in the schedule of administrative penalties adopted by the city council/county board by
resolution.
C. Notice of violation, with the applicable penalty for such violation noted thereon, shall be issued to and served upon the violator. Service of the notice may be
by regular mail or by delivery in person.
D. Penalties assessed pursuant to notice of violation shall be paid by the violator in full as directed in the notice within thirty (30) days of its issuance.
E. The administrative penalties set out in the schedule of administrative penalties shall be charged in lieu of the fines and penalties provided for in section 8-3B-
12 of this article, unless the violator refuses to correct the violation and pay the scheduled administrative penalty, or the WRA director determines that
immediate enforcement action by municipal infraction prosecution is, in view of the particular circumstances of the case, necessary to achieve compliance
with the requirements of this article. The WRA shall maintain a record of all violations, administrative penalties charged or other enforcement actions taken.
8-3B-12: PENALTIES
A. Any person who fails to perform an act required by this division or who commits an act prohibited by this division shall be guilty of a municipal infraction
punishable by a civil penalty.
B. Any person who violates a discharge prohibition set forth in section 8-3-10 of this chapter, or discharges in excess of local limits as set forth in section 8-3-11
of this chapter, shall be guilty of an environmental violation punishable as provided by section 364.22 of the Iowa Code.
8-3B-13: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Grounds For Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of Waste Haulers License: The WRA director may deny, suspend or revoke the waste hauler license and/or
grease hauler certification of any waste hauler who violates any provision of this division or any condition of its license, or who commits any of the following
violations, or who does not meet the following requirements:
1. Violation of any term, condition or requirement of this division, the license, or applicable state of Iowa or federal laws or regulations.
3. Obtaining a license by misrepresentation.
4. Falsification of, failure to complete or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in a license application.
5. Failure to pay fees, administrative penalties or fines.
6. Failure to report a spill to the WRA.
7. Using wash down water or otherwise diluting the permitted waste for the purpose of meeting discharge limitations or requirements.
8. Falsification of, failure to complete or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in any report, manifest information or record required by the license or
this division.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 37/439
9. Tampering with samples or sampling equipment intended to accurately reflect the contents of each hauled waste load.
10. Refusing to allow WRA personnel timely access to the waste hauler’s facility premises, fsdfsdfsvehicles, or records.
11. Failure to perform as required under a corrective action order or compliance schedule jkjhk jhjh issued by the WRA director.
12. Failure to correct any violation of this division within thirty (30) days after notice by the sdfa WRA Director.
13. Failure to immediately correct any violation of this division if the condition constituting the asdfviolation is declared a threat to public health, safety
or welfare by the WRA director and asdfthe director orders immediate correction.
B. Procedure For Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of Waste hauler’s License: The procedure for denial, suspension or revocation of a waste hauler’s license
shall be as follows:
1. Any license issued to a waste hauler pursuant to this division may be denied, suspended or revoked by written order of the WRA director
specifying the grounds for such action as outlined in subsection A of this section, which order shall not take effect until hearing thereon as hereafter
provided. Upon determining that grounds exist for an order to deny, suspend or revoke a waste hauler’s license, the WRA director shall cause a notice
of hearing to be prepared, specifying the violations of subsection A of this section which are deemed to have occurred, and the time, date and place that
such hearing will be held. The notice shall be sent to the waste hauler by regular mail addressed to the waste hauler’s address listed on the waste
hauler’s license a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, and shall be deemed delivered when placed in the mail.
2. If after such a hearing the WRA director makes a finding based on substantial evidence that one or more violations under subsection A of this
section have occurred as alleged, the director may deny issuance of the license, suspend the license for a fixed period, or may issue an order
immediately revoking the license and ordering the waste hauler to discontinue hauling waste to the WRF or any other disposal locations approved by
the director. The determination whether to deny issuance of a license, to suspend a license, or to revoke a license, shall be in the discretion of the
director and shall be dependent upon the circumstances surrounding the violations of subsection A of this section and the severity of those violations.
If the waste hauler does not appear for the hearing, the director shall issue the order revoking the waste hauler’s license and ordering the cessation of
delivery of hauled waste at the WRF or any other disposal locations approved by the director, which order shall take effect immediately.
3. The decision and order of the WRA director to deny issuance, to suspend or to revoke the license of a waste hauler may be appealed to the
WRA appeal committee. Such appeal request shall be in writing, shall include the grounds for appeal including any factual findings which are
disputed, and shall be delivered to WRA not less than ten (10) days after the director's entry of the order of denial, suspension or revocation. Such
appeal request shall be considered delivered when placed in the mail, return receipt requested, addressed to:
WRA Appeal Committee
Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater
Reclamation Authority
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, Iowa 50317
The chair of the appeal committee shall schedule the appeal and shall cause notice of the time, date and place of the hearing to be mailed to the
appealing waste hauler. Such appeal shall be decided by majority vote of the appeal committee. If the appeal committee affirms the order of the WRA
director denying issuance, suspending or revoking the license and ordering the cessation of waste deliveries at the WRF or other approved locations,
the appeal committee shall so state and order in its written decision.
4. A waste hauler whose license has been denied or revoked shall not be eligible for issuance or reinstatement of its license until thirty (30) days after the
violating conditions have been corrected to the satisfaction of the director.
8-3B-14: ALTERNATIVE RELIEF:
Neither the WRA nor the city/county is precluded from seeking alternative relief from the court, including an order for abatement or injunctive relief, in the event that
the WRA or the city files a misdemeanor citation, notice of administrative penalty, and/or files a municipal infraction for the same violation of this division, or in the
event the WRA seeks to deny, suspend or revoke the waste hauler’s license.
SECTION 3. REPEALER. All parts of the “CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
CLIVE OF CLIVE, IOWA, 2008”in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase, or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any section subsection, provision, sentence, clause, phrase, or part
thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 5. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its final passage, approval, and notice of its passage is given as
provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED by the City Council on the 14 day of March, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 38/439
____________________________ _______________________________
Joyce A. Cortum, City Clerk Scott Cirksena, Mayor
Ordinance No. 1069 authenticated this 14 day of March,2019.
____________________________ _______________________________
Joyce A. Cortum, City Clerk Scott Cirksena, Mayor
Officially published on the 26 dayof March, 2019.
CERTIFIED BY:
____________________________
Joyce A. Cortum, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 1070
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CLIVE CITY CODE 2008, BY AMENDING PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO WATER RATES
Be It Enacted by the City Council of the City of Clive, Iowa:
SECTION 1. INTERNAL REFERENCES. All references to section numbers in this ordinance shall be to sections contained within Title 8,
Chapter 1, Article B (Water Rates) of the “Clive City Code 2008" unless otherwise specified.
SECTION 2. AMENDMENT. Section 8-1B-2 is hereby deleted in its entirety and the following new Section 8-1B-2 is inserted in lieu thereof:
8-1B-2: RATES FOR SERVICE. Effective May 15, 2019, water service shall be furnished at the following rates within the city:
(Code of Iowa , Sec. 384.84)
A. General Rate: Except as otherwise provided herein, water use shall be billed at the following general rate: Seven dollars and fifty-three cents
($7.53) per one thousand (1,000) gallons used, billed monthly.
B. Irrigation Meter Rate: For water use registered by an irrigation meter, for which no sewer service charge is made, the following rate
applies and not the general rate:
1. Residential Customers:
$7.53 per 1,000 gallons. All such sums shall be billed monthly.
2. Commercial Customers:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 39/439
$8.98 per 1,000 gallons. All such sums shall be billed monthly.
SECTION 3. REPEALER. All parts of the "CLIVE CITY CODE 2008" in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged to be
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any section, subsection, provision, sentence,
clause, phrase or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 5. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This Ordinance shall be in effect from and after its final passage, approval and notice of its passage is
given as provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED by the City Council on the 11 day of April, 2019.
_____________________________ ________________________________
Matthew Graham, Deputy City Clerk Scott Cirksena, Mayor
Ordinance No. 1070 authenticated this 15 day of April, 2019.
_____________________________ ________________________________
Matthew Graham, Deputy City Clerk Scott Cirksena, Mayor
Officially published on the 19 day of April, 2019.
CERTIFIED BY:
_____________________________
Matthew Graham, Deputy City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 1071
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CLIVE CITY CODE, 2008, BY AMENDING PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO SANITARY SEWER SERVICE RATES
AND CONNECTION CHARGES
Be It Enacted by the City Council of the City of Clive, Iowa:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 40/439
SECTION 1. INTERNAL REFERENCES. All references to section numbers in this ordinance shall be to sections contained within Title 8,
Chapter 2, Article D, entitled Sanitary Sewer System-Service Rates and Connection Charges of the Clive City Code, 2008, unless otherwise specified.
SECTION 2. AMENDMENT. Section 8-2D-2(A) is hereby deleted in its entirety and the following new Section 8-2D-2(A) is inserted in lieu thereof:
8-2D-2: BASIC RATE:
A. Except as hereinafter noted, effective May 15, 2019, each customer whose property lies within the corporate limits of the city shall
pay to the city, through its collection agent, the Clive Water Department, at the same time payment for city water service is made,
the following charges:
1. A flat sewer availability charge at the rate of seven dollars seventy-seven cents ($7.77) per month, regardless of the
amount of the consumption by such customer; and
2. A sewage consumption charge computed on water consumption at the rate of five dollars ninety-two cents ($5.92) per one
thousand (1,000) gallons of water.
SECTION 3. REPEALER. All parts of the "CLIVE CITY CODE, 2008" in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged to be
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any section, subsection, provision, sentence,
clause, phrase or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 5. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This Ordinance shall be in effect from and after its final passage, approval and notice of its passage is
given as provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED by the City Council on the 11 day of April, 2019.
_____________________________ ________________________________
Matthew Graham, Deputy City Clerk Scott Cirksena, Mayor
Ordinance No. 1071 authenticated this 15 day of April, 2019.
_____________________________ ________________________________
Matthew Graham, Deputy City Clerk Scott Cirksena, Mayor
Officially published on the 19 day of April, 2019.
CERTIFIED BY:
_____________________________
Matthew Graham, Deputy City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 41/439
ORDINANCE NO. 1072
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CLIVE CITY CODE, 2008, BY AMENDING PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES
Be It Enacted by the City Council of the City of Clive, Iowa:
SECTION 1. INTERNAL REFERENCES. All references to section numbers in this ordinance shall be to sections contained within Title 8,
Chapter 4, Article A, entitled Stormwater Management System and Facilities-Stormwater Service Charges of the Clive City Code, 2008, unless
otherwise specified.
SECTION 2. AMENDMENT. Section 8-4A-3(A) is hereby deleted in its entirety and the following new Section 8-4A-3(A) is inserted in lieu thereof:
8-4A-3: BASIC RATE:
A. Except as hereinafter noted, each customer whose property lies within the corporate limits of the city shall pay to the city, through
its collection agent, the Clive water department, at the same time payment for city water service is made, the following charges
per equivalent residential unit associated with the customer’s property (an “ERU” means the median average impervious coverage
of a detached dwelling unit property in the city of Clive, which has been determined by the city to be 3,667 square feet of
impervious surface area):
1. Undeveloped: A flat storm sewer availability charge at the rate of zero dollars ($0.00) per month, regardless of the amount
of the consumption by such customer; and
2. Residential: A storm sewer availability charge, regardless of the amount of the consumption by such customer, will be
based on the following schedule:
Fiscal year 2019/2020: $7.83 per month
The monthly rate for each fiscal year beyond 2019/2020 will be determined by ordinance of the city council prior to July 1 of each
year.
3. Commercial/Industrial: A storm sewer availability charge will be based on the following schedule:
Fiscal year 2019/2020: $7.83 per ERU per month
The monthly rate for each fiscal year beyond 2019/2020 will be determined by ordinance of the city council prior to July 1 of each
year.
SECTION 3. REPEALER. All parts of the "CLIVE CITY CODE, 2008" in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged to be
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any section, subsection, provision, sentence,
clause, phrase or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 5. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This Ordinance shall be in effect from and after its final passage, approval and notice of its passage is
given as provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED by the City Council on the 11 day of April, 2019.
_____________________________ ________________________________
Matthew Graham, Deputy City Clerk Scott Cirksena, Mayor
Ordinance No. 1072 authenticated this 15 day of April, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 42/439
_____________________________ ________________________________
Matthew Graham, Deputy City Clerk Scott Cirksena, Mayor
Officially published on the 19 day of April, 2019.
CERTIFIED BY:
_____________________________
Matthew Graham, Deputy City Clerk
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Clive, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 1068, passed January 10, 2019. Ordinances
of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 903
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF CLIVE, IOWA, 2008
Be it enacted by the city council of the city of Clive, Iowa:
Section 1. As required by section 380.3 of the code of Iowa, there is hereby adopted by the city of Clive, Iowa, the "code of ordinances of the city of
Clive, Iowa, 2008" (the "code").
Section 2. All of the provisions of the code shall be in force and effect on and after the effective date of this ordinance.
Section 3. All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of the code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in the code or
are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses set forth in the code), and excluding the following ordinances
which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants;
salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances;
ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; all special ordinances; street and
sidewalk grade ordinances; zoning map ordinances; and ordinances containing legal descriptions of urban revitalization areas and urban renewal
areas.
Section 4. No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of the code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as the code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case, the code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
Section 5. An official copy of the code adopted by this ordinance, including a certificate of the city clerk as to its adoption and effective date, is on file in
the office of the city clerk, and shall be kept available for public inspection.
Section 6. The city clerk shall furnish a copy of the code to the judicial magistrates serving the city of Clive.
Section 7. This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its final passage, approval and notice of its passage is given as provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED by the city council on the 15th day of January, 2009.
Pamela L. Blessman, City ClerkLes Aasheim, Mayor
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 43/439
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
CLIVE CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Clive. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the CLIVE CITY CODE and is hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any legal documents. (2008 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (2008
Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion
in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the city code. (2008 Code)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1-1-4: CITY POWERS:
The city may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa constitution, and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa general assembly, exercise any
power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the city and of its residents, and
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents, and each and every provision of this code shall be
deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the foregoing functions. (2000 Code § 1.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the code, or to insert or delete pages, or
portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. (2000
Code § 1.09)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.5)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE; INDEMNITY
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the
issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances;
bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all special
ordinances. (2008 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 44/439
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2008 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right
accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising, before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the
proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any
judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
B. Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing
provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any
penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or
provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2008 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code or any part thereof or any portion adopted by reference
therein is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof or any portion adopted by reference therein. The city council hereby
declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
(2008 Code)
1-2-5: INDEMNITY:
The applicant for any permit or license under this code, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or death of any person
or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to property whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or
related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or
the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this code or the terms and conditions of such
permit or license; and such applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the city and its officers, agents and employees, and
agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, including all
costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or license
issued under this code or any other ordinance of the city whether expressly recited therein or not. (2000 Code § 1.04)
1-2-6: PERSONAL INJURIES:
When action is brought against the city for personal injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the city may notify in writing any person by
whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of
the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the city believes that the person notified is
liable to it for any judgment rendered against the city, and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any
action by the city against any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the city to
the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The city may maintain an action against the person notified to
recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by the city in the suit. (2000 Code § 1.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATIONS
1-3-1: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this code, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
council or repugnant to the context of the provisions:
A. Verb Tense And Plurals: Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes
the singular.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 45/439
B. May: The word "may" confers a power.
C. Must: The word "must" states a requirement.
D. Shall: The word "shall" imposes a duty.
E. Gender: The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
F. Interpretation: All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent
and meaning of the council may be fully carried out.
G. Extension Of Authority: Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a provision of this code, the provision shall be
construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly authorized designee of said officer or employee. (2000 Code
§ 1.06)
H. Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2008 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Where words and phrases used in this code are defined by state law, such definitions apply to their use in this code and are adopted by reference.
Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings,
unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this code:
ALLEY: A public right of way, other than a street, affording secondary means of access to abutting property.
CITY: The city of Clive, Iowa.
CLERK: The city clerk of Clive, Iowa.
CODE: The code of the city of Clive, Iowa.
COUNCIL: The city council of Clive, Iowa.
COUNTY: Polk County and Dallas County, Iowa.
MEASURE: An ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
MONTH: A calendar month.
OATH: An affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" are
equivalent to the words "swear" and "sworn".
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: Applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
ORDINANCES: The ordinances of the city of Clive, Iowa, as embodied in this code, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance adopting this code, and
those enacted hereafter.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other legal entity,
and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes real property, and tangible and intangible personal property unless clearly indicated otherwise.
PROPERTY OWNER: A person owning private property in the city as shown by the county auditor's plats of the city.
PUBLIC PLACE: Includes in its meaning, but is not restricted to, any city owned open place, such as parks and squares.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any and all property owned by the city or held in the name of the city by any of the departments, commissions or agencies within
the city government.
PUBLIC WAY: Includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
SIDEWALK: That surfaced portion of the street between the edge of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line, intended
for the use of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Iowa.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 46/439
STATUTES OR LAWS: The latest edition of the code of Iowa, as amended.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
WRITING AND WRITTEN: Include printing, typing, lithographing, or other mode of representing words and letters.
YEAR: A calendar year. (2000 Code § 1.02; amd. 2008 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code, titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), cross references and state law references,
unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in this code, do not constitute any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain,
supplement or clarify the contents of a section. (2000 Code § 1.08; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY1
1-4-1: STANDARD PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this code for any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing to perform a duty, or obtain
a license required by, or violating any provision of, this code, or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to
a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 1.10)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2])
1-4-2: ELECTION OF REMEDIES:
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense, provided the revocation of a
license or permit shall not be considered a recovery. (2008 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for failure to perform such duty unless the intention of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2008 Code)
Footnote 1: See article A of this chapter for municipal infractions.
ARTICLE A. MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
1-4A-1: DEFINITION:
For use in this article, the term "repeat offense" means a recurring violation of the same section of this Code. (2000 Code § 4.01)
1-4A-2: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ALTERNATIVE RELIEF:
A. Violations Subject To Civil Penalty: Failure to conform to the standards, criteria, or provisions of the following ordinances or portions of this Code
may constitute a Municipal infraction, subject to civil penalty as set forth in this article:
Title 4, chapter 3, regulating solicitors and mobile food units;
Title 5, chapter 4, article C, section 13, related to trail obstruction;
Title 5, chapter 6, regulating nuisances;
Title 5, chapter 7, regarding animal protection and control;
Title 5, chapter 7, article C, regarding the prohibition of the voluntary feeding of deer;
Title 5, chapter 8, dealing with noise control;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 47/439
Title 5, chapter 9, regulating alarm systems;
Title 7, chapter 1, regulating street use and maintenance;
Title 7, chapter 2, regulating sidewalks/shared use paths;
Title 7, chapter 6, establishing park regulations;
Title 8, chapter 1, article C, regarding cross connection control and containment;
Title 8, chapter 3, including articles A and B, dealing with the regulation of industrial wastewater and commercial wastewater;
Title 8, chapter 4, article B, dealing with illicit discharge to storm sewer system;
Title 8, chapter 4, article C, regarding postconstruction stormwater management;
Title 8, chapter 5, article A, dealing with collection of solid waste;
Title 10, as amended, dealing with building regulations; and
Title 11, as amended, Clive zoning ordinance. (Ord. 889, 1-17-2008; amd. Ord. 924, 2-4-2010; Ord. 957, 1-19-2012; Ord. 956, 2-2-2012; Ord. 978,
6-20-2013; Ord. 1035, 3-23-2017; Ord. 1046, 7-13-2017)
B. Schedule Of Civil Penalties: Unless another civil penalty is provided elsewhere in this Code for a specific violation, a Municipal infraction is a civil
offense punishable as provided in the following schedule of civil penalties:
Schedule of maximum civil penalties:
First offense $ 750.00
Subsequent offenses 1,000.00
C. Each Day A Separate Offense: Each day that a Municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
D. Alternative Relief: Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this article does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the
same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief. (2000 Code § 4.02)
1-4A-3: CIVIL CITATIONS:
A. Authority To Issue: Any Clive Police Officer, the Fire Chief, the Building and Zoning Inspector, the Community Development Director, the Public
Works Director or the WRA, as authorized pursuant to title 8, chapter 3, articles A and B of this Code, may issue a civil citation to a person who
commits a Municipal infraction.
B. Serving Citation: The citation may be served by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
C. Filing Of Citation: A copy of the citation shall be filed with the Clerk of the District Court.
D. Information Contained In Citation: The citation shall serve as notification that a Municipal infraction has been committed and shall contain the
following information:
1. The name and address of the violator.
2. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the citation.
3. The location and time of the infraction.
4. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or both.
5. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6. The time and place of court appearance.
7. The penalty for failure to appear in court. (2000 Code § 4.03)
1-4A-4: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
All citations issued pursuant to this article shall be prosecuted in accordance with section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa. (2000 Code § 4.04)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 48/439
Chapter 5
CITY CHARTER AND ELECTIONS
1-5-1: CITY CHARTER1:
A. Title: This section may be cited as the CHARTER OF THE CITY OF CLIVE, IOWA. (2000 Code § 2.01)
B. Form Of Government: The form of government of the city is the mayor-council form of government. (2000 Code § 2.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
C. Powers And Duties: The council and mayor and other city officers have such powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by
state law and by the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city. (2000 Code § 2.03)
D. Number And Term Of Council: The council consists of five (5) council members elected at large for overlapping terms of four (4) years. (2000 Code
§ 2.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
E. Term Of Mayor: The mayor is elected for a term of four (4) years. (2000 Code § 2.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
F. Copies On File: The clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the official records of the clerk and the secretary of state, and shall
keep copies of the charter available at the clerk's office for public inspection. (2000 Code § 2.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
1-5-2: CITY ELECTIONS:
A. Nominating Method: All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the provisions of chapter 376 of the code of Iowa. (2000
Code § 6.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
B. Candidacy: An eligible elector of the city may become a candidate for an elective city office by filing with the city clerk a valid petition requesting that
the elector's name be placed on the ballot for that office. The petition must be signed by eligible electors equal in number to at least two percent
(2%) of those who voted to fill the same office at the last regular city election, but not less than ten (10) persons. (2000 Code § 6.02)
C. Runoff Election In Lieu Of Primary: A runoff election shall be held in lieu of a primary election for the choosing of persons for elective offices. (2000
Code § 6.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6)
D. Runoff Election Procedure: A runoff election shall be held only for positions unfilled because of failure of a sufficient number of candidates to
receive a majority vote in the regular city election. (2000 Code § 6.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
E. Qualification: Candidates who do not receive a majority of the votes cast for an office, but who receive the highest number of votes cast for that
office in the regular city election, to the extent of twice the number of unfilled positions, are candidates in the runoff elections. (2000 Code § 6.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
F. Time Held: Runoff elections shall be held four (4) weeks after the date of the regular city election and shall be conducted in the same manner as
regular city elections. (2000 Code § 6.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
G. Candidates Elected: Candidates in the runoff election who receive the highest number of votes cast for each office on the ballot are elected to the
extent necessary to fill the positions open. (2000 Code § 6.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
Footnote 1: Ordinance 179 adopting a charter for the city was passed and approved by the council on June 19, 1975, and published by posting on
June 23, 1975.
Chapter 6
MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES AND PRECINCTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 49/439
1-6-1: CORPORATE LIMITS:
The corporate limits map and specific description shall be and remain on file in the office of the city clerk. (2008 Code)
1-6-2: ELECTION PRECINCTS:
The following election precincts are hereby established for all national, state and local elections:
A. Precinct 1: Election precinct 1 is that part of the city lying east of the centerline of N.W. 86th Street.
B. Precinct 2: Election precinct 2 is that part of the city lying west of the centerline of N.W. 86th Street and east of the centerline of N.W. 100th Street.
C. Precinct 3: Election precinct 3 is that part of the city lying west of the centerline of N.W. 100th Street and east of the centerline of N.W. 128th Street.
D. Precinct 4: Election precinct 4 is that part of the city lying west of the centerline of N.W. 128th Street and east of the centerline of N.W. 142nd
Street.
E. Precinct 5: Election precinct 5 is that part of the city lying west of the centerline of N.W. 142nd Street and east of the centerline of N.W. 156th Street
located in Dallas County, Iowa.
F. Precinct 6: Election precinct 6 is that part of the city lying west of the centerline of N.W. 156th Street and located in Dallas County, Iowa. (Ord. 950,
8-4-2011)
Chapter 7
MAYOR
1-7-1: TERM OF OFFICE:
The mayor is elected for a term of four (4) years. (2000 Code § 15.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
1-7-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the mayor are as follows:
A. Chief Executive Officer: Act as the chief executive officer of the city and presiding officer of the council, supervise all city officers and departments,
except for supervisory duties delegated by ordinance to the city manager, and have the power to examine all functions of the municipal
departments, their records and to call for special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
B. Proclamation Of Emergency: Have authority to take command of the police and govern the city by proclamation, upon making a determination that
a time of emergency or public danger exists. Within the city limits, the mayor has all the powers conferred upon the sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
C. Special Meetings: Call special meetings of the council when the mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the city.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
D. Mayor's Veto: Sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance, amendment or resolution passed by the council. The mayor may veto an ordinance,
amendment or resolution within fourteen (14) days after passage. The mayor shall explain the reasons for the veto in a written message to the
council at the time of the veto.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 380.5 and 380.6[2])
E. Reports To Council: Make such oral or written reports to the council as required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the
municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for council action.
F. Negotiations: May represent the city in all negotiations properly entered into in accordance with law or ordinance.
G. Contracts: Whenever authorized by the council, sign contracts on behalf of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 50/439
H. Professional Services: Upon order of the council, secure for the city such specialized and professional services not already available to the city. In
executing the order of the council, the mayor shall act in accordance with the code and the laws of the state.
I. Absentee Officer: Make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee officer be carried on during such absence. (2000 Code § 15.02)
1-7-3: APPOINTMENTS:
The mayor shall appoint the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
A. Mayor pro tem.
B. Civil service commission (subject to council approval).
C. Parks and recreation board (subject to council approval).
D. Library board of trustees (subject to council approval). (2000 Code § 15.03)
E. Public arts advisory commission (subject to council approval). (2008 Code)
F. Planning and zoning commission (subject to council approval).
G. Board of adjustment (subject to council approval).
H. Building codes appeal board (subject to council approval). (Ord. 1015, 5-26-2016)
1-7-4: COMPENSATION:
Beginning on January 1, 2018, the salary of the mayor shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per month, payable monthly. Each calendar year
the mayor's compensation amount is adjusted by no less than one percent (1%) and no greater than three percent (3%) equal to the increase in the
consumer price index (CPI-U, U.S. city average, all items NSA) for the calendar year immediately preceding the increase in compensation, rounded to
the closest one dollar ($1.00). (Ord. 1034, 4-13-2017)
1-7-5: VOTING:
The mayor is not a member of the council and may not vote as a member of the council. (2000 Code § 15.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1-7-6: MAYOR PRO TEM:
A. Vice President Of Council: The mayor pro tem is vice president of the council. (2000 Code § 16.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
B. Powers And Duties: Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the mayor pro tem shall perform the duties of the mayor in cases of
absence or inability of the mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office, the mayor pro tem shall not have power to
employ, or discharge from employment, officers or employees that the mayor has the power to appoint, employ or discharge without the approval of
the council. (2000 Code § 16.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
C. Voting Rights: The mayor pro tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the council. (2000 Code § 16.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
D. Compensation: If the mayor pro tem performs the duties of the mayor during the mayor's absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15)
days or more, the mayor pro tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the council, based upon the mayor pro tem's
performance of the mayor's duties and upon the compensation of the mayor. (2000 Code § 16.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 51/439
Chapter 8
CITY COUNCIL
1-8-1: NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
The council consists of five (5) council members elected at large for overlapping terms of four (4) years. (2000 Code § 17.01)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 372.4 and 376.2)
1-8-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the council include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. General: All powers of the city are vested in the council except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
B. Fiscal Authority: The council shall apportion and appropriate all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order
payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or repairs
which may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 364.2[1], 384.16 and 384.38[1])
C. Public Improvements: The council shall make all orders for the construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
D. Contracts: The council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the city unless adopted by
resolution of the council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.100)
E. Employees: The council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by state law or this code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
F. Setting Compensation For Elected Officers: By ordinance, the council shall prescribe the compensation of the mayor, council members, and other
elected city officers, but a change in the compensation of the mayor does not become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and
the council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer during the months of November and December in
the year of a regular city election. A change in the compensation of council members becomes effective for all council members at the beginning of
the term of the council members elected at the election next following the change in compensation. (2000 Code § 17.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
1-8-3: EXERCISE OF POWER:
The council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a resolution, an amendment or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
A. Action By Council: Passage of an ordinance, amendment or resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the council. Passage of a
motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the council. A resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) on any one project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their completion. Each council member's vote on a
measure must be recorded. A measure which fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
B. Overriding Mayor's Veto: Within thirty (30) days after the mayor's veto, the council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds
(2/3) of all of the members of the council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
C. Measures Become Effective: Measures passed by the council become effective in one of the following ways:
1. An ordinance or amendment signed by the mayor becomes effective when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
2. A resolution signed by the mayor becomes effective immediately upon signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
3. A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by the council. (2000 Code § 17.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 52/439
4. If the mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution and the council repasses the measure after the mayor's veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is
published or posted, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
5. If the mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment or resolution, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the date of
passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published or posted, but not
sooner than fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(2000 Code § 17.03; amd. 2008 Code)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
D. Reference To Council Members: "All of the members of the council" refers to all of the seats of the council including a vacant seat and a seat where
the member is absent, but does not include a seat where the council member declines to vote by reason of a conflict of interest. (2000 Code
§ 17.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
1-8-4: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the council and other provisions regarding the conduct of council meetings are contained in section 1-10-6
of this title. Additional particulars relating to council meetings are the following: (2000 Code § 17.04)
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the council shall be on the second and fourth Thursdays of each month. All meetings shall be held at six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. in the council chambers at city hall. If any such day falls on a legal holiday, the meetings may be rescheduled to a mutually
convenient time or canceled, as determined by the council. (Ord. 993, 10-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
B. Special Meetings: Special meetings shall be held upon call of the mayor or upon the written request of a majority of the members of the council
submitted to the clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify the date, time, place and subject of the meeting and such notice shall be given
personally or left at the usual place of residence of each member of the council. A record of the service of notice shall be maintained by the clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
C. Quorum: A majority of all council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
D. Rules Of Procedure: The council shall determine its own rules and maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
E. Compelling Attendance: Any three (3) members of the council can compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned or duly
called meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once. (2000 Code § 17.04)
1-8-5: APPOINTMENTS:
The council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers, duties, compensation and term of office:
A. City manager.
B. City clerk.
C. City attorney.
D. Planning and zoning commission.
E. Board of adjustment. (2000 Code § 17.05; amd. 2008 Code)
F. Building codes appeal board.
G. Civil service commission.
H. Parks and recreation board.
I. Library board of trustees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 53/439
J. Public arts advisory commission. (Ord. 1016, 5-26-2016)
1-8-6: COMPENSATION:
Beginning on January 1, 2018, the salary of each council member shall be three hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00) per month, payable monthly.
Each calendar year this compensation amount is adjusted by no less than one percent (1%) and no greater than three percent (3%) equal to the
increase in the consumer price index (CPI-U, U.S. city average, all items NSA) for the calendar year immediately preceding the increase in
compensation, rounded to the closest one dollar ($1.00). (Ord. 1034, 4-13-2017)
Chapter 9
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
1-9A-1: APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION:
At its first meeting in January following the regular city election, the council shall appoint by majority vote a city clerk to serve for a term of two (2)
years. The clerk shall receive such compensation as established by resolution of the council. (2000 Code § 18.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
1-9A-2: POWERS AND DUTIES, GENERAL:
The clerk, or, in the clerk's absence or inability to act, the deputy clerk, has the powers and duties as provided in this article, this code and the law.
(2000 Code § 18.02)
1-9A-3: PUBLICATION OF MINUTES:
The clerk shall attend all regular and special council meetings and within fifteen (15) days following a regular or special meeting shall cause the
minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall
show the gross amount of the claim. (2000 Code § 18.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
1-9A-4: RECORDING MEASURES:
The clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the council and record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating
whether the mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure was repassed after the mayor's veto. (2000 Code
§ 18.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 and 2])
1-9A-5: PUBLICATION:
A. Publication: The clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows:
1. Time: If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is required by this code or law, the notice must be published at least once, not less
than four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date of the election, hearing or other action, unless otherwise provided by law. (2000
Code § 18.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])
2. Manner Of Publication: A publication required by this code or laws must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general
circulation in the city. (Ord. 1018, 5-26-2016)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])
1-9A-6: AUTHENTICATION:
The clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the clerk's signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required. (2000
Code § 18.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
1-9A-7: CERTIFY MEASURES:
The clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 54/439
recorder of the county containing the affected parts of the city. (2000 Code § 18.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
1-9A-8: RECORDS:
The clerk shall maintain the specified city records in the following manner:
A. Ordinances And Codes: Maintain copies of all effective city ordinances and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
B. Custody: Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings or documents in which the city is a party in interest unless otherwise
specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
C. Maintenance: Maintain all city records and documents, or accurate reproductions, for at least five (5) years, except that ordinances, resolutions,
council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement
of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least eleven (11) years following the final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances,
resolutions, council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be maintained
permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 and 5])
D. Provide Copy: Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any record, paper or public document under the clerk's control when it may
be necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer's duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by
council resolution; under the direction of the mayor or other authorized officer, affix the seal of the city to those public documents or instruments
which by ordinance and code are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 372.13[4 and 5] and 380.7[5])
E. Filing Of Communications: Keep and file all communications and petitions directed to the council or to the city generally. The clerk shall endorse
thereon the action of the council taken upon matters considered in such communications and petitions. (2000 Code § 18.08)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-9A-9: ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
At the direction of the council, the clerk shall attend meetings of committees, boards and commissions. The clerk shall record and preserve a correct
record of the proceedings of such meetings. (2000 Code § 18.09)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-9A-10: ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS:
The clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this code, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which shall show
date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose for which
issued. (2000 Code § 18.10)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-9A-11: NOTIFY APPOINTEES:
The clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the mayor or council to offices in the city government of their position and the time at which they shall
assume the duties of their office. The clerk shall also advise the mayor or council at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the term of any
appointment. (2000 Code § 18.11)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-9A-12: ELECTIONS:
The clerk shall perform the following duties relating to elections and nominations:
A. Certify to the county commissioner of elections the type of nomination process to be used by the city no later than ninety (90) days before the date
of the regular city election.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6)
B. Accept the nomination petition of a candidate for a city office for filing if on its face it appears to have the requisite number of signatures and is
timely filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 55/439
C. Designate other employees or officials of the city who are ordinarily available to accept nomination papers if the clerk is not readily available during
normal working hours.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
D. Note upon each petition and affidavit accepted for filing the date and time that the petition was filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
E. Deliver all nomination petitions, together with the text of any public measure being submitted by the council to the electorate, to the county
commissioner of elections not later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the day following the last day on which nomination petitions can be filed. (2000
Code § 18.12)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
1-9A-13: CITY SEAL:
The city seal is in the custody of the clerk and shall be attached by the clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be necessary or
proper to authenticate. The city seal is circular in form, in the center of which are the words "CLIVE, IOWA" and around the margin the words "CITY
SEAL". (2000 Code § 18.13)
1-9A-14: CIVIL SERVICE:
The clerk shall serve as clerk to the civil service commission and perform such functions as required by law. (2000 Code § 18.14)
1-9A-15: COUNCIL AGENDA:
The clerk shall prepare and maintain a council agenda, subject to modification by the mayor, council, or the city manager, and forward copies to such
officials or persons as directed. (2000 Code § 18.15)
1-9A-16: ASSIST CITY MANAGER:
The clerk shall provide information and staff support to the city manager in related areas as requested by the city manager. (2000 Code § 18.16)
1-9A-17: TREASURER:
The clerk is the treasurer of the city and performs all those duties required of the treasurer by section 1-9B-3 of this title. (2000 Code § 18.17)
ARTICLE B. CITY TREASURER
1-9B-1: APPOINTMENT:
The city clerk is the treasurer and performs all functions required of the position of treasurer. (2000 Code § 19.01)
1-9B-2: COMPENSATION:
The clerk receives no additional compensation for performing the duties of the treasurer. (2000 Code § 19.02)
1-9B-3: DUTIES OF TREASURER:
The duties of the treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
A. Custody Of Funds: Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the city in the manner provided by law, and council direction.
B. Record Of Fund: Keep the record of each fund separate.
C. Record Receipts: Keep an accurate record of all monies or securities received by the treasurer on behalf of the city and specify the date, from
whom, and for what purpose received.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 56/439
D. Record Obligations: Keep an accurate account of all cash disbursed, purchase and contract commitments and property disposed of or sold by the
city, specifying the date and to whom paid.
E. Special Assessments: Keep a separate account of all monies received by the treasurer from special assessments.
F. Deposit Funds: Upon receipt of monies to be held in the treasurer's custody and belonging to the city, deposit the same in depositories selected by
the council.
G. Reconciliation: Reconcile depository statements with the treasurer's books and certify monthly to the council, city manager and respective boards
and commissions the balance of cash and investments of each fund and amounts received and disbursed.
H. Debt Service: Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all payments of interest and principal.
I. Water Department: Be in charge of and supervise the water department books of account, records, billings and receipts.
J. Other Duties: Perform such other duties as specified by the council by resolution or ordinance or as requested by the city manager. (2000 Code
§ 19.03)
1-9B-4: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AGENCIES:
The city treasurer is the treasurer and custodian of all funds received or held in custody for any board, commission or agency existing in the city and
created by the council, and pays out all monies under control of the respective boards, commissions or agencies on orders signed by the respective
chairs and secretaries of such boards, commissions or agencies, but receives no additional compensation for such services. (2000 Code § 19.04)
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
1-9C-1: APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION:
The council shall appoint by majority vote a city attorney and assistants to serve at the discretion of the council. The city attorney and assistants shall
receive such compensation as established by resolution of the council. (2000 Code § 20.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-9C-2: ATTORNEY FOR CITY:
The city attorney shall act as attorney for the city in all matters affecting the city's interest and appear on behalf of the city before any court, tribunal,
commission or board. The city attorney shall prosecute or defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the mayor or council. (2000 Code
§ 20.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-9C-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
A. Ordinance Preparation: The city attorney shall prepare those ordinances which the council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the
council upon all such ordinances before their final passage by the council and publication. (2000 Code § 20.03)
B. Review And Comment: The city attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the council, city manager and mayor, giving an opinion on all
contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or coming under the city attorney's notice. (2000 Code § 20.04)
C. Provide Legal Opinion: The city attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on city contracts and all questions of law relating to city matters
submitted by the mayor, council members or city manager. (2000 Code § 20.05)
D. Attendance At Council Meetings: The city attorney shall attend meetings of the council. (2000 Code § 20.06)
E. Prepare Documents: The city attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms and other writings which may be required for the
use of the city. (2000 Code § 20.07)
ARTICLE D. CITY MANAGER
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 57/439
1-9D-1: PURPOSE:
By virtue of the authority conferred by chapter 372, code of Iowa, the office of the city manager for the city is hereby created. (2000 Code § 21.01)
1-9D-2: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The city manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the council at a regular meeting of such body and may be appointed for a term not to exceed
two (2) years. The city manager shall hold office at the discretion of the council and shall be subject to removal by a majority vote thereof. (2000 Code
§ 21.02)
1-9D-3: COMPENSATION:
The city manager shall receive such annual salary as the council shall, from time to time, determine by resolution, and time of payment shall be fixed
in accordance with that for other Clive municipal employees. (2000 Code § 21.03)
1-9D-4: DUTIES:
The city manager is the chief administrative officer of the city. The duties of the city manager are as follows:
A. General: See that all resolutions, ordinances, laws, council and mayor directives and approved operational policies are either faithfully enforced and
executed or referred to the proper official for compliance thereof.
B. Attend Council Meetings: Attend all meetings of the council unless otherwise excused by the mayor or council.
C. Recommendations: Recommend to the mayor and council such measures as the city manager deems necessary or expedient for good efficient
government, and the general welfare of the city.
D. Supervision: Have general responsibility for the supervision, direction, and administration of the following departments, offices, functions and
services, and be directly responsible to the council for the proper function of the same:
1. Clerk's office.
2. Fiscal and administrative services department.
3. Fire and rescue department.
4. Police department.
5. Community development and building department.
6. Department of public works.
7. Parks and recreation department.
8. Library department.
9. Personnel.
10. Budget control and finance.
11. Insurance and public bonds.
12. Capital improvement and planning.
E. Liaison: Maintain liaison with citizens, businesses, developers, builders, engineers and other governmental agencies.
F. Contracts: Be responsible for the supervision and performance of all contracts for work and services to be done for the city, except as specified
otherwise in said construction or service program involved.
G. Agreements; Contracts: Maintain an accounting of all obligations, agreements, commitments and contractual franchises involving the city and report
to the mayor and council any deviations from the exact terms as specified.
H. Purchasing: Direct the purchasing of all commodities, materials, supplies, capital outlay and services for all departments of the city that have been
budgeted and appropriated by resolution of the council, and enforce a program to determine that such purchases are received and are of the
quality and character called for in the order.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 58/439
1. Bids: The city manager shall require the taking of bids on all matters which the city manager deems advisable, as required by law, or as directed
by the council.
2. Unbudgeted Items: The city manager may approve the purchase of unbudgeted items costing less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
provided a budget amendment is not required. The city manager must first receive the approval by majority vote of the council before authorizing
the purchase of unbudgeted items costing in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
I. Appoint And Employ: Have the power to appoint or employ all officers and employees to fill authorized positions with the exception of the city clerk,
city attorney, assistant city attorney, city prosecutor, police department personnel appointed pursuant to civil service law (other than the police chief,
who shall be appointed by the city manager), fire officers and full time fire department personnel. The appointment or employment of officers or
employees at the department head level is subject to council approval.
J. Suspension Or Discharge Of Employees: Have the power to suspend without pay for a period not exceeding fourteen (14) days or discharge
summarily any officer or employee which the city manager has the power to appoint or employ, subject, however, to the provisions of the veteran's
preference law, chapter 35C of the code of Iowa. The suspension or discharge of officers or employees at the department head level is subject to
review and confirmation by the council.
K. Emergency Employees: Have the authority to employ any person for emergency purposes as deemed necessary for the welfare of the city, but in
no case shall said employment be extended after the first council meeting following the date of employment, unless otherwise approved by vote of
the council.
L. Buildings And Equipment: Supervise the management of all buildings, structures and land under the jurisdiction of the council, and be charged with
the care and preservation of all city owned equipment, tools, machinery, appliances, supplies and commodities under the control of employees or
departments, over which the city manager has, by this article, specific authority.
M. Financial Condition: Keep the mayor and council fully advised of the financial and other conditions of the city.
N. Annual Budget: Prepare and submit to the mayor and council an annual budget in the manner as prescribed by law.
O. Business Affairs: See that all business affairs of the city are conducted by modern, approved methods and in an efficient manner.
P. Records: Be responsible at all times for the maintenance of accurate and current records of all affairs of the departments under the jurisdiction of the
city manager, and in a form acceptable by the council. Copies of such reports shall be available for public inspection.
Q. Council Committees: Assist the council committees in the execution of their reviews, investigations, reports and assignments, and provide
administrative support in compliance with their directives.
R. Delegated Powers: Perform duties and have direct authority on all matters delegated by council action.
S. Administrative Support: Provide administrative support and assistance to the mayor and perform duties in the coordination of all phases of
municipal activity as directed by the mayor and council. (2000 Code § 21.04)
1-9D-5: RESIDENCE:
The city manager shall upon appointment and confirmation reside within the Clive city limits. (2000 Code § 21.05)
1-9D-6: EXECUTION OF BOND:
The city manager shall execute and file a bond for the faithful performance of duties, and in favor of the city, in a sum as determined by the council.
The city shall pay the cost of such bond. (2000 Code § 21.06)
Chapter 10
MUNICIPAL OPERATING PROCEDURES
1-10-1: OATHS:
The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the following:
A. Qualify For Office:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 59/439
1. All elected officers and the following appointed officers shall qualify for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond:
a. City manager.
b. City clerk.
c. Deputy city clerk.
d. Police officers.
e. Fire chief.
2. The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after being certified as elected but not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of the first day which is
not a Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
B. Prescribed Oath: The prescribed oath is: "I, (name), do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in Clive as
now or hereafter required by law".
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
C. Officers Empowered To Administer Oaths: The following are empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the
business of their respective office:
1. Mayor.
2. City clerk.
3. Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by law. (2000 Code § 5.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
1-10-2: BONDS:
Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
A. Required: The council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or blanket position bond running to the city and covering the mayor, clerk,
treasurer and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
B. Bonds Approved: Bonds shall be approved by the council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
C. Bonds Filed: All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed with the clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
D. Record: The clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the "record of official bonds" in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all city officers,
elective or appointive. (2000 Code § 5.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])
1-10-3: DUTIES, GENERAL:
Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties prescribed by law and this code, or as otherwise directed by the council unless
contrary to state law or city charter. (2000 Code § 5.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1-10-4: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions
of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential. Access to public records which are combined with data processing
software shall be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the city. (2000 Code § 5.04)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 22.2 and 22.3A)
1-10-5: TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR:
Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer's custody and appertaining
to that office. (2000 Code § 5.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 60/439
1-10-6: MEETINGS:
All meetings of the council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall
be held in accordance with the following:
A. Notice Of Meetings: Reasonable notice, as defined by state law, of the time, date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda shall be
given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
B. Meetings Open: All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by state law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
C. Minutes: Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The
minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member
present shall be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
D. Closed Session: A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of either two-thirds (2/3) of the body or all of the members present at the
meeting and in accordance with chapter 21 of the code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
E. Cameras And Recorders: The public may use cameras or recording devices at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
F. Electronic Meetings: A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or
impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of chapter 21 of the code of Iowa. (2000 Code § 5.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
1-10-7: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
A city officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to be
furnished or performed for the city, unless expressly permitted by law. A contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of this
section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
A. Compensation Of Officers: The payment of lawful compensation of a city officer or employee holding more than one city office or position, the
holding of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[1])
B. Investment Of Funds: The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[2])
C. City Treasurer: An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as treasurer of the city.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3])
D. Stock Interests: Contracts in which a city officer or employee has an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in subsection H of this section, or both, if the contract is for professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid, if the
remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the contract, and if the duties of employment do not directly involve the
procurement or preparation of any part of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[5])
E. Newspaper: The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[6])
F. Existing Contracts: A contract in which a city officer or employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee
was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[7])
G. Paid On Call Personnel: Contracts with paid on call firefighters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[8])
H. Corporations: A contract with a corporation in which a city officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five
percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 61/439
immediate family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[9])
I. Contracts: Contracts made by the city upon competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened. (2000 Code § 5.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[4])
J. Cumulative Purchases: Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section, for the purchase of goods or services which benefit a city officer or
employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative total purchase price of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) in a fiscal year. (2000 Code § 5.07; amd. 2008 Code)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[10])
K. Franchise Agreements: Franchise agreements between the city and a utility and contracts entered into by the city for the provision of essential city
utility services. (2000 Code § 5.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[12])
1-10-8: RESIGNATIONS:
An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation in writing to the clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was
elected, if during that time the compensation of the office has been increased. (2000 Code § 5.08)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
1-10-9: REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
Except as otherwise provided by state or city law, all persons appointed to city office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the clerk, and a copy shall be
sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be
granted a public hearing before the council on all issues connected with the removal. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date the
request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date. (2000 Code § 5.09)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
1-10-10: VACANCIES:
A vacancy in an elective city office during a term of office shall be filled, at the council's option, by one of the two (2) following procedures:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2])
A. Appointment: By appointment following public notice by the remaining members of the council within forty (40) days after the vacancy occurs,
except that if the remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the full membership, or if a petition is filed requesting an election, the council
shall call a special election as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2a])
B. Election: By a special election held to fill the office for the remaining balance of the unexpired term as provided by law. (2000 Code § 5.10)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2b])
1-10-11: GIFTS:
Except as otherwise provided in chapter 68B of the code of Iowa, a public official, public employee or candidate, or that person's immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series of gifts from a "restricted donor" as defined in said chapter 68B, and a
restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee or candidate. (2000 Code § 5.11)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-1-1: APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP:
There shall be appointed by the council a city planning and zoning commission, hereinafter referred to as the "commission", consisting of seven (7)
members, who shall be residents of the city and qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of a city plan and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 62/439
who shall not hold any elective office in the city government. (2000 Code § 23.01)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 414.6 and 392.1)
2-1-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of office of the members of the commission shall be five (5) years. The terms of not more than one-third (1/3) of the members will expire in
any one year. (2000 Code § 23.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2-1-3: VACANCIES:
If any vacancy exists on the commission caused by resignation, or otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same
manner as the original appointee. (2000 Code § 23.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2-1-4: COMPENSATION:
All members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the council.
(2000 Code § 23.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have and exercise the powers and duties provided by chapter 414 of the code of Iowa and the city zoning ordinance. (2000
Code § 23.05)
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODES APPEAL BOARD
2-2-1: BOARD CREATED:
A building codes appeal board is hereby established. (Ord. 960, 3-15-2012)
2-2-2: BOARD ORGANIZATION:
A. Appointment; Compensation: The board shall consist of five (5) resident members. The board shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of
the city council. The members shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council and shall receive no compensation for their service, except for
reimbursement of necessary expenses.
B. Staggered Terms: The appointment of each member of the board shall be for staggered terms of three (3) years each. At the time of the initial
appointment, the mayor shall designate the length of term for each member to provide for staggered terms.
C. Chairperson And Vice Chair: Upon appointment, the board shall be called together by the mayor and shall organize by electing one member as
chair and one member as vice chair from any of its members for a term of one year with eligibility for reelection.
D. Meetings: Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson, and at such times as the board may determine. All meetings of the
board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions all of which shall be immediately
filed in the community development department and shall be treated as a public record. The presence of three (3) members shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum.
E. Removal Of Members: Any board member may be removed from the board by the mayor, with the concurrence of the city council, for good and
sufficient cause. This shall be stated in writing and filed with the city clerk and a copy thereof filed with the chair of the board. Continued absence of
any member from meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the mayor, render any member liable for immediate removal from appointment
with final approval by the council. In the event that a vacancy arises, a new board member shall be appointed to serve out the unexpired term.
(Ord. 960, 3-15-2012)
2-2-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 63/439
Board members shall be citizen representatives of the city at large who have experience in or are knowledgeable about building construction methods
and codes. Members shall not hold any elected office within the city. (Ord. 960, 3-15-2012)
2-2-4: PURPOSE:
It shall be the purpose of the board:
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the community
development department in the enforcement of title 10 of this code. (Ord. 960, 3-15-2012)
B. To grant a variance in a specific case and from a specific provision of title 10 of this code, subject to appropriate conditions and provided that the
board makes findings of fact based on the following: (Ord. 964, 6-7-2012)
1. That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, not of the applicants own doing and not purely economic in nature, in carrying out
the strict letter of any notice or order and that such difficulties or hardships are not generally applicable to other properties; and
2. That the effect of the application of the provisions would be arbitrary in the specific case; and
3. That in granting a variance, such variance would not adversely impact the intended spirit and intent of the provisions of the code in preserving
the health, safety and welfare of the occupants, neighbors and general public.
In the granting of a variance, the board may set reasonable conditions and safeguards to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
occupants, neighbors and general public.
C. To revoke a variance at any time upon a showing that the basis for granting the variance no longer exists or upon a showing that a condition of the
variance has been violated; and
D. To rule on requests for additional time, provided that the granting of such additional time does not endanger the health, safety and welfare of the
occupants, neighbors and general public; and (Ord. 960, 3-15-2012)
E. To direct that legal action be brought to enforce the provisions of title 10 of this code when such action is deemed necessary and appropriate due to
failure to comply or failure to appear before the board for a scheduled hearing. (Ord. 964, 6-7-2012)
2-2-5: APPEALS:
Appeals to the board may be made by any person aggrieved by the decision of the community development department in the enforcement of title 10
of this code. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days by filing an application request on forms provided by the community development
department. Additionally, the application must be accompanied with the appropriate fees in an amount determined by resolution of the city council from
time to time. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the community development department certifies to the
board after notice of appeal shall have been filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the opinion of the department, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or
court of record on application, on due cause shown. (Ord. 960, 3-15-2012; amd. Ord. 964, 6-7-2012)
2-2-6: HEARING NOTICE:
After the community development department has set the board meeting date, the community development department shall post at least one
notification sign at least seven (7) days prior to the board meeting. At least one sign must be placed so that it may be seen from a public street, and in
cases of through lots and/or corner lots, a sign may be posted at both frontages. (Ord. 960, 3-15-2012)
2-2-7: DECISIONS:
A. Authority Of The Board: In exercising the above mentioned powers, the board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of title 10
of this code, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make
such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end, shall have the power of the community development
department from whom the appeal was taken.
B. Vote Of The Members: The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the community development department, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass
under title 10 of this code. (Ord. 964, 6-7-2012)
C. Written Testimony Or Evidence: Every decision granted or denied by the board shall be supported by a written testimony or evidence submitted in
connection therewith.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 64/439
D. Denial Of Application: If any application has been denied by the board, then no new application for the same relief shall be considered by the board
unless the board shall find conditions have changed.
E. Council Review: Any decision made by the board shall not be deemed effective until reviewed and accepted by the city council, at the next regularly
scheduled meeting, no more than twenty (20) days from the date of such deciding vote. (Ord. 960, 3-15-2012)
2-2-8: CITY COUNCIL REMAND:
The city council, may, at its sole discretion, review any affirmative decision of the board at any time before the effective date of the decision. After such
review but prior to the effective date of the decision, the city council may remand any such decision to the board for further review. Upon remand, the
board may reconsider its decision and issue its final decision on the request within thirty (30) days after the date of such remand. (Ord. 960, 3-15-
2012)
2-2-9: APPEALS FROM BOARD:
Any person or persons, any officer, department, or board of the city severally aggrieved by any decision of the board may present to a court of record a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be
presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. (Ord. 960, 3-15-2012)
Chapter 3
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
2-3-1: PUBLIC LIBRARY ESTABLISHED:
A free public library for the city is hereby established to be known as the Clive Public Library (the "library"). (2000 Code § 22.01)
2-3-2: BOARD APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP; ORGANIZATION:
A. Appointment; Terms; Compensation: The board shall consist of an odd number (between 5 and 9) of resident, voting members, appointed by the
mayor, with the approval of the council, for overlapping three (3) year terms. Members of the board shall serve without compensation but may
receive reimbursement for their actual expenses. Seven (7) members shall initially be appointed, including two (2) board members whose terms
shall expire one year after the effective date of their appointment, two (2) board members whose terms shall expire two (2) years after the effective
date of their appointment, and three (3) members who will serve a full three (3) year term. Thereafter appointments shall be made for three (3) year
terms. In the event a vacancy arises, a new board member shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council, and the board
member so appointed shall serve out the unexpired term. Said vacancy shall be filled within sixty (60) days after the position becomes vacant.
(2000 Code § 22.02)
B. Removal Of Members: Any board member may be removed from the board by the mayor, with the concurrence of the council, for good and
sufficient cause which shall be stated in writing and filed with the clerk, and a copy thereof filed with the chair of the board; or any board member
may be removed from the board for good and sufficient cause upon the recommendation of the board, with the concurrence of the mayor and
council.
C. Election Of Officers: The board members shall annually elect, by majority vote, a chairperson, to preside over all meetings of the board, and a
secretary, who shall keep minutes of its meetings. (2000 Code § 22.02; amd. Ord. 1017, 5-26-2016)
2-3-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
Members of the board of library trustees shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and reside within the corporate limits of the city. (2000 Code
§ 22.03)
2-3-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of library trustees shall have and exercise the following powers and duties, subject to review by the council:
A. The board may adopt, amend or repeal bylaws governing the activities of the board and relating to its duties.
B. The board shall develop and oversee plans for the development and maintenance of the public library facilities, furnishings and fixtures.
C. The board shall provide recommendations and advice to the city manager regarding control and supervision of the public library staff.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 65/439
D. The board shall have the authority to adopt, amend or repeal policies, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, for the use of the public
library facilities and resources, including establishing and enforcing penalties for violations of the rules and regulations regarding the public's use of
the library.
E. The board shall provide recommendations and advice to the director of library services regarding selecting and purchasing books, pamphlets,
magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, audiovisual matters, software, other library materials, furniture, fixtures, computer equipment,
stationery and supplies for the library within budgetary limits.
F. The board shall have the authority to authorize the use of the library by nonresidents of the city and to fix charges therefor.
G. The board shall have authority to accept gifts of real property, personal property or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds,
on behalf of the library; to coordinate with the city manager for the establishment of a special trust and agency account, to determine, consistent
with the city's annual budget process, the expenditures of the funds in the special trust and agency account for the improvement of the library; and
to enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, devises and bequests accepted.
H. The director of library services, in consultation with the board, shall prepare an annual budget request for the library's operation, based upon the
municipal fiscal year, and submit the same to the city manager for review and incorporation into the city manager's budget request prior to being
submitted to the council.
I. Immediately following the close of each municipal fiscal year, the board shall make an annual written report to the council which shall contain a
statement of the board's activities during the preceding year, statements regarding the condition of the library, the number of books and other
materials added thereto, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and recommendations for proposed activities for the coming year.
(2000 Code § 22.04)
2-3-5: CONTRACTING WITH OTHERS FOR USE OF LIBRARY:
The board may recommend contracting with any other boards of trustees of free public libraries of any other city, school organization, institution of
higher learning, township, or county, or with the trustees of any county library district for the use of the library by their respective residents. (2000 Code
§ 22.05)
2-3-6: NONRESIDENT USE OF LIBRARY:
The board may authorize the use of the library by nonresidents in any one or more of the following ways:
A. By lending the books or other materials of the library to nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the city, or upon payment
of a special nonresident library fee.
B. By establishing depositories of library books or other materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
C. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or other library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
D. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other library materials to nonresidents. (2000 Code § 22.06)
2-3-7: APPEAL PROCESS:
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board of library trustees may file an appeal with the council within thirty (30) days of the action appealed
from. (2000 Code § 22.07)
Chapter 4
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
2-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the appointment, powers and duties of a civil service commission in accordance with the requirements of
state law. (2000 Code § 24.01)
2-4-2: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
A civil service commission consisting of three (3) members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council for staggered terms of four
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 66/439
(4) years. (2000 Code § 24.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.1)
2-4-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
Commissioners must be citizens of Iowa, eligible electors and residents of the city preceding their appointment. No person while on said commission
shall hold or be a candidate for any office of public trust. (2000 Code § 24.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
2-4-4: HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2-4-3 of this chapter, when a human rights commission has been established, the director thereof shall ex
officio be a member, without vote, of the civil service commission. (2000 Code § 24.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
2-4-5: COMPENSATION:
Civil service commissioners shall serve without compensation. (2000 Code § 24.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
2-4-6: CHAIRPERSON:
The chairperson of the commission for each biennial period shall be the member whose term first expires. (2000 Code § 24.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
2-4-7: CLERK:
The city clerk or designee of the city clerk shall be the clerk of the commission. (Ord. 1029, 2-23-2017)
2-4-8: RECORDS:
The civil service commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and also a complete individual service record of each civil service employee, which
record shall be permanent and kept up to date. (2000 Code § 24.08)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
2-4-9: ROOMS AND SUPPLIES:
The council shall provide suitable rooms in which the commission may hold its meetings and supply the commission with all necessary equipment and
a qualified shorthand reporter or an electronic voice recording device to enable it to properly perform its duties. (2000 Code § 24.09)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.5)
2-4-10: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall administer the civil service procedure as contained in chapter 400, code of Iowa, and amendments thereto, and shall have,
exercise and perform all powers and duties as provided thereby. (2000 Code § 24.10)
2-4-11: APPLICABILITY; EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter apply only to members of the police department, except the following persons connected with such departments:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.6)
A. Police chief.
B. Janitors, clerks, stenographers, secretaries and dispatchers.
C. Casual employees. (2000 Code § 24.11)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 67/439
Chapter 5
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
2-5-1: BOARD CREATED:
A parks and recreation board is hereby created to advise the council on the needed facilities to provide recreational opportunities and programs for the
enjoyment of the residents of the city through planning, acquisition, and development of quality parks and recreation facilities. (2000 Code § 25.01)
2-5-2: BOARD ORGANIZATION:
A. Appointment; Terms; Compensation: The board shall consist of seven (7) resident, voting members appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the
council. Appointments shall be made for three (3) year terms, with the expiration of the terms staggered over a three (3) year period. Two (2) of the
board members' terms shall expire on January 1, 2003, three (3) of the board members' terms shall expire on January 1, 2004, and two (2) of the
board members' terms shall expire on January 1, 2005. Subsequent appointments shall be made for three (3) year terms. Members of the board
shall serve without compensation, but may receive reimbursement for their actual expenses. In the event a vacancy arises, a new board member
shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council, and the board member so appointed shall serve out the unexpired term. Said
vacancy shall be filled within sixty (60) days after the position becomes vacant. (2000 Code § 25.02)
B. Removal From Board: Any board member may be removed from the board by the mayor, with the concurrence of the council, for good and sufficient
cause which shall be stated in writing and filed with the clerk, and a copy thereof filed with the chair of the board; or any board member may be
removed from the board for good and sufficient cause upon the recommendation of the board, with the concurrence of the mayor and council.
(2000 Code § 25.02; amd. Ord. 1017, 5-26-2016)
2-5-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
Members of the parks and recreation board shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and reside within the corporate limits of the city. Board
members are required to possess a demonstrated interest in parks and recreation. (2000 Code § 25.03)
2-5-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. The board shall advise the council on plans for parks and recreation and their facilities and shall update and revise these plans as required. The
board shall have all administrative powers in the adoption of policies, rules and regulations, subject to council review, pertaining to the use and
control of all city parks and recreational buildings and facilities.
B. The parks and recreation director, in consultation with the board, shall prepare an annual budget request for its operation, based upon the municipal
fiscal year, and submit the same to the city manager for review and incorporation into the city manager's budget request prior to being submitted to
the council.
C. The board shall make an annual written report to the council which shall contain a statement of its activities during the preceding year and
recommendations for proposed activities for the coming year. (2000 Code § 25.04)
2-5-5: APPEAL PROCESS:
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board may file an appeal with the council within thirty (30) days of the action appealed from. (2000 Code
§ 25.05)
2-5-6: CITY TREE COMMITTEE:
A city tree committee shall be established as a standing committee of the parks and recreation board. The committee shall consist of not less than
three (3) members who shall be citizens or residents of the city. The members of the committee shall be appointed annually by the chairperson of the
parks and recreation board. The committee shall study, investigate, counsel and develop plans for the care, preservation, planting, and maintenance of
trees and shrubs in parks, along public rights of way and in other public areas owned by the city. Such plans will be presented at regular intervals, no
greater than every five (5) years, to the parks and recreation board for acceptance and approval. Upon acceptance and approval of the plan by the
board, the written plan shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan. The committee, when requested by the parks and recreation board or
council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of question within the scope of its work. (Ord. 890,
2-21-2008)
Chapter 6
PUBLIC ARTS ADVISORY COMMISSION
2-6-1: PURPOSE OF COMMISSION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 68/439
Public Arts Advisory Commission, herein referred to as the Arts Commission, is hereby established to advise and assist the Council in the promotion of
public art within the City's physical environment and public spaces. (Ord. 873, 10-18-2007)
2-6-2: COMMISSION ORGANIZATION:
A. Appointment; Compensation: The Arts Commission shall consist of an odd number of members (between 5 and 9), appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council. All members of the Arts Commission shall serve as such without compensation except for reimbursement of necessary
expenses, subject to the approval of the City Council.
B. Staggered Terms: The appointment of each member of the Arts Commission shall be for staggered terms of three (3) years each. At the time of the
initial appointment, the Mayor shall designate the length of term for each member to provide for staggered terms.
C. Chairperson And Secretary: Upon appointment, the Arts Commission shall be called together by the Mayor and shall organize by electing one
member as Chair and one as Secretary from any of its members for a term of one year with eligibility for reelection. (Ord. 873, 10-18-2007)
D. Meetings: The Arts Commission shall meet at least once per quarter with a majority of the members constituting a quorum. The Director of Leisure
Services or designee shall act as staff to the commission. (Ord. 1068, 1-10-2019)
E. Removal Of Members: Any commission member may be removed from the Arts Commission by the Mayor, with the concurrence of the Council, for
good and sufficient cause. This shall be stated in writing and filed with the Clerk and a copy thereof filed with the Chair of the commission.
Continued absence of any member from meetings of the Arts Commission shall, at the discretion of the Mayor, render any such member liable for
immediate removal from appointment with final approval by the Council. Any member absent from three (3) consecutive meetings without being
excused shall be considered as having vacated his/her appointment. In the event a vacancy arises, a new commission member shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of the Council, and the commission member so appointed shall serve out the unexpired term. Said vacancy shall be
filled within sixty (60) days after the position becomes vacant. (Ord. 873, 10-18-2007)
2-6-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
Membership shall be a diverse mixture of citizen representatives of the community at large who are recognized for their interest or experience in
connection with the visual arts. Members shall not hold any elected office within the City government. (Ord. 1068, 1-10-2019)
2-6-4: DUTIES:
The Arts Commission shall have the following duties:
A. Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council on matters pertaining to visual public art within the City;
B. Hold regular public meetings and maintain a written record of its proceedings; (Ord. 873, 10-18-2007)
C. Uphold a general policy for inclusion and approval of visual art in public places and projects; (Ord. 1068, 1-10-2019)
D. Make recommendations to the City Council on the allocation of budgeted City funding for visual arts programs and services;
E. Prepare an annual report to the Council summarizing its activities during the preceding year and recommendations for proposed activities for the
succeeding year; and
F. Adopt such rules and regulations to govern its internal organization and procedures as it may deem necessary and which are not in conflict with this
chapter or this Code and present to the City Council for its consideration and approval. (Ord. 873, 10-18-2007)
2-6-5: APPEAL PROCESS:
Any person aggrieved by a decision by the Arts Commission may file an appeal with the City Council within thirty (30) days of the action appealed
from. (Ord. 873, 10-18-2007)
Title 3
FINANCE AND TAXATION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 69/439
Chapter 1
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
(2000 Code § 7.01)
3-1-2: FINANCE OFFICER:
The Clerk is the Finance and Accounting Officer of the City and is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter. (2000 Code
§ 7.02)
3-1-3: CASH CONTROL:
A. Deposit Of Funds: All monies or fees collected for any purpose by any City officer shall be deposited through the Office of the Finance Officer. If any
said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check drawn by the Finance Officer and approved by the Council only upon such
officer's making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law, ordinance or Council directive.
B. Deposits And Investments: All monies belonging to the City shall be promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or invested in accordance with the City's written investment policy and
State law, including joint investments as authorized by section 384.21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
C. Petty Cash Fund: The Finance Officer shall be custodian of a Petty Cash Fund not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the payment of
small claims for minor purchases, collect on delivery transportation charges and small fees customarily paid at the time of rendering a service, for
which payments the Finance Officer shall obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such time as the
Petty Cash Fund is approaching depletion, the Finance Officer shall draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the accumulated
expenditures and said check and supporting detail shall be submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual manner for claims and charged to the
proper funds and accounts. It shall not be used for salary payments or other personal services or personal expenses.
D. Change Funds:
1. Finance Officer: The Finance Officer is authorized to draw a check on the Utilities Fund for establishing a Change Fund in the amount of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the purpose of making change without commingling other funds to meet the requirements of said office. The
Finance Officer is further authorized to draw a check on the General Fund for establishing a Change Fund in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00)
for the purpose of making change without commingling funds to meet the requirements of the Administration Department. Said Change Funds
shall be in the custody of the Finance Officer, who shall maintain the integrity of the fund.
2. Parks And Recreation Division: The Finance Officer is authorized to draw a check on the General Fund for establishing a Change Fund in the
amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the purpose of making change without commingling other funds to meet the requirements of the
Parks and Recreation Division. Said Change Fund shall be in the custody of the Leisure Services Director and the Director shall maintain the
integrity of the fund.
3. Library: The Finance Officer is authorized to draw a check on the General Fund for establishing a Change Fund in the amount of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the purpose of making change without commingling other funds to meet the requirements of the Clive Public Library. Said
Change Fund shall be in the custody of the Library Director and the Director shall maintain the integrity of the fund.
4. Police Department: The Finance Officer is authorized to draw a check on the General Fund for establishing a Change Fund in the amount of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the purpose of making change without commingling other funds to meet the requirements of the Police Department. Said
Change Fund shall be in the custody of the Police Chief and the Police Chief shall maintain the integrity of the fund.
5. Aquatics Center And Campbell Park Concessions: The Finance Officer is authorized to draw two (2) checks on the General Fund. One is for
establishing a Change Fund in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for the purpose of making change without
commingling other funds to meet the requirements of the Parks and Recreation Department at the Aquatics Center. The Finance Officer is
authorized to draw a second check to establish a Change Fund for the Campbell Park Concessions in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for the purpose of making change without commingling other funds to meet the requirements of the Campbell Park Concessions. Said
Change Funds shall be in the custody of the Recreation Coordinator of the Aquatics Center and the Recreation Manager respectively, and the
Leisure Services Director shall maintain the integrity of the fund. (Ord. 1058, 4-26-2018)
3-1-4: FUND CONTROL:
There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in accordance with the following:
A. Revenues: All monies received by the City shall be credited to the proper fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 70/439
B. Expenditures: No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
C. Emergency Fund: No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency Fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384, 388], Sec. 2.5[2])
D. Debt Service Fund: Except where specifically prohibited by State law, monies may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund
to meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384, 388], Sec. 2.5[3])
E. Capital Improvements Reserve Fund: Except where specifically prohibited by State law, monies may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384, 388], Sec. 2.5[4])
F. Utility And Enterprise Funds: A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund and
Road Use Tax Funds, by resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required transfers have been made to any restricted accounts
in accordance with the terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the Utility or Enterprise Fund. A "surplus" is
defined as the cash balance in the operating account or the unrestricted retained earnings calculated in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles in excess of:
1. The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating and maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three (3) months; and
2. The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted accounts for the succeeding three (3) months.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384, 388], Sec. 2.5[5])
G. Balancing Of Funds: Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council. (2000 Code
§ 7.04)
3-1-5: OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION:
The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with the following:
A. Proposal Prepared: The city manager is responsible for preparation of the annual budget detail, for review by the mayor and council and adoption
by the council in accordance with directives of the mayor and council.
B. Boards And Commissions: All boards, commissions and other administrative agencies of the city that are authorized to prepare and administer
budgets must submit their budget proposals to the city manager for inclusion in the proposed city budget at such time and in such form as required
by the council.
C. Submission To Council: The city manager shall submit the completed budget proposal to the council no later than February 15 of each year.
D. Council Review: The council shall review the proposed budget and may make any adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate before
accepting such proposal for publication, hearing and final adoption.
E. Notice Of Hearing: Upon adopting a proposed budget, the council shall set a date for public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause
notice of such hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to be published not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before the
date established for the hearing. Proof of such publication must be filed with the county auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
F. Copies Of Budget On File: Not less than twenty (20) days before the date that the budget must be certified to the county auditor and not less than
ten (10) days before the public hearing, the city manager shall make available a sufficient number of copies of the detailed budget to meet the
requests of taxpayers and organizations and have them available for distribution at the offices of the mayor and city clerk and have a copy posted
at one of the places designated for the posting of notices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
G. Adoption And Certification: After the hearing, the council shall adopt, by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the county auditor and the county board of supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less
than, but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget. Two (2) copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax
certificate must be transmitted to the county auditor. (2000 Code § 7.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
3-1-6: BUDGET AMENDMENTS:
A city budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the city appropriation for each program and purpose
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 71/439
specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
A. Program Increase: Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2[384, 388])
B. Program Transfer: Any transfer of appropriation from one program to another must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner
as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.3[384, 388])
C. Activity Transfer: Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the council.
(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])
D. Administrative Transfers: The city manager shall have the authority to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a specific
activity without prior council approval; provided, however, when such adjustments in any one activity aggregate one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
ten percent (10%) of the amount appropriated, whichever is greater, no further adjustments shall be made without approval by resolution of the
council. All such transfers shall be reported in writing at the next regular meeting of the council following the transfer and recorded in the minutes
for the information of the council and the general public. (2000 Code § 7.06)
(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])
3-1-7: ACCOUNTING:
The accounting records of the city shall consist of not less than the following:
A. Books Of Original Entry: There shall be established and maintained books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
B. General Ledger: There shall be established and maintained a general ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses.
C. Checks: Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the clerk following council approval, except as provided by subsection E of this section.
D. Budget Accounts: There shall be established such individual accounts to record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will
provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and approved by the council. Each individual account shall be
maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and expenditures can
be related to the authorizing appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the
expense was incurred.
E. Immediate Payment Authorized: The council may by resolution authorize the clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if
not paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to
the council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting following such payment. The resolution
authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include, but is not limited to, payment of utility bills,
contractual obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.
F. Utilities: The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities. (2000 Code § 7.07)
3-1-8: FINANCIAL REPORTS:
The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:
A. Monthly Reports: There shall be submitted to the council each month a report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, subprogram
and activity for the preceding month.
B. Annual Report: Not later than December 1 of each year, there shall be published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal
year of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the city, and all expenditures, the current public debt of the city, and the legal debt limit of the
city for the current fiscal year. A copy of the annual report must be filed with the auditor of state not later than December 1 of each year. (2000
Code § 7.08)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
Chapter 2
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 72/439
3-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new
construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution centers and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery
and equipment assessed as real estate. (2000 Code § 8.01)
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
ACTUAL VALUE ADDED: The actual value added as of the first year for which the exemption is received, except that actual value added by
improvements to machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined by the local assessor as of January 1 of each year for which the
exemption is received.
DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A building or structure used primarily for the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets.
"Distribution center" does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store
goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: New buildings and structures and includes new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing
buildings and structures. "New construction" does not include reconstruction of an existing building or structure which does not constitute complete
replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or
structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the
manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the building or structure to continue competitively
to manufacture or process those products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the city council of the city upon the recommendation
of the Iowa department of economic development.
NEW MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT ASSESSED AS REAL ESTATE: New machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to section
427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e, code of Iowa, unless the machinery or equipment is part of the normal replacement or operating process to
maintain or expand the existing operational status.
RESEARCH-SERVICE FACILITIES: A building or group of buildings devoted primarily to research and development activities, including, but not limited
to, the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental use, and corporate research services which do not have a primary
purpose of providing on site services to the public.
WAREHOUSE: A building or structure used as a public warehouse for the storage of goods pursuant to chapter 554, article 7, of the code of Iowa,
except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail. (2000 Code
§ 8.02)
3-2-3: PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION:
The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution
centers, and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate, is eligible to receive a partial exemption from
taxation for a period of five (5) years. (2000 Code § 8.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
3-2-4: AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION:
The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
A. For the first year, seventy five percent (75%).
B. For the second year, sixty percent (60%).
C. For the third year, forty five percent (45%).
D. For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%).
E. For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%). (2000 Code § 8.04)
3-2-5: LIMITATIONS:
The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall not
result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the new
construction added. (2000 Code § 8.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 73/439
3-2-6: APPLICATIONS:
An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added for which an exemption is claimed. (2000 Code § 8.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
A. The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with the county assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which
the value added is first assessed for taxation. (2000 Code § 8.06; amd. 2008 Code)
B. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the director of revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the
improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the director of revenue. (2000 Code § 8.06)
3-2-7: APPROVAL:
A person may submit a proposal to the city council to receive prior approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the city council
resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing thereon. Thereafter, at least thirty (30) days after such hearing the
city council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction if the new construction is in conformance with city
zoning. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found to be
qualified real estate. (2000 Code § 8.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
3-2-8: EXEMPTION REPEALED:
When in the opinion of the city council continuation of the exemption granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the city, the city council may
repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration. (2000 Code § 8.08)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
3-2-9: DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED:
A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law. (2000 Code § 8.09)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
3-2-10: FILING FEE FOR APPLICATION:
Prior to final passage of any ordinance granting prior approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction, the property owner shall pay to
the city treasurer, as a filing fee for said application, an amount sufficient to cover all actual costs incurred by the city for legal services, city staff
services and services of other persons or entities employed by the city for, or in any way involved in, the review of all matters relating to said
application, publication of notices and the preparation of any and all documents, including any ordinance. For nonsalaried city staff personnel, actual
costs shall be that amount equal to the actual time spent by such employee multiplied times the hourly wage for such employee, plus an amount equal
to that portion of the actual value of annual benefits for such employee which is reflective of the actual time spent by such employee on the matter. For
salaried city staff personnel, actual costs shall be that amount equal to that portion of such employee's annual salary, including the actual costs of
annual benefits for such employee, which is reflective of the actual time spent by such employee on the matter based on a forty (40) hour workweek.
(2000 Code § 8.10)
Chapter 3
HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have or include the following meanings:
GROSS RECEIPTS: All of the monies received by a hotel or motel for the renting of its rooms, apartments and sleeping quarters to persons for
periods of time not exceeding thirty one (31) consecutive days, other than those monies received by state of Iowa universities for the renting of
sleeping quarters in their dormitories or memorial unions.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: Any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house, tourist court, trailer court or other such place or establishment located
in the city where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent, whether with or without meals.
RENTING OR RENT: Includes the making or receiving of any kind of direct or indirect charges for the use of any room, apartment or sleeping quarters
in a hotel or motel. (2000 Code § 11.01)
3-3-2: TAX RATE AND IMPOSITION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 74/439
A tax is hereby established upon the gross receipts of a hotel or motel at the rate of seven percent (7%) of such gross receipts. (2000 Code § 11.02)
3-3-3: PAYMENT OF TAX:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid as is provided in chapter 422A of the code of Iowa, as said chapter may be from time to time amended,
codified or recodified. (2000 Code § 11.03)
3-3-4: USE OF PROCEEDS:
The proceeds of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be used for the purposes stated in subsection 4 of section 422A.2 of chapter 422A of the code
of Iowa:
A. Facilities: At least fifty percent (50%) of the revenues derived from such tax for the acquisition of sites for, or constructing, improving, enlarging,
equipping, repairing, operating or maintaining of recreation, convention, cultural or entertainment facilities including, but not limited to, memorial
buildings, halls and monuments, civic center convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums, and parking areas or facilities located at those
recreation, convention, cultural or entertainment facilities or the payment of principal and interest, when due, on bonds or other evidence of
indebtedness issued by the city for those recreation, convention, cultural or entertainment facilities; or for the promotion and enlargement of tourist
and convention business in the city and surrounding areas.
B. Operations: The remaining revenues may be spent for any city operations authorized by law as a proper purpose for the expenditure within
statutory limitations of city revenues derived from ad valorem taxes.
C. Bonds: Up to thirty percent (30%) of the revenue derived may be pledged to secure bonds which the city may issue for one or more of the purposes
set forth in subsection A of this section. Any revenue pledged to the payment of such bonds may be credited to the spending requirement of
subsection A of this section. (2000 Code § 11.04)
3-3-5: DETERMINATION OF NEED:
The city has, through its council, determined that it has a need for funds set forth in section 3-3-4 of this chapter, that such needs are in excess, both
jointly and severally, of the revenues expected to be derived from such tax and that such tax must be levied and executed to meet such needs. (2000
Code § 11.05)
3-3-6: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The tax established in section 3-3-2 of this chapter shall be imposed on and after April 1, 1985. (2000 Code § 11.06)
Title 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
LIQUOR LICENSES; WINE AND BEER PERMITS
4-1-1: LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control license,
wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of chapter 123 of the code of Iowa. (2000 Code § 120.01)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 123.22, 123.122 and 123.171)
4-1-2: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms, conditions,
limitations and restrictions enumerated in chapter 123 of the code of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may
be imposed for a violation thereof. (2000 Code § 120.02)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 123.2, 123.39 and 123.50)
4-1-3: INVESTIGATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 75/439
Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer permit, the clerk may forward it to the police chief, who shall then conduct an
investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the application. The fire chief may also inspect the premises to determine
if they conform to the requirements of the city. The council shall not approve an application for a license or permit for any premises which does not
conform to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city. (2000 Code § 120.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
4-1-4: ACTION BY COUNCIL:
The council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its approval or
disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application, necessary fee and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the alcoholic beverages
division of the state department of commerce for such further action as is provided by law. (2000 Code § 120.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
4-1-5: PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS:
A person or club holding a liquor license or retail wine or beer permit and the person's or club's agents or employees shall not do any of the following:
A. Sell, dispense or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
B. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the premises covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between
the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on a weekday, and between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Sunday and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a license or permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, beer or wine
on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, beer or wine between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Sunday and two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
of the following Monday; and further provided, that a holder of any class of liquor control license or the holder of a class B beer permit may sell or
dispense alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Sunday and two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. on Monday when that Monday is New Year's Day and beer for consumption off the premises between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. on Sunday and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New Year's Day.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 123.49[2b and 2k] and 123.150)
C. Sell alcoholic beverages, wine or beer to any person on credit, except with a bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club
to its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests or to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic
center or events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
D. Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises where
sold.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
E. Sell, give or otherwise supply any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer to any person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be
under legal age, or permit any person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under legal age, to consume any alcoholic
beverage, wine or beer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2h])
F. In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine or any other
beverage in or about the permittee's place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
G. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
H. Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
I. Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the alcoholic
beverages division of the state department of commerce and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate consumption.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])
J. Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the
addition of any substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original package of any alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any
original package which has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 76/439
K. Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or employees of the licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic
liquor in any bottle or other container which is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except as allowed by state law. (2000 Code
§ 120.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
L. Permit or allow any person under twenty one (21) years of age ("minor") to remain upon licensed premises unless the licensee satisfies one or more
of the exceptions set forth in section 5-5-1, "Minors In Certain Establishments", of this code. (Ord. 992, 10-16-2014)
M. Sell, offer to sell, dispense or serve for on premises consumption an unlimited number of servings of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for a fixed price,
or for free. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit a holder of a liquor control license or wine or beer permit, or its employees or
agents, from: 1) including servings or drinks of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer as part of a hotel or motel package which includes overnight
accommodations; 2) providing an unlimited or indefinite amount of drinks for a fixed price, or for free, for a "private event", which is defined as an
event not open to the general public and restricted to a particular group of persons invited to the event by the host of the event, provided, that the
licensee or permittee shall provide means or methods by which to identify persons participating in the private event, such as the use of a separate
room or an identification tag or badge; or 3) as otherwise permitted for a special event by the city council (provided, however, that no permit holder
shall be allowed to hold such a special event under item 3 of this subsection M more than 3 times per year). (Ord. 983, 1-16-2013)
4-1-6: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 120.06)
Chapter 2
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO SALES
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
CARTON: A box or container of any kind in which ten (10) or more packages or packs of cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or
otherwise distributed to consumers.
CIGARETTE: Any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of
tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of
paper or any other material. However, this definition is not to be construed to include cigars.
PACKAGE OR PACK: A container of any kind in which cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any place where cigarettes or tobacco products are sold, stored or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
RETAILER: Every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption, cigarettes,
irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales or who engages in the business of selling tobacco products to ultimate consumers.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY: Any manner of product display, placement or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of
the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access
location.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Cigars; little cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco;
snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; cavendish twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings
of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both
chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes. (2000 Code § 121.01)
4-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Permits:
1. Cigarette Permits: It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell
or solicit the sale of any cigarettes within the city without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit shall be displayed publicly in the
place of business so that it can be seen easily by the public. No permit shall be issued to a minor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
2. Tobacco Permits: It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a retailer of tobacco products at any place of business without first
having received a permit as a tobacco products retailer for each place of business owned or operated by the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
B. Exception; Permit Suspension: A retailer who holds a cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only
holds a cigarette permit and that permit is suspended, revoked or expired, the retailer shall not sell any cigarettes or tobacco products during such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 77/439
time. (2000 Code § 121.02)
4-2-3: APPLICATION:
A completed application on forms provided by the state department of revenue and accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the clerk.
Renewal applications shall be filed at least five (5) days prior to the last regular meeting of the council in June. If a renewal application is not timely
filed, and a special council meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant. (2000 Code
§ 121.03)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
4-2-4: FEES:
The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
For Permits Granted During Fee
July, August or September $100.00 (the annual fee)
October, November or December 3/4 of the annual fee
January, February or March 1/2 of the annual fee
April, May or June 1/4 of the annual fee
(Ord. 963, 5-17-2012)
4-2-5: ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION:
Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for
which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of each year. The clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a
permit, and any permit issued, to the Iowa department of public health within thirty (30) days of issuance. (2000 Code § 121.05)
4-2-6: REFUNDS:
A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the city, except during April, May or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the code of Iowa. (2000 Code § 121.06)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
4-2-7: PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE:
A. Prohibition; Penalties: No person shall sell, give or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes to any person under eighteen (18)
years of age. The provision of this section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing cigarettes or tobacco products from a vending machine. If a
retailer or employee of a retailer violates the provisions of this section, the council shall, after written notice and hearing, and in addition to the other
penalties fixed for such violation, assess the following:
1. For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Failure to pay the civil penalty
as ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.
2. For a second violation within a period of two (2) years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) or the retailer's permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days. The retailer may select its preference in the penalty
to be applied under this subsection.
3. For a third violation within a period of three (3) years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) and the retailer's permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days.
4. For a fourth violation within a period of three (3) years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) and the retailer's permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.
5. For a fifth violation with a period of four (4) years, the retailer's permit shall be revoked.
B. Notice Of Violation And Hearing Date To Retailer: The clerk shall give ten (10) days' written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy of the notice to
the place of business as it appears on the application for a permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the time and
place at which the retailer may appear and be heard. (2000 Code § 121.07)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
4-2-8: SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 78/439
Beginning January 1, 1999, except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as provided in section 453A.36(6) of the code of
Iowa, a retailer shall not sell or offer for sale cigarettes or tobacco products, in a quantity of less than a carton, through the use of a self-service display.
(2000 Code § 121.08)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
4-2-9: PERMIT REVOCATION:
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the code of Iowa, the council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter for a violation of division I of chapter 453A of the code of Iowa or any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall
not be issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one
year has expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown to the council. The clerk shall report the revocation or
suspension of a retail permit to the Iowa department of public health within thirty (30) days of the revocation or suspension. (2000 Code § 121.09)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
4-2-10: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 121.10)
Chapter 3
SOLICITORS AND MOBILE FOOD UNITS
4-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents against fraud, protect them from intrusion into the privacy of their homes, and to ensure the safety of
the residents by licensing and regulating solicitors and mobile food units. (Ord. 1030, 3-23-2017)
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPROVED EVENT: A larger event, such as a farmers' market, music festival, or similar activity that has been approved by the city through a public
property special event permit, a temporary use permit (on private property) or a block party permit. An approved event would also include events within
a city park with the approval of the director of leisure services or their designee.
CATERED EVENT: For the purposes of this title, any event where a business or entity has requested the mobile food unit to provide food for a
targeted audience and where the food is served to the customers within a building, structure, or facility and not directly from the mobile food unit, or
where the business or entity requesting the service is paying for the food in a single lump sum payment rather than individual patrons paying for their
food themselves.
CATERING BUSINESS: A business, social or home catering service providing food and incidental services for a social affair, event, or for a private
dwelling, which does not engage in the sale of food or beverage to individually paying patrons.
MOBILE FOOD UNIT: Any type of annually licensed food establishment that is a readily movable vehicle (on wheels), that is self-propelled (driven), or
can be pulled or pushed to a location and used for the vending of food or beverage items to the public.
MOBILE FOOD UNIT CLASSIFICATION: The type of mobile food unit based upon the type of menu items being served and preparation and storage
requirements for the defined menu items based upon the Iowa department of inspections and appeals mobile food unit guide.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: A person engaged in the business of selling food or beverages from a mobile food unit.
PERSON: Natural persons, corporations, firms, and organizations of any description, whether acting in person or through agents, employees, or other
persons.
PUSHCART: A nonself-propelled mobile food unit that is pushed or pulled by the mobile food vendor to a location and serves a limited offering of food
or beverage items.
SOLICITOR: Any person who initiates or attempts to initiate personal contact with other persons at or near residences or businesses, including upon
private driveways, parking lots, or public sidewalks in an apparent effort to solicit or attempt to solicit monies or orders for goods, services,
subscriptions, or merchandise to be delivered immediately or at a future date.
STATE LICENSING LEVEL CLASSIFICATION: The Iowa department of inspections and appeals has established four (4) classification levels for
mobile food vendors that will be referenced as a part of this chapter. There are more requirements for each of the levels but in general the levels are
as follows:
A. Class I: Nonrefrigerated vending units that serve only intact, nonpotentially hazardous commercially prepackaged food and beverages.
Examples include chips, crackers, cookies, soda, and sweets in manufacturer's packaging.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 79/439
B. Class II: Refrigerated or hot vending units that serve potentially and nonpotentially hazardous commercially prepackaged foods from an
approved source. Examples include packaged sandwiches, ice cream bars, individually wrapped and cooked hot dogs. No cooking is allowed as
part of a class II unit.
C. Class III: Units that serve potentially and nonpotentially hazardous packaged food and unpackaged foods with limited assembly. These units are
limited to precooked foods from an approved source that may be reheated on the unit. Examples include pushcart operations, packaged salads,
hot dogs, shaved ice.
D. Class IV: Units that serve potentially and nonpotentially hazardous foods that are prepared, cooked, cooled or reheated and assembled on the
unit. Examples include self-contained mobile food units, food trucks and any units that are capable of preparing and producing food items from
precooked and/or raw products (meat, fish, poultry, plant foods and dairy products) to finished product for consumption.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who engages in a temporary or itinerant merchandising business selling direct to the public from a temporary
location or structure through a temporary association with a local property owner or business owner. The term "transient merchant", does not include
mobile food vendors. Transient merchants shall be regulated by the provisions of the temporary use permit regulations within title 11, "Zoning
Regulations", of this code unless defined and regulated elsewhere within this code. (Ord. 1030, 3-23-2017)
4-3-3: SOLICITOR REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
Any person defined in section 4-3-2 of this chapter as a "solicitor", shall comply with the following requirements:
A. License Required: Any solicitor must procure a license as provided for herein. The term "person" as used herein includes natural persons,
corporations, firms and organizations of any description, whether acting in person or through agents, employers, or other persons.
B. Application For License; Fee: An application in writing shall be filed with the clerk for a solicitor license under this chapter. Such application shall set
forth the applicant's name, permanent address, local address and business address, if any. The application shall also set forth the applicant's
employer, if any, and the employer's address, the nature of the applicant's business, the last three (3) places where such business was conducted
and the length of time sought to be covered by the license. A nonrefundable application fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid at the time of
filing such application to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein. The applicant and each individual who is to be working for or on
behalf of the applicant shall submit a copy of his or her state issued photo ID or photo driver's license, to be retained by the clerk, and a report of
criminal history data obtained from the Iowa department of public safety. Solicitors whose business is limited to hanging information on residence
doors (referred to herein as "door hangers") shall not be required to submit a report of criminal history data.
C. License Fee: Each individual who is to be working for or on behalf of the applicant is required to pay the license fee. A license fee in the following
amount shall be paid to the clerk, by the applicant, prior to the issuance of any license to cover the cost of issuance and policing during the
licensing period:
All solicitors except door hangers:
1 day permit $ 20.00
1 week permit (7 contiguous days) 100.00
Door hangers:
1 week permit (7 contiguous days) 30.00
D. Bond Required: Each applicant for a license required by this chapter shall, before the license is issued to the applicant, file with the clerk a personal
surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned that the applicant shall comply with and observe the terms and
conditions of all provisions of this code relating to solicitors, and will pay all costs, fines and penalties incurred on account of the applicant's failure
to observe such provisions and will pay all damages resulting to any person by reason of such applicant's actions in violation of such terms and
conditions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, solicitors whose business is limited to hanging information on residence doorknobs shall not be required
to file a personal surety bond. (Ord. 1030, 3-23-2017)
E. License Issued: If the clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are
found to be correct, the application and license fee paid, and the Clive police chief or designee has reviewed and approved said application, a
license may be issued. The license shall authorize the applicant to engage in the activities of a "solicitor" as defined in section 4-3-2 of this chapter
(specified limitations may be applied) for the period stated in the license, provided that nothing herein shall authorize any act or practice which is
contrary to any law or ordinance. Upon expiration of the license, a new application shall be made and a new license may be issued in the same
manner as the original license. (Ord. 1041, 6-8-2017)
F. Display Of License: Each person licensed under this chapter shall keep such license in possession at all times while doing business in the city and
shall, upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements of this chapter.
G. Character Of Applicant:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 80/439
1. Evidence Of Good Character And Business Responsibility: In order to be considered for a license, the applicant shall provide in addition to the
application required under this section:
a. The names, addresses and phone numbers of at least two (2) residents of the city of Clive who are not the applicant's employer, coworker,
agent or relative (within 2 separations) and will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility; or
b. In the alternative, the applicant shall provide other available evidence which attests to the good character and business responsibility of the
applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such reputation and business responsibility.
2. Investigation: Upon receipt of the complete application as required by this section and either the information required under subsection G1a or
G1b of this section the police chief or a designee shall investigate the applicant as deemed necessary for the protection of the public health,
safety, welfare and good.
3. Unsatisfactory Character And Business Responsibility: If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility
are found to be unsatisfactory such that would harm the public good, the police chief may endorse on such application disapproval and state
reasons for disapproval and return the application to the city clerk who shall notify the applicant in writing that the application has been
disapproved, state the reasons for the denial, and the applicant's right to appeal under subsection G5 of this section.
4. Satisfactory Character And Business Responsibility: If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility are
found to be satisfactory, the police chief may endorse approval on the application and shall return the application to the city clerk and the license
may be issued under subsection E of this section.
5. Right To Appeal: Any applicant whose application for license was disapproved as under subsection G3 of this section may appeal to the city
council at its next regularly scheduled meeting by filing with the city clerk a written request for an appeal to the city council at least seven (7) days
prior to the meeting. As a result of this appeal, the city council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the clerk not to issue the license. If
the application for license is denied, the applicant is not eligible for the issuance of a license under this chapter for a period of one year from the
date of notification that the license application was disapproved, was served in person or deposited in U.S. mail.
H. License Not Transferable: Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to
the person filing the application, for the period stated and approved in the license.
I. Hours To Do Business: All solicitor licenses shall provide that said licenses are in force and effect only between the following hours: Monday through
Saturday, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., and Sunday, one o'clock (1:00) P.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. No soliciting shall
occur on nationally recognized holidays. Any person found to be acting as a solicitor without a license, shall also be limited to these hours.
J. Solicitor License Exemptions:
1. Government Officers: Officers and employees of the United States, the state of Iowa, or any subdivision or agency thereof, while in the
performance of their official duties.
2. Public Utilities: Representatives of any public utility lawfully doing business in the city, while acting in such capacity.
3. Route Salespersons: Route salespersons who call routinely on customers on a regular basis or on an established route.
4. Charitable Organizations: Any organization which is acting under the authority of chapter 504 of the code of Iowa, which has obtained tax
exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code, and if requested by the city to do so, provide documentation of 501(c)(3)
status to the city.
5. Resale Or Institutional Use: Persons customarily calling on businesses or institutions for the purpose of selling products for resale or institutional
use.
6. Nationally Recognized Nonprofit Organizations: Members of any Des Moines metro area Boy Scout, Girl Scout, Camp Fire, 4-H Club, FFA and
similar nationally recognized nonprofit organizations, if the sales are to benefit the organization in its recognized operation and/or programs.
7. Community Improvement Or Benefit: Persons making door to door sales for the purpose of a community improvement or benefit, approved by
the city council, on behalf of nonprofit, tax exempt organizations.
8. School Students: Students representing Des Moines metro area schools conducting projects sponsored by organizations and recognized by
such schools.
9. Youth Sports Organizations: Des Moines metro area youth sports organizations.
10. Exercising Constitutional Rights: Persons going from house to house, door to door, business to business, street to street, or place to place
where the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person's state or federal constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press, and
religion. This exemption may be lost if the person's exercise of these constitutional rights are merely incidental to a commercial activity. (Ord.
1030, 3-23-2017)
4-3-4: MOBILE FOOD UNITS:
A. Mobile Food Unit Licensing: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale of food or beverages to the public from a temporary or mobile
facility within the corporate limits of the city of Clive without first obtaining a mobile food unit license from the city, in addition to any other state,
federal, or county permits, certifications and licenses.
1. A mobile food unit license is an annual license that expires on April 15 each year and must be renewed prior to the first event after that date.
2. Each mobile food unit shall be licensed separately. No license transfer is allowed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 81/439
3. Although certain activities may be exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter, any food service to the public in the city of Clive is
expected to comply with all other local, county and state requirements for health inspections, licensing, safety and fire code requirements.
4. The following shall be exempt from this requirement:
a. Catering businesses.
b. Grilling and food preparation activities of brick and mortar establishments on the establishment's premises for immediate consumption by
patrons or employees.
c. Concession stands associated with sports or recreational venues that have been approved as part of a site plan or permitted conditional use
permit for the venue.
B. License/Inspection Fee(s): At the time of the submittal of a license application, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk the applicable license fee in
addition to any applicable inspection fee(s).
1. The amount of the license and applicable inspections fee(s) shall be determined in accordance with an established fee schedule, which fee
schedule may be modified from time to time with approval of the council.
2. Any licensee who surrenders their license prior to the date of expiration shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the fee.
C. Fire Department Inspection:
1. All mobile food units that have cooking facilities or use products with grease laden vapors (class III and class IV state licenses) shall be
inspected by the fire department prior to initiation of business operations within the city.
2. Inspections are required annually and prior to issuance of a mobile food vending license. It shall be the obligation of the mobile food vendor to
schedule the inspection with the fire department. Class I and II state license classifications are not required to meet this inspection requirement.
3. All class III and IV mobile food units shall have an acceptable fire suppression system, as determined by the Clive fire department.
4. Upon completion of the annual fire inspection, a certificate shall be issued to the applicant to verify completion of the fire inspection. Said
certificate shall be kept in the vehicle during operation.
5. At the discretion of the Clive fire department, they may accept the inspection of the mobile food unit by another city's fire inspector to satisfy the
annual inspection requirement. Applicant is obligated to contact the fire department to verify whether or not another community's inspection is
adequate to fulfill obligation of city of Clive inspection requirements.
D. Mobile Food Unit Licensing Application:
1. Filing: Application requests shall be filed with the city clerk. No application request shall be accepted for filing and processing unless it conforms
to the requirements of this title. This would include a complete and true application, all of the required materials and information prescribed, and
is accompanied by the appropriate fees.
2. Timely Submittal: Unless otherwise provided herein, applications must be submitted not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the proposed
start date of the mobile food unit activities. The city reserves the right to reject any applications that have not been timely submitted to the city.
3. Applicant's Responsibility: Receiving approval of a mobile food unit license from the city shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent, or waive the
applicant's responsibility to obtain any additional permits, licenses, and approvals for other applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
4. Application Contents: Application shall be made on a form provided by the city and shall include:
a. Full name of the applicant.
b. Applicant's contact information including mailing address, phone numbers and e-mail address.
c. State health inspection certificate with the classification level of the state license.
d. Description of the kitchen facilities, cooking facilities, preparation area, safety features (such as, but not limited to, suppression system) of the
mobile food unit.
e. Photographs of the mobile food unit from the front, side and back.
f. Make, model and year of vehicle to be used and the license plate number.
g. Overall size of the vehicle; length and width.
h. Copy of fire department inspection certificate.
i. Fee.
5. Character Of Applicant: Upon receipt of the complete application as required by this chapter, the police chief or a designee shall investigate the
applicant as deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and good.
a. Unsatisfactory Character And Business Responsibility: If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business
responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory such that would harm the public good, the police chief may endorse on such application
disapproval and state reasons for disapproval and return the application to the city clerk who shall notify the applicant in writing that the
application has been disapproved, state the reasons for the denial, and the applicant's right to appeal under subsection D5c of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 82/439
b. Satisfactory Character And Business Responsibility: If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility
are found to be satisfactory, the police chief may endorse approval on the application and shall return the application to the city clerk and the
license may be issued.
c. Right To Appeal: Any applicant whose application for license was disapproved as under subsection D5a of this section may appeal to the city
council at its next regularly scheduled meeting by filing with the city clerk a written request for an appeal to the city council at least seven (7)
days prior to the meeting. As a result of this appeal, the city council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the clerk not to issue the
license. If the application for license is denied, the applicant is not eligible for the issuance of a license under this chapter for a period of one
year from the date of notification that the license application was disapproved, was served in person or deposited in U.S. mail.
6. Applications Deemed Withdrawn: Any application received shall be deemed withdrawn if it has been held in abeyance, awaiting the submittal of
additional requested information from the applicant, and if the applicant has not communicated in writing with the city and made reasonable
progress within thirty (30) days from the last written notification from the city to the applicant. The application fee is nonrefundable. Any
application deemed withdrawn shall require submission of a new application and fees to begin a new review and approval process.
7. Issuance Of License: Upon completion of the review process and a determination of compliance with the applicable regulations, the city clerk will
issue a mobile food unit license.
8. Modification Of License After Issuance: Should the mobile food vendor change the food or beverage being offered during the term of an issued
license that would change the designation of the mobile food unit to a higher state licensing level classification, a new application and fire
inspection shall be required.
E. Mobile Food Units On Public Property: No mobile food unit may be operated on public property except as part of an approved event under a public
property special event permit issued by the city clerk's office or as authorized by the director of leisure services or their designee, within a city park
or greenway. Requests for authorization to vend within a city park or greenway (not as part of a city permitted public property special event) may be
submitted no less than five (5) days and no more than fifteen (15) days prior to the requested day of vending.
F. Unattended Mobile Food Unit: No mobile food unit shall be left unattended or stored on any site overnight, unless that property is under the
ownership or control of (by way of a lease or other contractual agreement) the operator of the unit and is being done so in compliance with all other
city code requirements or the mobile food unit is a participant in a multiple (contiguous) day, city permitted, public property special event. Any
mobile food unit found unattended shall be considered in violation of these regulations and subject to license revocation, municipal infraction,
towing, or any other action legally allowed.
G. Music And Sound Making Devices: The use of music or sound making devices as a part of a mobile food unit shall be prohibited, unless expressly
allowed as part of an approved event.
H. Mobile Food Unit Performance Standards: Persons conducting business from a mobile food unit must do so in compliance with the following
standards:
1. The mobile food vendor must obtain expressed written consent of the property owner or lessee to use the property on which they propose to
operate. The written consent must be kept in the unit at all times that the unit is on the property. Written consent does not excuse or permit the
violation of any other imposable regulations.
2. The operator of the mobile food unit shall display their city license in full view of the public in or on the unit.
3. Mobile food units shall only be allowed on nonresidential properties, except in the case of an approved residential block party or private catering
arrangement, so long as it is in compliance with all other city code requirements related to residential property.
4. Mobile food units that are within three hundred feet (300') of a residential use or residentially zoned property, shall be limited to hours of
operation between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M.
5. A mobile food unit operating on nonresidential property (excluding those operating as part of city permitted "public property special event") may
only do so during the usual posted business hours of the consenting business(es) of the property the mobile food unit is utilizing or during the
posted hours of the city park being utilized. Mobile food units may enter a nonresidential property in order to set up to conduct business up to
one-half (1/2) hour (30 minutes) prior to the usual posted opening time of the corresponding business or city park and must depart from the
property no later than one-half (1/2) hour (30 minutes) after the usual posted closing time of the corresponding business or city park. In the case
of operating a mobile food unit on nonresidential property where the corresponding business(es) does not have usual posted business operating
hours or operates on a twenty four (24) hour type basis, the mobile food unit may not remain on the premises for longer than eighteen (18) hours
and must depart for at least six (6) hours before reentering unless operating under an approved public property special event permit.
6. A mobile food unit operating on nonresidential property as part of a city permitted public property special event may only do so during the
granted time period for the event.
7. Mobile food units must maintain a minimum separation between units of fifteen feet (15').
8. Mobile food unit operation is not a generally acceptable use of a nonresidential parking lot and may only be allowed if doing so does not diminish
the usable number of parking spots within the lot to below the minimum threshold needed as established by the city site plan for the property. It is
the joint responsibility of the property owner or lessee and mobile food unit owner to ensure that this provision is not violated. Exceptions to this
rule may be applied for by way of a city approved temporary site plan amendment.
9. Mobile food units shall serve patrons which are on foot only; no drive-up service to the unit itself shall be provided or allowed.
10. The mobile food unit must be located on a paved surface, unless approved as part of a public property special event permit or through a
temporary site plan amendment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 83/439
11. No mobile food unit may be located on a vacant property or lot with a vacant building. Exceptions to this rule may be granted by city staff after a
review of the particular property and the vendor has been able to make arrangements to ensure safe and sanitary conditions. This would include,
but is not limited to: employee access to restrooms, adequate access for fire and police personnel/vehicles, and that the site in general is free
from hazards or dangerous conditions.
12. No mobile food unit may operate within one hundred feet (100') of a permanent restaurant or business offering food or beverage services
unless they receive expressed written consent of the restaurant or business owner.
13. All mobile food units shall maintain a minimum separation from buildings, five feet (5') for state IA class I and II units and fifteen feet (15') for
state IA class III and IV units, as measured to the closest building element including awnings or canopies, tents or membrane structures.
Location of the food unit shall not impede pedestrians entering or exiting a building.
14. The window or area where a patron orders and receives their purchase shall be located so as to not require a patron to stand, or create a line
that may cause pedestrians to be in the public right of way, vehicle travel lane, including parking lot drive aisles, or similar situation that may
create a potential safety hazard. Adequate safe space for patrons waiting for their order must be available on the property where the mobile food
unit is located.
15. With the exception of pushcarts as allowed herein, no mobile food unit shall be placed on a public or private sidewalk. Pushcarts may locate on
or adjacent to a private sidewalk or public sidewalk, including the Clive Greenbelt Trails, only as part of an approved public property special event
permit. However, a minimum forty eight inch (48") open walkway must be maintained for passing pedestrians. The placement of the pushcart
shall be in such a manner so as to minimize encroachment into the forty eight inch (48") walkway by patrons waiting in line for service from the
pushcart.
16. Signs are limited to those that are attached to the exterior of the mobile unit and must be mounted flat against the unit and not project more
than six inches (6") from the exterior of the unit. No freestanding signs, banners, flags, or similar items are allowed. Off premises signs directing
patrons to the mobile food unit are prohibited.
17. During business hours, the mobile food vendor shall provide a trash receptacle for use by customers.
18. The mobile food vendor shall keep the area around the mobile food unit clear of litter and debris at all times.
19. All mobile food units shall be located in such a manner as to not create a safety hazard, such as blocking emergency access to buildings and
the site, obstructing access to fire hydrants, impeding entering and exiting from a building, creating a visual impediment for the motoring public at
drive entrances, intersections, pedestrian crossings, or similar movement and access.
I. Property Owner/Lessee Responsibility: By allowing the mobile food unit on their property, the property owner or lessee jointly and severally with the
vendor are responsible for compliance with this chapter and to ensure the safety of pedestrians and access of emergency vehicles to and around
the site. Failure to do so could result in the property owner or lessee being party to any enforcement actions or penalties allowed by law. (Ord.
1030, 3-23-2017)
4-3-5: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. Fraudulent Representation/Harassment: No licensee shall falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quality, character, or quantity of any article, item,
or commodity offered for sale, or sell any unwholesome or tainted food or foodstuffs. No licensee shall harass, intimidate, coerce, or threaten any
individual to induce a sale.
B. Failure To Maintain Licenses And Permits: Failure of any applicant to maintain the appropriate county, state and federal licenses and permits, during
the term of the local license or permits shall be considered an unlawful act and subject to revocation or any other penalties available to the city.
(Ord. 1030, 3-23-2017)
4-3-6: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the city as follows:
1. Grounds: The city clerk or clerk's designee may suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter, for any of, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
a. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in his/her application for the license or in the conduct of his/her business.
b. The licensee has violated this chapter or any other chapter of this code or has otherwise conducted his/her business in an unlawful manner.
c. The licensee has conducted his/her business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order, or morals.
d. The city clerk has received and investigated three (3) or more found complaints during the licensed period related to the manner in which the
licensee is conducting business.
2. Notice Of Suspension Or Revocation; Right To Appeal: The clerk or clerk's designee shall cause notice of the license revocation to be served in
person by a city official or by mail to the licensee's local address, which notice shall specify the reason(s) for such action, at which time
operations of the licensee must cease within the corporate limits of the city of Clive. The licensee may appeal the revocation of the license to the
city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting by filing with the clerk a written request for an appeal to the city council at least seven (7) days
prior to the meeting. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the clerk to revoke such license. If a license is revoked, no
refund of any license fee paid shall be made. Upon the revocation of a license, the licensee is not eligible for the issuance of a new license under
this chapter for a period of one year from the date the license revocation is served in person or deposited in the U.S. mail. (Ord. 1030, 3-23-
2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 84/439
4-3-7: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, violations of this chapter are simple misdemeanors
subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days and may also be punishable as
municipal infractions subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code. Each day a
municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. Police officers, code enforcement officers and the police chief's
designees shall have the authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter, and shall have the discretion to enforce this chapter as either a
simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction. (Ord. 1030, 3-23-2017)
Chapter 4
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
PAWNBROKER: A person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of
personal property or other valuable thing on the condition of selling the item back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel
mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged, or any person who displays at that person's place
of business the sign of three (3) gilt or yellow balls, generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their business, or anyone holding himself or herself out to
be a pawnbroker.
SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER: Any person whose business includes selling, buying or receiving any tangible personal property, previously owned,
used, rented or leased. The term "secondhand goods dealer" includes pawnbrokers. (2000 Code § 127.01)
4-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall carry on or engage in business as a secondhand goods dealer in the city without first having obtained a license therefor from the city
and paying an annual license fee in an amount set by resolution of the council. Any person having several or separate places of business shall pay the
license fee and procure a license for each place. The license provided for herein is valid only for the location designated in the application pursuant to
section 4-4-4 of this chapter and shall be prominently displayed therein at all times. Upon any change in any of the information required to be
submitted as part of the application, the licensee shall, within three (3) days of such change, notify the clerk of such change, in writing; and in the event
of a change of address where doing business, the license shall be returned to the clerk and an amended license issued designating the new location.
The amended license will be valid for the length of the time remaining on the original license. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire one
year after the original date of issuance. (2000 Code § 127.02)
4-4-3: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to or include the following:
A. The sale of secondhand goods where all of the following are present:
1. The sale is held on property occupied as a dwelling by the seller or owned, rented or leased by a charitable or political organization; i.e., yard
sale, garage sale or moving sale.
2. The items offered for sale are owned by the occupant or seller.
3. The sale does not exceed a period of ninety six (96) consecutive hours.
4. No more than two (2) sales are held in any twelve (12) month period.
5. None of the items offered for sale have been purchased for resale or received on consignment for purpose of resale.
B. The sale of secondhand books or magazines.
C. The sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed auctioneer.
D. The business of buying or selling only those secondhand goods taken as part or full payment for new goods and where such business is incident to
and not the primary business of a person.
E. A bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established place of business or of goods sold at open sale from
bankrupt stock.
F. Goods sold at the public market, i.e., farmers' market, etc.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 85/439
G. Goods sold at a bona fide antique, used furniture or used clothing store, i.e., a business in which seventy five percent (75%) of the business's
revenue is derived through the sale of antiques, used furniture or used clothes. (2000 Code § 127.03)
4-4-4: AFFIDAVIT REQUIRED:
Before any license required by this chapter is issued, the applicant therefor shall file with the clerk an affidavit that the applicant will observe and carry
out the requirements of any provisions of this code in force at the time of application, or any provision of this code passed thereafter and during the
time the applicant's license is in force, in relation to secondhand goods dealers or their business. (2000 Code § 127.04)
4-4-5: APPLICATION:
A. Information: Any applicant for a secondhand goods dealer's license must complete an application form provided by the clerk. The application form
shall contain the following information:
1. Name, place of birth, date of birth and home address of applicant.
2. Designation of location, including street and number, where business is to be transacted, plus name and address of the owner of the premises.
3. A detailed drawing of the interior of the place of business and any other storage facilities used by the secondhand goods dealer for storing items
in the dealer's possession.
4. A statement as to whether, within the previous five (5) years, the applicant has been convicted of any law relating to theft, damage or trespass to
property, sale of a controlled substance or the operation of a business, including the nature and date of the offense and the penalty received.
5. Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, or partnership, and:
a. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners;
b. If the applicant is a corporation, the state of incorporation and the names and addresses of all officers and directors.
6. If the applicant is a natural person, the application shall be signed and sworn to by the person; if a corporation, by an agent authorized to sign;
and if a partnership, by a partner.
7. The name of the manager or proprietor of the business.
8. Applicant shall provide the clerk with any additional information required by the clerk with regard to the application.
B. Investigation: The police department shall investigate the facts set forth in the application and shall report to the clerk its findings thereon. The
applicant shall furnish to the police department such evidence as it may reasonably require in support of the statements set forth in the application.
(2000 Code § 127.05)
4-4-6: SURETY BOND:
Each applicant for a license required by this chapter shall, before the license is issued to the applicant, file with the clerk a bond, with a surety
approved by the council, in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned that the applicant will comply with and observe the terms
and conditions of all provisions of this code relating to secondhand goods dealers or their business, and will pay all costs, fines and penalties incurred
on account of the applicant's failure to observe such provisions and will pay all damages resulting to any person by reason of the wrongful purchase or
receiving of any stolen property or property from any minor, which bond shall be approved by the council and filed with the clerk. (2000 Code § 127.06)
4-4-7: RECORDS REGISTER REQUIRED:
A. Every secondhand goods dealer is required to keep a record register in which the dealer accurately, intelligently and legibly enters, in ink, in the
English language, at the time of purchasing or receiving any article or item:
1. The value of the article;
2. The amount paid, advanced or loaned for the article;
3. A detailed, complete and accurate description of the article, including identifying marks;
4. The article's serial number and model number, if any;
5. The name of the person from whom the article is purchased or received, his or her residence address, social security number, height and
general description;
6. The date, time and place of the transaction;
7. The time and date when the article is to be redeemed or bought back;
8. Any mortgage or bill of sale taken, or receipt or pawn ticket given;
9. When, and by whom, an article was bought back or redeemed;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 86/439
10. When, to whom and how an article was disposed of, not to include pawned items.
B. Every secondhand goods dealer shall also record the date of disposition of said article or any part or portion thereof. Said disposition report shall be
located in the same book and at the same place where the receiving records for said article are located.
C. Any person who fails to keep such records or fails to make the required entries therein, or intentionally or knowingly makes any false or
unintelligible entry or any entry which the dealer has reason to believe is untrue, or who fails to make the inquiries necessary to enable the dealer
to make such entries or any of them, or who fails to produce the records when requested, or who destroys or negligently permits such records to be
destroyed or lost is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
D. Every secondhand goods dealer shall submit to the police department, by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Friday of each week, a record of each
item received on pawn or purchased outright. Such record shall include all information required by subsection A of this section. A secondhand
goods dealer or employee who fails to submit such record on each item received is guilty of a misdemeanor. (2000 Code § 127.07)
4-4-8: INSPECTION OF REGISTER AND PROPERTY:
The secondhand goods dealer's register required by this chapter shall at all times be open to inspection by a duly authorized officer of the city without
warrant. The secondhand goods dealer shall also, upon request, show to any such duly authorized officer any articles purchased, taken or received by
the dealer or deposited with the dealer and in the dealer's possession. (2000 Code § 127.08)
4-4-9: TICKET FOR PROPERTY RECEIVED:
To each person selling, negotiating, depositing or leaving any property with a secondhand goods dealer, the secondhand goods dealer shall give a
ticket upon which shall be printed or written a copy of all entries required by this chapter to be made in the secondhand goods dealer's register with
reference to the transactions with such person. No charge shall be made by the secondhand goods dealer for such ticket. (2000 Code § 127.09)
4-4-10: HOLDING PERIOD:
Any item received by a secondhand goods dealer shall not be sold, transferred, altered, removed from the premises or otherwise disposed of for
seven (7) days after the date of purchase. However, an individual may redeem an item that he or she pawned any time after the item was received on
deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays. Failure to hold said items for the required holding period is deemed a simple misdemeanor. (2000
Code § 127.10)
4-4-11: POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY:
The police are authorized to seize property, with proper seizure notice, or require the dealer to hold property which they have probable cause to
believe is stolen property. A receipt will be given to the secondhand goods dealer for all property seized. (2000 Code § 127.11)
4-4-12: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall sell or pawn any item with any secondhand goods dealer, nor shall any secondhand goods
dealer receive any items from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. No dealer shall receive any goods unless the seller presents two (2) forms of identification. Proper identification shall consist of, but not be limited
to, driver's license, picture ID, medicard, draft card and/or major credit card.
C. No goods or merchandise shall be stored or continuously displayed on any public street, alley or public parking. Any goods or merchandise stored
or displayed outside a fully enclosed building shall be done so in an orderly and clean fashion so as not to create a nuisance, as defined in the
code of Iowa or this code, or stored or displayed in such a manner as to provide a habitat or breeding area for rodents or insects. Goods and
merchandise stored or displayed outside, which are not designed to be placed, freestanding, on the ground, shall be placed on racks or shelves.
(2000 Code § 127.12)
4-4-13: LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Any license under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons:
1. The proposed use is in conflict with the zoning ordinance;
2. The proposed use is in conflict with any health, building, building maintenance or other provision of this code or state law;
3. Violation of any provision of this chapter;
4. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements in securing a license;
5. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements in the course of the applicant's business;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 87/439
6. Conviction within the preceding five (5) years of any public offense relating to theft, damage or trespass to property or to the operation of a
business.
B. The clerk may, upon receipt of information alleging that grounds exist to deny, suspend or revoke the license of any applicant or licensee under this
chapter, and after consultation with the legal department, report the circumstances to the council, which in such cases may cause a notice to be
served on the applicant or licensee, which notice shall state that a denial, suspension, or revocation hearing has been set before the council, the
grounds for the proposed denial, suspension or revocation, the date and time of the hearing and the place where the hearing will be conducted.
Upon such hearing, if the council determines that one or more of such grounds do exist, it may deny an application or suspend or revoke an
existing license. In the event such license is revoked, no license under this chapter shall be issued to that licensee for a period of one year. (2000
Code § 127.13)
4-4-14: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 127.14)
Chapter 5
HOUSE MOVERS
4-5-1: HOUSE MOVER DEFINED:
A "house mover" means any person who undertakes to move a building or similar structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the
building or structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies or any other specialized moving equipment or any method other than
a properly licensed motor vehicle. (2000 Code § 123.01)
4-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of "house mover" as herein defined without a valid permit from the community development
department for each house, building or similar structure to be moved. (2000 Code § 123.02)
4-5-3: APPLICATION:
Application for a house mover's permit shall be submitted on forms provided by the community development department. (2000 Code § 123.03)
4-5-4: BOND REQUIRED:
The applicant shall post with the community development department a penal bond in the minimum sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by
a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the state. The bond shall guarantee the permittee's payment for any damage done to the city or to
public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the city in the course of moving the building or structure. (2000 Code § 123.04)
4-5-5: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of the
permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:
Bodily injury $1,000,000.00 per accident
Property damage 300,000.00 per accident
(2000 Code § 123.05)
4-5-6: PERMIT FEE:
A permit fee as determined by the city shall be payable at the time of filing the application with the community development department. A separate
permit shall be required for each house, building or similar structure to be moved. (2000 Code § 123.06)
4-5-7: PERMIT ISSUED:
Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate, and payment of the required fee, the community development department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 88/439
shall issue a permit. (2000 Code § 123.07)
4-5-8: PUBLIC SAFETY:
At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain flagmen at
the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when the building
or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the
intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. (2000 Code § 123.08)
4-5-9: TIME LIMIT:
No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than twelve (12)
hours without having first secured the written approval of the city. (2000 Code § 123.09)
4-5-10: REMOVAL BY CITY:
In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of section 4-5-9 of this chapter, the city is authorized to remove such building or
structure and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit holder's bond. (2000 Code § 123.10)
4-5-11: PROTECT PAVEMENT:
It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement, unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are
at least one inch (1") in width for each one thousand (1,000) pounds of weight of such building. If there is any question as to the weight of a house or
building, the estimate of the city's engineer or community development director as to such weight shall be final. (2000 Code § 123.11)
4-5-12: OVERHEAD WIRES:
The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone, cable television and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary
and replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same. (2000 Code § 123.12)
4-5-13: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 123.13)
Chapter 6
CHRISTMAS TREE SALES YARDS
4-6-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall establish or operate a Christmas tree sales yard for the sale of Christmas trees, whether natural evergreen or artificial, at retail without
first obtaining a permit therefor. (2000 Code § 125.01)
4-6-2: APPLICATION:
Application for such permit shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the city clerk's office. The application shall be accompanied by a sketch
showing the proposed yard, parking, any shelter to be located thereon, street access, and any structures or possible fire hazards in close proximity to
the yard. The applicant shall covenant to clean and clear the yard and remove all Christmas trees, debris and temporary shelters prior to January 1 of
the year next following the year of the issuance of the permit. (2000 Code § 125.02; amd. 2008 Code)
4-6-3: FEE:
The fee for each permit is as approved by the city of Clive fee schedule adopted by resolution, which shall accompany the application and not be
refundable. (2000 Code § 125.03; amd. 2008 Code)
4-6-4: DEPOSIT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 89/439
Each application shall be accompanied by a certified or cashier's check in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) drawn on or by a bank
acceptable to the city clerk's office which shall be held by the city clerk's office as security for the Christmas tree sales yard being cleaned and cleared.
(2000 Code § 125.04; amd. 2008 Code)
4-6-5: PERMISSION TO CLEAR:
As a condition to the issuance of any permit hereunder the owner or lessee of the land upon which the Christmas tree yard is to be located shall grant
to the city the right to enter upon such premises to remove any materials constituting a public nuisance, Christmas trees, debris and temporary
shelters in the event the Christmas tree yard is not cleaned and cleared as provided in section 4-6-7 of this chapter and to indemnify and hold the city
harmless for all loss and liability resulting therefrom. The proceeds of the deposit shall be used to reimburse the appropriate city fund. (2000 Code
§ 125.05)
4-6-6: PROCEDURE:
Upon receipt of the application in proper form with all necessary accompanying documents, fee and check, the city clerk's office shall review the
application and sketch, and if it is found that the Christmas tree yard as shown by the accompanying sketch does not create any hazards to the public
safety, a permit shall be issued. (2000 Code § 125.06; amd. 2008 Code)
4-6-7: CLEANING YARD:
The permittee shall cause the Christmas tree sales yard to be cleaned and cleared of all materials constituting a public nuisance, Christmas trees, and
temporary shelters prior to January 1 of the year next following the issuance of the permit. In the event the Christmas tree sales yard is not so cleaned
and cleared, the city clerk's office shall cash the deposit check and deposit the proceeds in the city's general fund. The city clerk shall then notify the
director of public works to cause the yard to be cleaned and to have removed all materials therefrom which constitute a public nuisance, including
Christmas trees, debris and temporary shelters. The proceeds of the deposit shall be used to reimburse the appropriate city fund for the cost of such
removal and cleaning. (2000 Code § 125.07; amd. 2008 Code)
4-6-8: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 125.08)
Chapter 7
AFTER HOURS BUSINESSES
4-7-1: PURPOSE; FINDINGS:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the reasonable regulation of after hours businesses within the city. The city council finds that the existence
of after hours businesses, which allow the on premises consumption of alcohol during early morning hours, in the greater Des Moines metropolitan
area has caused detrimental effects on the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of residents, visitors, and upon cities in general. Based on these
findings, the city council has deemed it necessary to enact the following regulations for after hours businesses in the city. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AFTER HOURS BUSINESS: Any business open during any time between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. any day of the
week and where patrons are allowed to bring their own beer and wine onto the business premises.
BEER: Any liquid capable of being used for beverage purposes made by the fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley, malt, and hops,
with or without unmarred grains or decorticated and degerminated grains or made by the fermentation of or by distillation of the fermented products of
fruit, fruit extracts, or other agricultural products, containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume but not more than five
percent (5%) of alcohol by weight but not including mixed drinks or cocktails; or, as otherwise defined by succeeding state legislation.
BUSINESS PREMISES OR LICENSED PREMISES: All buildings and properties including parking lots owned or leased for the benefit of the operation
of the after hours business.
DESIGNATED SECURITY EMPLOYEE: An agent, contract employee, independent contractor, servant, or employee of a licensee or permittee who
works in a security position in any capacity at a commercial establishment licensed or permitted under this chapter.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: Premises licensed by the state department of inspections and appeals and regularly or seasonally kept open in a bona fide
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 90/439
manner for the lodging of transient guests and with twenty (20) or more sleeping rooms.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, corporation, or club owning or operating an after hours business.
PERSON OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER, OR AS OTHERWISE DEFINED BY SUCCEEDING STATE LEGISLATION: Any person who meets all of
the following requirements:
A. The person has such financial standing and good reputation as will satisfy the city that the person will comply with this chapter and all laws,
ordinances, and regulations applicable to the person's operations under this chapter.
1. In evaluating any applicant's "financial standing", the city may consider the following: an applicant's "financial standing" may include, but is not
limited to, verified source(s) of financial support and adequate operating capital for the applicant's proposed after hours business, a record of
prompt payment of local or state taxes due, a record of prompt payment to the city and the various utility companies of fees or charges due the
city or the utility companies for municipal services or utilities provided, and prompt payment of or satisfaction of any fee, fine, or civil penalty
imposed pursuant to any chapter of this code.
2. In evaluating an applicant's "good reputation", the city may consider such factors as, but not limited to, the following: a pattern or practice of
violating any of the requirements or prohibitions set out in this chapter to which the licensee or licensee's agents or employees have pleaded
guilty or been found guilty in a criminal court or have been otherwise sanctioned under this chapter, a pattern or practice of violating any of the
state alcoholic beverages laws and regulations for which corrective action has been taken, convictions of licensee under laws relating to
operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of drugs or alcohol, convictions under any laws relating to illegal drug use, possession or
sale, convictions on misdemeanor charges, and their recency and severity.
B. The person is not subject to or prohibited from obtaining a liquor control license or a wine or beer permit.
C. Notwithstanding subsection E of this definition, the applicant is a citizen of the United States and a resident of the state of Iowa, or licensed to do
business in the state of Iowa in the case of a corporation. Notwithstanding subsection E of this definition, in the case of a partnership, only one
general partner need be a resident of the state of Iowa.
D. The person has not been convicted of a felony. However, if the person's conviction of a felony occurred more than five (5) years before the date
of the application for a license or permit, and if the person's rights of citizenship have been restored by the governor, the city may determine that
the person is of good moral character notwithstanding such conviction.
E. The requirements of this definition apply to the following:
1. Each of the officers, directors, and partners of such person.
2. A person who directly or indirectly owns or controls ten percent (10%) or more of any class of stock of such person.
3. A person who directly or indirectly has an interest of ten percent (10%) or more in the ownership or profits of such person.
4. For the purposes of this subsection, an individual and the individual's spouse shall be regarded as one person.
WINE: Any beverage containing more than five percent (5%) of alcohol by weight but not more than seventeen percent (17%) of alcohol by weight or
twenty one and twenty five hundredths percent (21.25%) of alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar contents of fruits or
other agricultural products but excluding any product containing alcohol derived from malt or by the distillation process from grain, cereal, molasses, or
cactus; or, as otherwise defined by succeeding State legislation. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-3: LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED; ELIGIBILITY:
No person shall operate an after hours business in the City without first applying for and paying the license fee to procure an after hours business
license. This chapter, however, shall not apply to hotels or motels. Upon meeting the requirements imposed by this chapter, a person who is of good
moral character as defined by this chapter, may apply for and hold an after hours license. For a corporation or partnership, the officers of the
corporation and the partners of a partnership shall be persons of good moral character as defined by this chapter or State law. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-4: CONDITIONS FOR LICENSE APPROVAL:
The following conditions and regulations must be met by an applicant for an after hours business license: (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
A. The applicant must give consent in writing on the application that members of the Clive Fire and Police Departments and the Clive building official
may enter upon the business premises without warrant to inspect for violations of the provisions of State and Municipal law, as well as for
compliance with other applicable Fire, Building, and Health Code regulations. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007; amd. Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 91/439
B. The premises for which an after hours business license is sought must be located within an area where such business is permitted and conforms to
City zoning requirements.
C. All applicable permits and licenses provided for by this Code shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises of the license holder and at
all times shall be subject to inspection.
D. No after hours business license shall be approved for premises which do not conform to all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, and health and
fire regulations. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-5: LICENSE APPLICATION:
A. Filing Of Application: All applicants for an after hours business license shall apply in writing to the City Clerk. Applications for the issuance of an
after hours business license shall be filed at the time and in the number of copies as the City Clerk shall prescribe, on forms prescribed by the City
Clerk.
B. Information Required: All applications shall be made in the name of the owner of the business, whether an individual, a partnership, or a
corporation, and shall contain the following:
1. The full name, residence address, business address, date of birth, and social security number of the applicant and, when the applicant is a
partnership or corporation, of the partners or officers.
2. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation together with the
names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors, and each stockholder holding more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the
corporation; if the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and the residence address of each of the partners, including
limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the subsections of this section pertaining to a corporate application apply.
3. The name and address of the owner of the building where such after hours business will be located.
4. If required by the City Clerk, a sketch or diagram of the proposed licensed premises, in such form and containing such information as the City
Clerk may require.
5. A copy of a valid Iowa Sales Tax permit for operation of the after hours business. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-6: SECURITY REQUIRED; SECURITY EMPLOYEE TRAINING:
A. Security Required: An after hours business license holder shall provide adequate security to provide for crowd control and the safety of patrons.
B. Security Employee: The City may, as a condition of obtaining and holding an after hours business license or permit, require a "designated security
employee" as defined in this chapter to be trained and certified in security methods. This training shall include, but is not limited to, mediation
techniques, civil rights or unfair practices awareness, and providing instruction on the proper physical restraint methods used against a person who
has become combative. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-7: INVESTIGATION PROCEDURE:
A. Background Check: Upon submission of an original application for an after hours business license to the City Clerk, each person listed in the
original application shall also obtain and provide the City Clerk with an officially sealed Iowa Division of Criminal Investigation ("DCI") personal
background check at that person's expense. The City Clerk shall forward a copy of the original application documents to the Police Chief. The
Police Chief may then conduct an investigation as to the truth of the facts averred in the application documents and transmit the results to the City
Clerk. The Police Chief and City Clerk shall then make a recommendation to the City Council for approval or disapproval of the application.
B. Police Review Of Renewal Application: Upon submission of an application for renewal of a current after hours business license to the City Clerk,
any person listed in the renewal application who did not previously obtain and provide the City Clerk with an officially sealed DCI personal
background check must do so at that person's own expense. The City Clerk shall forward a copy of the renewal application documents to the
Police Chief. The Police Chief shall then review and comment on the renewal application, and the Police Chief and the City Clerk will make a
recommendation to the City Council for approval or disapproval of the renewal application. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
C. Inspection Of Premises: The City's Building Official, Zoning Enforcement Officer, and the Fire Chief or their designees shall inspect the premises to
determine if they conform to the City's requirements. No license or permit shall be approved or issued unless or until the City Clerk has been
advised that the applicant has fully complied with all requirements of this chapter and all applicable ordinances and codes regulating fire, buildings,
health, and zoning. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007; amd. Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
4-7-8: LICENSE FEES:
A. An applicant for an after hours business license shall submit a fee to the City Clerk at the time of filing the application.
B. All after hours business licenses, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall expire at six o'clock (6:00) A.M., one year from the date of issuance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 92/439
C. An applicant who files for renewal less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of any license expiration shall pay a late fee.
D. If the application is denied or if the application is withdrawn before final action is taken by the City, a portion of the application fee shall be retained
by the City Clerk for the cost of administration.
E. The license fee, its nonrefundable portion, and the late fee for the after hours business license shall be in the amounts set in the schedule of fees
adopted by the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-9: LICENSE RENEWALS:
Every person operating an after hours business shall apply for an after hours business license annually as if for an original license. There shall be no
automatic renewal. Such application shall be filed and the fee paid not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the current license. (Ord. 869,
9-6-2007)
4-7-10: SCOPE OF LICENSE; SALE, TRANSFER AND ASSIGNABILITY:
A. An after hours business license shall be a personal privilege and is revocable for cause. It is not property nor is it subject to attachment and
execution nor alienable nor assignable, and it shall cease upon the death of the permittee or licensee, or terminate upon sale.
B. Every permit or license shall be issued in the name of the applicant, and no person holding a permit or license shall allow any other person to use
the permit or license.
C. No after hours business license shall be sold or transferred. The purchaser of any after hours business or of the majority of the stock of any
corporation operating an after hours business shall make application for and obtain a new license before operating such business at the location for
which the license has been issued. The after hours business license shall not be assignable. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-11: EXAMINATION OF PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for a person to refuse, resist, or attempt to prevent any city employee or any authorized city agent from making a reasonable
examination of the business premises. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-12: VIOLATION BY CLERKS, AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every clerk, agent or employee of any after hours business shall be subject to and bound by all the sections of this chapter and state law and be liable
for the same penalties and to the same extent as his or her employer or principal for any violation of this chapter or state law. Any violation of any
section of this chapter or state law by any clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee shall be deemed the act of the licensee and shall subject the license
of said licensee to civil penalty, suspension or revocation. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-13: PROCEDURES FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR CIVIL PENALTY:
A. Whenever the city council finds that the licensee or its employees or agents have furnished any false information required under this chapter, or has
violated or failed to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or state law, the city council may impose a civil penalty not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) upon the licensee and/or suspend or revoke the license.
B. No civil penalty, suspension, or revocation shall issue except upon notice delivered to the licensee by mailing notice via regular mail, addressed to
the licensee at the licensed premises, a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the time,
date, and place of hearing and shall set out briefly the reasons for the hearing.
C. If, after such hearing, the city council makes a finding based on substantial evidence that a violation of this chapter or state law did in fact take place
as alleged, the city council may impose an appropriate civil penalty and/or suspend or revoke the license. The determination of whether to impose
a civil penalty and/or suspend or revoke such license shall be in the discretion of the city council, and shall be dependent upon the circumstances
surrounding the violation and its severity.
D. A licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible for another such license for a period of two (2) years after such revocation.
E. Failure to pay a civil penalty imposed within thirty (30) days of the resolution imposing such penalty, if not stayed by appeal, shall result in an
automatic suspension of the after hours business license for thirty (30) consecutive days. The city clerk shall issue a suspension order and the
thirty (30) day suspension shall commence at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. five (5) business days following service of the order via ordinary mail to the last
known address of the licensee or permittee. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-14: ENFORCEMENT ALTERNATIVES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 93/439
Any person who fails to perform an act required by this chapter or state law, or who commits an act prohibited by this chapter or state law, may be
subject to a municipal infraction, punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article A, "Municipal Infractions", of this code or pursuant to state law, as
an alternative to the penalty procedures of section 4-7-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-15: CAUSES FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR CIVIL PENALTY:
A criminal conviction is not a prerequisite to suspend, revoke, or impose a civil penalty pursuant to this chapter. An after hours business licensee or
permittee may be required to pay a civil penalty and/or have the license suspended for a period not to exceed one year or revoked for violations of this
chapter, following notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
A. Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for the after hours business license.
B. Violation of any of the provisions of state or municipal law pertaining to the operation of the after hours business.
C. Any change in the ownership or interest in the business, which was not previously reported to and approved by the city.
D. Any event which would have resulted in disqualification from receiving such license or permit when originally issued or renewed.
E. Any sale, hypothecation, or transfer of such license or permit.
F. The failure or refusal on the part of the licensee or permittee to render any report or remit any taxes to the department of revenue of the state of
Iowa that are required by state law. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-16: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the chief of police or his or her designee may temporarily suspend the after hours business
license and order a temporary closure of the business in a situation involving an immediate danger to public health, safety, or welfare.
B. The police department shall give written notice of the temporary suspension and closure order along with a brief statement of the facts and reasons
for the decision to suspend to persons who are required to comply with the order. Such notice shall state that the matter of temporary suspension
and closure will be heard by the city council at the first regularly scheduled council meeting after expiration of five (5) calendar days from the
temporary suspension/closure. The suspension and order of closure is effective when issued and will remain effective until the city council reviews
the facts, circumstances, and reasons for the temporary suspension and closure.
C. A copy of the written notice of suspension and closure shall be sent to the city clerk. Such hearing shall be placed on the city council agenda for the
next regularly scheduled council meeting after expiration of five (5) calendar days from the temporary suspension and closure.
D. The city council may take any action it is authorized to take under section 4-7-13 of this chapter and/or reinstatement of the after hours business
license. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-17: EFFECT OF REVOCATION:
A. Any licensee whose license or permit is revoked shall not thereafter be permitted to hold a license in the city for a period of two (2) years from the
date of such revocation.
B. A spouse or business associate holding ten percent (10%) or more of the capital stock or ownership interest in the business of a person whose
license or permit has been revoked shall not be issued a license and no license shall be issued which covers any business in which such person
has a financial interest for a period of two (2) years from the date of such revocation.
C. If a license is revoked, the premises covered by such license shall not be relicensed as an after hours business for one year. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
4-7-18: APPEAL:
A. The right of appeal to the city council shall be afforded an applicant for an after hours business license or for a renewal license whose license has
been denied. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk's office within ten (10) days after notice of denial is sent by ordinary mail.
(Ord. 869, 9-6-2007)
B. Any applicant who feels aggrieved by a decision of the city council penalizing, suspending, revoking, or disapproving issuance of a license may
appeal from such decision within thirty (30) days to the Polk County or Dallas County district court. (Ord. 869, 9-6-2007; amd. 2008 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 94/439
Chapter 8
LICENSING OF KENNELS1
4-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall apply:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: An employee of the city of Clive or a contracted individual, firm, or governmental entity who responds to and remedies
animal control issues and/or inspects kennel facilities within the city of Clive.
CAT: See section 5-7-1 of this code.
DOG: See section 5-7-1 of this code.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL EXERCISE YARD: See section 11-2-1 of this code.
KENNEL: Any premises as identified by an individual mailing address on which more than four (4) dogs or cats or combinations thereof, six (6) months
old or older, are held for sale, boarding, grooming, or medical care. Such dogs or cats may be the property of the owner of the site or of other persons.
NUISANCE: See section 5-6-1 of this code.
PERSON: An individual, association, firm, partnership, company, corporation, or any other legal entity.
PRIMARY ENCLOSURE: Any structure used to immediately restrict an animal to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, crate or
compartment. Such enclosure shall be constructed and occupied in accordance with the standards set forth by the Humane Society of the United
States as well as those included in subsection 11-4-8E of this code. (Ord. 897, 11-20-2008, eff. 6-1-2009)
4-8-2: KENNEL LICENSE REQUIRED:
A person shall not operate a kennel within the city unless the person has obtained a license issued by the Clive city clerk. Application for the license
shall be made in the manner provided by the Clive city clerk. A license may be renewed annually beginning one year from date of issue. A license fee
in accordance with the license fee schedule approved by the city council, which license fee schedule may be modified from time to time with the
approval of city council, shall be payable at the time of filing the license application with the city clerk. (Ord. 897, 11-20-2008, eff. 6-1-2009)
4-8-3: INSPECTION REQUIRED:
Upon the filing of an application for the issuance of a license, and annually after the granting of such license, the animal control officer shall inspect the
kennel to determine material compliance with the following requirements:
A. The kennel shall be operated in a safe, sanitary, and humane manner, with due regard for the criteria promulgated by the Humane Society of the
United States.
B. All primary enclosures shall be in an interior, climate controlled area, and adequate odor and sound mitigation shall ensure that the kennel does not
create a nuisance to adjacent property.
C. All primary enclosures shall be of a size that will permit the dog or cat housed by such enclosure to stand up, lie down and easily turn around within
such enclosure.
D. Each dog kept overnight shall be provided exercise on at least a twice daily basis either: 1) in an indoor or outdoor domesticated animal exercise
yard, which shall be constructed subject to the limitations set forth in subsection 11-4-8F of this code, or 2) on a handheld leash. Dogs shall not be
allowed to remain in a domesticated animal exercise yard to an extent that causes a nuisance to adjoining property.
E. The kennel may contain no more than one primary enclosure per twenty five (25) square feet of indoor, climate controlled space.
If, upon such inspection, the animal control officer finds that a new or existing kennel is in compliance with these requirements, the city clerk shall
issue or renew the kennel license.
The animal control officer may also inspect any kennel from time to time upon reasonable notice to the licensee. If the animal control officer finds
material noncompliance with these requirements, which noncompliance is not cured within seven (7) days' written notice from the animal control
officer, the determination of whether to issue, renew or revoke the license for such kennel shall be referred to the Clive animal review board for
consideration in the manner set forth in section 4-8-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 897, 11-20-2008, eff. 6-1-2009)
4-8-4: REVIEW AND/OR REVOCATION OF KENNEL LICENSE:
If, upon inspection of a kennel as set forth in section 4-8-3 of this chapter, the animal control officer determines that there is material noncompliance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 95/439
with the requirements set forth therein, which noncompliance is not cured within seven (7) days' written notice, the animal control officer shall deliver a
written report concerning the issuance, renewal or revocation of the kennel license to the applicant or licensee and the city clerk.
A. Within thirty (30) days of the delivery of the report to the city clerk, the Clive animal review board shall hold a hearing concerning the granting,
renewal or revocation of the kennel license. Notice of said hearing shall be delivered to the kennel license holder not later than fifteen (15) days
before the date of said hearing.
B. The animal control officer shall appear at the hearing and present information to the Clive animal review board regarding compliance with the
criteria set forth in section 4-8-3 of this chapter.
C. The applicant or licensee may appear at the hearing and present information to the Clive animal review board regarding compliance with the criteria
set forth in section 4-8-3 of this chapter.
D. The Clive animal review board shall consider the testimony and evidence provided by the applicant or licensee and the animal control officer, and
shall make a recommendation to the Clive city council regarding whether the kennel license shall be granted, renewed or revoked. The Clive city
council shall then make a determination regarding the licensing of the kennel at its next regularly scheduled meeting. If a kennel license is revoked
by the Clive city council, the revocation shall be effective ten (10) calendar days following the city council's determination that the kennel license
shall be revoked ("revocation date"). In the event of a revocation, the kennel license holder shall cause the kennel to terminate its operations before
the revocation date. (Ord. 897, 11-20-2008, eff. 6-1-2009)
4-8-5: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter by operating an unlicensed kennel shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of
civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate
offense. (Ord. 897, 11-20-2008, eff. 6-1-2009)
Chapter 9
MASSAGE THERAPIST BUSINESSES
4-9-1: PURPOSE:
State of Iowa licensed massage therapists and businesses offering massage therapy services perform an important service in addressing the health
and wellbeing of our citizens. Unfortunately, there are businesses that advertise the provision of massage therapy and/or other therapeutic services,
but are engaged in various illegal activities which may include prostitution and/or human trafficking. This chapter is not intended to discourage a
legitimately licensed massage therapist or massage therapy business from providing their services in the City of Clive. The purpose of this chapter is
to identify and address businesses that engage in the practice of massage therapy without a license and/or are involved in illegal activities which may
include prostitution and/or human trafficking. Businesses providing massage therapy yet conducting various types of illegal activity are harmful to the
City and the image of the massage therapy profession. The implementation of this chapter will better enable the City to proactively screen, monitor and
remove businesses that are engaged in illegal activity. (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a
different meaning is intended.
LICENSE: Means permission granted by competent authority to exercise a certain privilege that, without such authorization, would constitute an illegal
act. The document that confers permission for an individual to engage in massage therapy shall be issued by the Iowa Board of Massage Therapy for
State of Iowa licenses; business licenses shall be issued by the City of Clive.
MASSAGE PATRON: Means any person who receives, or pays to receive, a massage or massage services from a massage therapist for value.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Means a person licensed to practice the health care service of the healing art of massage therapy under Iowa Code, chapter
152C.
MASSAGE THERAPY: Means performance for compensation of massage, myotherapy, massotherapy, bodywork, bodywork therapy, or therapeutic
massage including hydrotherapy, superficial hot and cold applications, vibration, body cleansing and topical applications, or other therein which
involves manipulation of the muscle and connective tissue of the body, excluding osseous tissue, to treat the muscle tonus system for the purpose of
enhancing health, muscle relaxation, increasing range of motion, reducing stress, relieving pain, or improving circulation.
MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS: Means any place of business, whether the physical property is owned, leased, or managed by a company or
individual, wherein any of the treatments, techniques, or methods of treatment referred to in the definition of massage therapy of this section are
administered, practiced, used, given or applied.
REFLEXOLOGY: Means manipulation of the soft tissues of the human body which is restricted to the hands, feet, or ears, performed by persons who
do not hold themselves out to be massage therapists or to be performing massage therapy. (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
4-9-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 96/439
No person shall operate a massage therapy business within the City, either exclusively or in connection with another business, without being licensed
as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
4-9-4: LICENSE FEE:
A. New massage therapy businesses in Clive:
1. The license fee for a massage therapy business in the City of Clive, as well as additional fees per employee, contractor or individual providing
therapy services at the business ("additional therapist fee"), shall be set by the license fee schedule approved by the City Council, which license
fee schedule may be modified from time to time with the approval of City Council. The license fee and additional therapist fee shall be paid when
the application is filed and when a therapist is added to the business.
2. The license, if granted, and not revoked or suspended, shall be valid so long as the business does not change more than fifty one percent (51%)
of the ownership, business name or the service provided. An annual review shall be initiated by the City Clerk, with assistance from the Police
Department, to confirm business ownership, business name, service(s) provided and accurate and up-to-date State licenses for the employees,
contractors or agents performing massage therapy.
B. Existing massage therapy businesses within the City of Clive:
1. For a massage therapy business applying for licensure in the initial year of this chapter's effective date (July 1, 2018 through June 30, 2019) the
licensing fee identified in subsection A of this section is waived. If an application properly submitted during the first year of this chapter is
approved, and the massage therapy business remains in continuous operation, renewal fees for a massage therapy business license will be
waived. A massage therapy business grandfathered in under this section will not be required to pay for the additional therapist fee for each
additional employee, contractor, agent or therapist not included in their original application.
2. An annual review shall be initiated by the City Clerk, with assistance from the Police Department, to confirm business ownership, business
name, service(s) provided and accurate and up-to-date State licenses for the employees, contractors or agents performing massage therapy.
C. A separate license shall be obtained for each place of business. The licensee shall display the license in a prominent place in the licensed business
at all times.
D. During the twelve (12) month licensed period, the massage therapy businesses will be required to notify the City Clerk of changes in massage
therapist staffing, contracting, therapists, ownership and/or business management. (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
4-9-5: APPLICATION:
Application for a massage therapy business license shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk's Office. The application shall include:
A. The address of the property to be used and documentation establishing the applicant's interest in the premises on which the business will be
located, which shall be in the form of a lease, deed, or other document that establishes the applicant's interest;
B. The names, ages, and addresses of the applicant, owner, manager and all employees, contractors, agents or therapists who are or will be
employed or present on the premises to perform massage therapy;
C. Dates and locations of other places the applicant has owned or operated as a massage therapy business;
D. Descriptions of all crimes or other offenses, including the time, place, date and disposition for which the applicant, owner, manager, and all persons
employed by or hired as a contractor by the applicant or present on the premises to perform massage therapy have been arrested, charged, or
convicted;
E. A statement as to whether the applicant, owner, manager, or any person employed by or hired as a contractor by the applicant has had any license
to perform massage therapy denied, revoked or suspended in any city, state, county, or any country and the reason for the denial, revocation or
suspension;
F. A government issued photo ID of the applicant, owner, manager and all employees, contractors, agents or persons present on the premises who are
or will be employed or engaged to perform massage therapy services;
G. Such other information as the Chief of Police may require for purposes of conducting a background check. If it is determined that a nationwide
background check is required, the applicant may be responsible for the expense to complete the background check. A background check
conducted by another Iowa law enforcement agency may be used in lieu of this background check.
H. Any application for a license shall be accompanied by proof of insurance executed by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State
of Iowa, in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). All insurance policies hereunder shall provide for at least thirty (30) days prior notice
to the Police Department before a cancellation thereof is effective and shall continue to provide coverage as to all matters arising during the term of
the insurance policy whether or not later cancelled.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 97/439
I. Provide proof of current State of Iowa Board of Massage Therapy license for all employees or contractors who are or will be employed, hired,
engaged or present on the premises to perform massage therapy services. (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
4-9-6: GRANTING OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
Business license applications shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police, who after considering all of the information provided and obtained in the
background check shall either grant or deny the license. If a business has been granted a license by another unit of municipal or county government in
Iowa, the licensing requirement may be waived. (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
4-9-7: CONDITIONS GOVERNING ISSUANCE:
A. No license shall be issued if the applicant or any of its owners, managers, employees, contractors, or agents has a criminal conviction for a sex
crime as defined by Iowa Code chapter 709, or for prostitution as defined by Iowa Code chapter 725, or for keeping a house of prostitution as
defined by Iowa Code chapter 657, or who is a registered sex offender, or who has been denied a license by any other community.
B. Licenses shall be issued only if the applicant and all of its owners, managers, employees, contractors and agents are free of convictions for
offenses which involve sex crimes or which relate directly to such person's ability or fitness to legally and safely perform the duties and discharge
the responsibilities of the licensed activity.
C. Licenses shall only be issued to applicants who have truthfully provided all of the information requested in the application, have paid the license fee
and have cooperated with the Chief of Police and other City officials in review of the application.
D. The business license, if issued, shall be displayed on the business premises in a conspicuous public area. (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
4-9-8: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to the following businesses:
A. Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons who are licensed to practice medicine or surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery,
chiropractic, cosmetology arts and sciences, or podiatry in Iowa, or athletic trainers, nurses, occupational therapists, physical therapists, or
physician assistants licensed, certified, or registered in this State or acting under the prescription or supervision of a person licensed to practice
medicine, surgery, osteopathic medicine, or chiropractic in this State.
B. Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons who are licensed, registered, or certified in another state, territory, the District of
Columbia, or a foreign country when incidentally and temporarily present in this State to teach a course of instruction related to massage therapy
and bodywork therapy.
C. Businesses which offer the services of students enrolled in a program recognized by the State Board of Massage Therapy while completing a
clinical requirement for graduation performed under the supervision of a licensed person.
D. Persons giving massage therapy and bodywork to members of their immediate family.
E. Persons practicing reflexology.
F. Persons engaged within the scope of practice of a profession with established standards and ethics utilizing touch, words, and directed movement
to deepen awareness of existing patterns of movement in the body as well as to suggest new possibilities of movement, provided that the practices
performed or services rendered are not designated or implied to be massage therapy. Such practices include, but are not limited to, the Feldenkrais
method, the Trager approach, and mind-body centering.
G. Persons engaged within the scope of practice of a profession with established standards and ethics in which touch is limited to that which is
essential for palpitation and affectation of the human energy system, provided that the practices performed or services rendered are not designated
or implied to be massage therapy.
H. Persons incidentally present in this State to provide services as part of an emergency response team working in conjunction with disaster relief
officials.
I. Massage therapy businesses with a place of business located outside the corporate boundaries of the City of Clive, or their employees, agents or
contractors who are engaged in performing massages on an out-call basis to locations in Clive that do not regularly offer massage therapy (i.e.,
private residences, hotels, festivals, employee wellness events and similar events). (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
4-9-9: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL AND REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 98/439
It shall be grounds for denial, revocation and/or suspension of an application or massage therapy business license if one or more of the following
conditions are met:
A. If the applicant or licensee is not complying with or has a history of violations of the laws and ordinances that might adversely impact public health
or safety.
B. If the licensee solicits or advertises to offer services that are a violation of this chapter.
C. If the applicant, an employee, licensee's independent contractor or licensee is convicted of any violation of any City ordinance or Federal or State
Statute which may be reasonably related to the licensed activity and/or occurring on the licensed premises.
D. If there is fraud or deception involved in the license application.
E. If the applicant, an employee, licensee's independent contractor or licensee is found to be in control or possession of any narcotic drugs or
controlled substances on the licensed premises, possession of which is illegal as defined by City, State or Federal law.
F. If the applicant, an employee, licensee's independent contractor or licensee has, in the past, engaged in willful disregard for health codes and
regulations.
G. If the applicant fails to provide all the information and certificates required by this chapter.
H. If the licensee permits an unlicensed individual(s) to conduct massage therapy services at the licensee's premises.
I. If the applicant, an employee, licensee's independent contractor or licensee refuses to permit any authorized police officers or authorized City,
County, or State governmental official to inspect the licensed premises or operations.
J. If the licensee is found to be violating provisions of this chapter or the Iowa Code.
K. If the licensed business promotes its services on websites that are known to advertise services that are illegal. (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
4-9-10: APPEAL:
A. If an applicant or licensee has been denied, revoked or suspended pursuant to this chapter, then said person may file a written request with the City
Manager for review of the decision of the Chief of Police within ten (10) days from the issuance of the notice of denial, revocation or suspension.
Failure to file a written request for review of the decision within this time frame shall constitute a waiver of any right to contest the decision to deny,
revoke or suspend a license.
B. The City Manager shall place a hearing of this action on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Clive City Council. The City
Manager shall notify the appealing applicant or licensee of the date, time and place for this hearing to review the decision of the Chief of Police. At
this hearing the applicant or licensee may present oral or written arguments.
C. If the applicant or licensee's denial, revocation or suspension is reversed by a majority vote of the City Council, the Chief of Police shall issue or
reinstate the appropriate license.
D. If the applicant or licensee's denial, revocation or suspension is upheld by a majority vote of the City Council, the applicant or licensee may appeal
said decision to the District Court pursuant to the laws of the State of Iowa. (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
4-9-11: RESTRICTION AND REGULATIONS:
A. Compliance With Law: The licensee and persons in its employ and at its premises shall comply with all applicable regulations and City, State and
Federal laws.
B. Person In Charge: If the applicant or licensee is a partnership, corporation or other organizations, the applicant or license shall designate a person
to be manager and in responsible charge of the business. The manager shall be a resident of Iowa. The manager shall provide written consent to
serve as an agent for service of notices and other process relating to the business. The manager shall remain responsible for the conduct of the
business until another suitable person has been designated in writing by the licensee. The licensee shall promptly notify the Chief of Police in
writing of any change indicating the address of the new manager and the effective date of such change.
C. Hours Of Business: The licensed premises shall not be open for business nor shall patrons be permitted on the premises between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 99/439
4-9-12: PENALTY:
A person who commits or attempts to commit, conspires to commit or aids or abets in the commission of an act constituting a violation of this chapter,
whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or as principal, agent, or accessory is guilty of a simple misdemeanor. A person
who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, permits or directs another to violate a provision of this chapter is guilty of a
simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
4-9-13: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, or part of this chapter shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of this
chapter as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1057, 5-3-2018)
Title 5
POLICE, HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
The police department of the city is established to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the corporate
limits of the city. (2000 Code § 30.01)
5-1-2: ORGANIZATION:
The department consists of the police chief and such other law enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by
the council. (2000 Code § 30.02)
5-1-3: POLICE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS:
In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement officer unless such person meets at least the minimum standards
established by the Iowa law enforcement academy and the city. (2000 Code § 30.03)
5-1-4: REQUIRED TRAINING:
All police officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of
employment. Police officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by law. (2000 Code § 30.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
5-1-5: OATH:
Every police officer, before taking the position, shall qualify for office by taking the oath prescribed by section 1-10-1 of this code. (2000 Code § 30.05)
5-1-6: POLICE OFFICERS APPOINTED:
The city manager shall appoint the police chief as provided by chapter 400.13 of the code of Iowa. The police chief shall be responsible to the city
manager for the functions of the police department. Other members of the department shall be appointed by the police chief, subject to civil service
procedures and to the approval of the council. (2000 Code § 30.06)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 372.4 and 400.13)
5-1-7: POLICE CHIEF; DUTIES:
The police chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval of the council:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
A. General: Perform all duties required of the police chief by law or ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 100/439
B. Enforce Laws: Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
C. Writs: Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the police chief.
D. Accident Reports: Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the state department of transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
E. Prisoners: Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
F. Assist Officials: When requested, provide aid to other city officers, boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
G. Investigations: Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
H. Record Of Arrests: Keep a record of all arrests made in the city by showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of state law or city
ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the charge.
I. Reports: Compile and submit to the mayor and council an annual report as well as such other reports as may be requested by the mayor or council.
J. Command: Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles, equipment
and materials of the department.
K. Other Duties: Have such other duties as lawfully assigned. (2000 Code § 30.07)
5-1-8: DEPARTMENTAL RULES:
The police chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with this code, and subject to the approval of the city manager, as may be necessary for the
operation of the department. (2000 Code § 30.08)
5-1-9: SUMMONING AID:
Any police officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the
arrest. (2000 Code § 30.09)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
5-1-10: TAKING WEAPONS:
Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person
may have within such person's control to be disposed of according to law. (2000 Code § 30.10)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
Chapter 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
5-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
A fire department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire prevention and
fire safety, to provide emergency medical services, transportation to medical facilities for sick and injured persons, to promote first aid and emergency
readiness among the citizens and to answer all emergency calls for which there is no other established agency. (2000 Code § 35.01; amd. 2008 Code)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
5-2-2: ORGANIZATION:
The department consists of the fire chief and such other officers and personnel as may be authorized by the council. (2000 Code § 35.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5-2-3: TRAINING:
All members of the department shall attend and actively participate in regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the chief. (2000 Code
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 101/439
§ 35.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5-2-4: COMPENSATION:
Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the council. (2000
Code § 35.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5-2-5: OFFICERS:
The city manager shall appoint a fire chief, subject to the approval of the council. The fire chief shall be responsible to the city manager for the
functions of the fire department. The fire chief shall appoint any other officers in the department. In case of absence of the chief, the officer next in rank
shall be in charge and have and exercise all the powers of chief. (2000 Code § 35.05)
5-2-6: OATH:
The fire chief, before entering upon the duties of office, shall qualify for office by taking the oath prescribed by section 1-10-1 of this code. (2000 Code
§ 35.06)
5-2-7: FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES:
The fire chief shall perform all duties required of the fire chief by law or ordinance, including, but not limited to, the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
A. Enforce Laws: Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
B. Technical Assistance: Upon request, give advice concerning private fire alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits and
development of fire emergency plans.
C. Authority At Fires: When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department's duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
D. Control Of Scenes: Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or
individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the fire department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
E. Authority To Barricade: When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right of
way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the fire
department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
F. Command: Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency, discipline and control of the fire department. The members of the fire department
shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the fire chief.
G. Property: Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the
fire department.
H. Notification: Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) has occurred as a
result of a fire, or if arson is suspected, notify the state fire marshal's division immediately. For all fires causing an estimated damage of fifty dollars
($50.00) or more or emergency response by the fire department, file a report with the fire marshal's division within ten (10) days following the end
of the month. The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the
fire, the value of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and
circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 100.2 and 100.3)
I. Right Of Entry: Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building or premises within the fire chief's jurisdiction for the purpose of making
such investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance may be necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 102/439
J. Recommendation: Make such recommendations to owners, occupants, caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
K. Assist State Fire Marshal: At the request of the state fire marshal, and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)
L. Records: Cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel, firefighting and emergency medical service equipment, depreciation of all
equipment and apparatus, the number of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by value, type and location of
buildings.
M. Reports: Compile and submit to the mayor and council an annual report of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports
as may be requested by the mayor or council. (2000 Code § 35.07)
5-2-8: OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the fire chief. (2000 Code § 35.08)
5-2-9: CONSTITUTION:
The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated to accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and
bylaws and any change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws, before being effective, must be approved by the city manager. (2000 Code
§ 35.09)
5-2-10: ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE:
The council shall contract to insure the city against liability for workers' compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization,
nursing, and medical attention for firefighters and emergency medical service providers injured in the performance of their duties as firefighters and
emergency medical service providers whether within or outside the corporate limits of the city. All firefighters and emergency medical service providers
shall be covered by the contract. (2000 Code § 35.10; amd. 2008 Code)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 85.2, 85.61 and 410.18)
5-2-11: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The council shall contract to insure against liability of the city or members of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of and
resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the corporate limits of the city. (2000 Code § 35.11)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 670.2 and 517A.1)
5-2-12: CALLS OUTSIDE CITY:
The fire department is hereby authorized, subject to the conditions set out in this section, to answer calls outside the corporate limits of the city. The
dispatching of equipment and/or personnel of the Clive fire department to answer a call outside the corporate limits of the city shall be made by the fire
chief, or in the absence of the chief by the assistant chief, or in the assistant chief's absence by such other member of the department as is designated
by the fire chief or assistant chief, only after giving due consideration to the equipment and personnel needed in order to provide adequate fire
protection and emergency medical service within the corporate limits of the city at the time of the said call and during the period of time it is anticipated
that equipment and/or personnel will be absent from the city in answer to said call; and in so considering the fire protection and emergency medical
service needed for the city, any mutual aid protection agreements providing fire protection to the city may be considered. (2000 Code § 35.12; amd.
2008 Code)
5-2-13: AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS:
Fire officials acting under the authority of chapter 100 of the code of Iowa may issue citations in accordance to chapter 805 of the code of Iowa, for
violations of state and/or local fire safety regulations. (2000 Code § 35.13)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
5-2-14: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE FEES:
In the event that the department provides emergency medical services, advanced emergency medical care or ambulance services to any person, the
department shall charge a fee to the user of such service as set forth in a schedule of fees adopted by the council in resolution form. Payment of such
fee shall be made to the city of Clive and deposited by the treasurer in the general fund for the benefit of the Clive fire department. (2000 Code
§ 35.14)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 103/439
Chapter 3
TEMPORARY CIVIL DISORDER RESTRICTIONS
5-3-1: DECLARATION OF CIVIL DISORDER:
Whenever the mayor determines that there has been either an act of violence or resistance to a lawful exercise of public authority, and that as a result
thereof, there is reason to believe that there exists a clear and present danger of a riot or other general public disorder involving widespread
disobedience of the law and substantial injury to persons or property, which riot or other general public disorder constitutes an immediate threat to the
public peace and to the general welfare of the city, or any area of it, the mayor may declare a state of civil disorder within the city or any of its areas.
(2000 Code § 38.01)
5-3-2: PROMULGATION OF TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS:
Whenever the mayor declares that a state of civil disorder exists, the mayor may promulgate any, all or part of the temporary restrictions provided for in
section 5-3-3 of this chapter, with such limitations and conditions as the mayor may deem appropriate under the circumstances. In so doing, the mayor
shall specify the area of the city affected by each restriction. Any measure promulgated will take effect only after reasonable notice of its contents has
been given. (2000 Code § 38.02)
5-3-3: TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS:
The mayor is authorized to promulgate any, all or part of the following restrictions:
A. Alcohol: Order the immediate closing of all taverns and order the cessation of the sale or any other distribution of intoxicating liquor and beer;
B. Weapons: Order the cessation of public display, possession, sale or any other distribution of firearms and ammunition;
C. Explosives And Flammables: Order the cessation of the sale or any other distribution of explosives and flammables;
D. Curfew: Order the closing of all or some public parks, public streets or other public places during specified hours;
E. Assembly: Order the cessation of gatherings by three (3) or more persons in public buildings, streets, parks and other open areas, either public or
private;
F. Other Activities: Order the cessation of any other activities reasonably believed hazardous to the maintenance of public safety. (2000 Code § 38.03)
5-3-4: TERMINATION OF TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS:
Any restriction promulgated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter will terminate automatically forty eight (48) hours after the mayor's
declaration of civil disorder was issued or upon issuance by the mayor of a declaration that a state of civil disorder no longer exists, whichever occurs
first; provided, however, any or all of the restrictions promulgated by the mayor may be extended by successive resolutions of the council for additional
periods of time. The period of any one extension shall not exceed five (5) days. (2000 Code § 38.04)
Chapter 4
OFFENSES
ARTICLE A. PUBLIC PEACE
5-4A-1: ASSAULT:
A. Prohibited Acts: No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
1. Pain Or Injury: Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to, or which is intended to result in physical contact which will be insulting or
offensive to, another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
2. Threat Of Pain Or Injury: Any act which is intended to place another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious,
insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 104/439
3. Dangerous Weapon: Intentionally point any firearm toward another, or display in a threatening manner any dangerous weapon toward another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[3])
B. Exceptions: However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport,
social or other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an
unreasonable risk of serious injury or breach of the peace, the act is not an assault. Provided, where the person doing any of the above
enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides
services to a school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle, or other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of
the employee or staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school grounds or at an official school function regardless of
the location, the act is not an assault, whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between students or other individuals if
the degree and the force of the intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those assembled. (2000 Code
§ 40.01)
5-4A-2: HARASSMENT:
No person shall commit harassment.
A. Term Described: A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy or alarm another person, the person does any of the
following:
1. Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing or via electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to
cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2. Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
3. Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be delivered to another, without such other person's knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
4. Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing that the
information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
B. Personal Contact: A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another
person, with the intent to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, "personal
contact" means an encounter in which two (2) or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other. "Personal contact" does not require
a physical touching or oral communication, although it may include these types of contacts. (2000 Code § 40.02)
5-4A-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
No person shall do any of the following:
A. Fighting: Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons; provided, that participants in
athletic contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1])
B. Noise: Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[2])
C. Abusive Language: Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke
a violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[3])
D. Disrupt Lawful Assembly: Without lawful authority or color of authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to
disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[4])
E. False Report Of Catastrophe: By words or action, initiate or circulate a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report
to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[5])
F. Disrespect Of Flag: Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will provoke or encourage another to commit a public offense.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[6])
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 105/439
G. Obstruct Use Of Street: Without authority or justification, obstruct any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to prevent or
hinder its lawful use by others. (2000 Code § 40.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[7])
5-4A-4: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY:
It is unlawful for three (3) or more persons to assemble together, with them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of
them will commit a public offense. No person shall willingly join in or remain part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to
believe it is such. (2000 Code § 40.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)
5-4A-5: FAILURE TO DISPERSE:
A police officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.
No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey. (2000 Code § 40.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
5-4A-6: PARADES REGULATED:
No person shall conduct, cause or participate in any parade on any street except as provided herein:
A. Parade Defined: "Parade" means any march or procession of fifteen (15) or more persons, with or without vehicles, organized for marching or
moving on the streets, sidewalks or other public ways in an organized fashion, or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or
advertised to the public as a parade.
B. Permit Required: No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a written permit from the police chief.
1. Permit Application: The permit application must be made in writing not less than three (3) days in advance of the parade and shall state:
a. The date and time for the parade;
b. The name, address and telephone number of applicant;
c. The route of the parade; and
d. The approximate number of persons and vehicles in the parade.
2. Restrictions. The city shall issue the applicant a permit unless:
a. The police chief determines that the time, route or size of the parade will disrupt the use of any street or sidewalk which is ordinarily subject to
significant congestion or traffic;
b. Another parade permit has already been issued for that day; or
c. The proposed parade violates any other governing law or ordinance.
C. Hours: No permit shall be granted for a parade through a residential district, except during the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M.
D. No Fee: No fee shall be charged for the parade permit. (2000 Code § 40.06)
5-4A-7: PICKETING RESIDENCE OR DWELLING:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before, about or immediately adjacent to the residence or dwelling of any individual in the city. For
the purpose of this section, "before, about or immediately adjacent to" means in front of or within one house on either side of a residence or dwelling,
but not the sidewalk or public area across the street from the residence or dwelling. (2000 Code § 40.07)
5-4A-8: PEEPING PROHIBITED:
No person, without cause and justification, shall enter and/or remain on public or private property thereby interfering with or invading the privacy of the
rightful occupant thereof, which includes, but is not limited to, dwellings, dressing rooms, public restrooms and public showers. Specifically, no person
shall peer into a dwelling without the express knowledge, permission and consent of the occupant or occupants of said dwelling. (2000 Code § 40.08)
5-4A-9: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this article or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 106/439
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 40.09)
ARTICLE B. PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
5-4B-1: DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES:
No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person
delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or
animals from the place where the substance is deposited. (2000 Code § 41.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
5-4B-2: FIREWORKS2:
The sale, use or exploding of fireworks within the City is subject to the following:
A. Definition: The term "fireworks" includes any explosive composition, or combination of explosive substances, or articles prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and specifically includes blank cartridges, firecrackers,
torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound,
or other device containing any explosive substance. (2000 Code § 41.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
B. Regulations: The City of Clive deems the use of first-class and second-class consumer fireworks as a threat to public safety or a nuisance to
landowners or persons with certain health conditions and therefor prohibits the use of first-class and second-class consumer fireworks. It is
unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail without a State issued license and during the dates as established by the
State Fire Marshal, or use or explode any first-class consumer fireworks within the corporate limits of the City; provided the City may, upon
application in writing, grant a permit for the display of fireworks by a City agency, fair associations, amusement parks and other organizations or
groups of individuals approved by City authorities when such fireworks display will be handled by a competent operator. No permit shall be granted
hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring organization has filed with the City evidence of insurance and any other requirements as set by a
resolution or approved by the City Council. Proof of insurance shall be in the following amounts:
1. Personal injury: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person.
2. Property damage: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
3. Total exposure: Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00). (Ord. 1038, 5-25-2017)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
C. Exceptions: This section does not prohibit the sale by a resident, dealer, manufacturer or jobber of such fireworks as are not prohibited; or the sale
of any kind of fireworks if they are to be shipped out of State; or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal purposes in
athletic sports or by railroads or trucks for signal purposes, or by a recognized military organization. This section does not apply to any substance
or composition prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation purposes. (2000 Code § 41.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
5-4B-3: FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES:
No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
A. Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department, a law enforcement authority or other public safety entity, knowing that the
information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the act did not occur.
B. Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency
information or assistance.
C. Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who enters the information on a citation. (2000 Code § 41.03)
5-4B-4: REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER:
Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or police officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to
make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably, and without
lawful cause, refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested. (2000 Code § 41.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 107/439
5-4B-5: HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
No person shall wilfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or employee from performing the officer's or employee's duty. (2000 Code
§ 41.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
5-4B-6: ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS:
No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, icebox, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such refrigerator, icebox, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person's possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children. (2000 Code § 41.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
5-4B-7: ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES:
It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground or public building. (2000 Code § 41.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
5-4B-8: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose land within the city limits without the written consent of the council unless
such land consists of ten (10) acres or more and is used as agricultural land. (2000 Code § 41.08)
5-4B-9: FIREARMS:
No person shall fire, shoot or discharge any firearm, air gun or BB gun within the city unless first having obtained a permit therefor from the police
chief. The provisions of this section do not apply to a qualified peace officer in the discharge of official duties or to personnel or patrons of a permitted
indoor shooting range. The permit shall limit the time and place of such firing and may be revoked at any time by the mayor or police chief. (Ord. 1013,
4-14-2016)
5-4B-10: BOWS AND ARROWS:
No person shall fire, shoot or discharge a bow and arrow or crossbow within the city unless first having obtained a permit therefor from the police chief
or having obtained a permit from the city for bow hunting of deer in the city's designated urban deer management zone. The permit shall limit the time
and place of such shooting and may be revoked at any time by the mayor or police chief. Notwithstanding the foregoing, persons on private property
may, with permission of the owner or tenant of the premises, shoot or discharge a bow and arrow at a backstop of sufficient size and substance that
the arrow will not pass through or beyond the backstop, and provided that the arrow does not travel beyond the boundaries of such property. (2000
Code § 41.10)
5-4B-11: SLINGSHOTS:
No person shall use, fire, shoot or discharge any sling, slingshot, wrist slingshot or wrist supported slingshot of any type or kind within the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, persons on private property may, with permission of the owner or tenant of the premises, shoot or discharge a sling,
slingshot, wrist slingshot or wrist supported slingshot; provided, that the projectile does not travel beyond the boundaries of such property. (2000 Code
§ 41.11)
5-4B-12: TRAPS:
No person shall set, use or maintain any snare, pitfall, deadfall, spring gun, set gun, steel leg trap or any other trap within the city; provided, however,
that the owner or tenant of any private property may use a cage trap, box trap, mouse trap, rat trap or other small trap not dangerous to children on
such property to rid such property of vermin or pests. (2000 Code § 41.12)
5-4B-13: URINATION AND DEFECATION:
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including,
but not limited to, the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway or window thereof, or onto public or private land. (2000 Code § 41.13)
5-4B-14: EXTREME FIGHTING CONTESTS:
A person shall not hold, promote or participate in an extreme fighting contest within the city. For purposes of this section, "extreme fighting contest"
shall mean any amateur contest, in which a person delivers, or is not forbidden by the rules of such contest from delivering, kicks, punches or blows of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 108/439
any kind to the body of an opponent. Extreme fighting contests may also be described as "no holds barred", "no rules", "ultimate fighting", "extreme
fighting" or "shoot boxing". The term "extreme fighting contest" shall specifically exclude boxing, wrestling or martial arts, provided that such activities
are conducted before a licensed official or in accordance with official rules adopted by a nationally recognized organization. Any person violating this
section commits a simple misdemeanor. (2000 Code § 41.14)
5-4B-15: PSEUDOEPHEDRINE RESTRICTIONS:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 126.23A)
A. Product Sales Limited: A retailer shall not sell and a person shall not purchase in a single transaction more than two (2) packages containing
pseudoephedrine as the product's sole active ingredient.
B. Sale Behind Counter Or With Antitheft Device: Except as otherwise provided, a retailer who offers for sale a product containing pseudoephedrine as
the product's sole active ingredient shall display and offer such product for sale behind a counter where the public is not permitted or within twenty
feet (20') of a counter which allows the attendant to view the products in an unobstructed manner. A retailer may display or offer for sale without
restriction a product containing pseudoephedrine as the sole active ingredient if the product is displayed using any type of antitheft device system,
including, but not limited to, an electronic antitheft device system that utilizes a product tag and detection alarm which prevents the theft of the
product.
C. Posting Notice: A retailer shall post a notice at the location where a product containing pseudoephedrine as its sole active ingredient is displayed or
offered for sale stating the following:
Iowa law prohibits the sale or purchase of more than two (2) packages containing pseudoephedrine as the sole active ingredient.
D. Exceptions: The provisions of this section do not apply to:
1. Any package of a product containing pseudoephedrine as the product's sole active ingredient which is in liquid form.
2. Any package of a product containing pseudoephedrine as the product's sole active ingredient which is primarily intended for administration to
children under twelve (12) years of age according to the label, regardless of whether the product is in liquid or solid form.
3. Any package of a product containing pseudoephedrine as the product's sole active ingredient that the board of pharmacy examiners, with the
concurrence of the department of public safety, upon application of a manufacturer, exempts from this section because the product is formulated
to effectively prevent conversion of the active ingredient into methamphetamine or its salts or precursors.
E. Violation; Penalty: An employee of a retailer who sells or a person who purchases pseudoephedrine in violation of subsection A of this section
commits a simple misdemeanor, punishable in an amount equal to a scheduled violation under section 805.8C(4a) of the code of Iowa. If a citation
is issued for a violation of subsection A of this section, the citation shall be issued to both the employee and the purchaser. For each violation of
subsection A, B or C of this section by a retailer, the retailer shall be assessed an amount equal to a scheduled fine under section 805.8C(4b) of
the code of Iowa, which is a civil penalty. (2000 Code § 41.15)
5-4B-16: RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX OFFENDERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 919, 8-6-2009)
5-4B-17: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this article or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 41.17)
ARTICLE C. PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
5-4C-1: TRESPASSING:
A. Prohibition; Definition: It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the property of another. As used in this section, the term "property"
includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent structure whether publicly or privately owned. The term
"trespass" means one (1) or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 716.7 and 716.8)
1. Entering Property Without Permission: Entering upon or in property without the express permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful
possession with the intent to commit a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or therein anything
animate or inanimate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
2. Entering Or Remaining On Property: Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification after being notified or requested to abstain
from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by any police officer, Magistrate, or public
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 109/439
employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
3. Interfering With Lawful Use Of Property: Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with the lawful use of
the property by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2c])
4. Using Property Without Permission: Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or
placing thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful
possession.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2d])
B. Exception: None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal
property which has accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that the person
retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property. Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway is not an
offense under this section. (2000 Code § 42.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7(3))
5-4C-2: DEFACING PUBLIC GROUNDS:
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to cut, break or deface any tree or shrub on public property or on any public way by wilfully defacing, cutting,
breaking or injuring. (2000 Code § 42.02)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 364.1 and 364.12[2])
5-4C-3: INJURING NEW PAVEMENT:
It is unlawful for a person to injure new pavement in any street, alley or sidewalk by wilfully driving, walking or making marks on such pavement before
it is ready for use. (2000 Code § 42.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
5-4C-4: DESTROYING PARK EQUIPMENT:
It is unlawful for a person to destroy or injure any property or equipment in public swimming pools, playgrounds or parks by wilfully defacing, breaking,
damaging, mutilating or cutting. (2000 Code § 42.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
5-4C-5: DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES:
It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy, in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of the
United States or the state, or any proclamation, advertisement or notification, set up at any place within the city by authority of the law or by order of
any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up. (2000 Code § 42.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
5-4C-6: INJURY TO FIRE APPARATUS:
It is unlawful for a person wilfully to destroy or injure any engine, hose, hook and ladder truck, or other thing used and kept for extinguishment of fires.
(2000 Code § 42.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
5-4C-7: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
It is unlawful to deface, injure, write upon or make marks or drawings on any part of any property located within the city without the consent of the
owner. (2000 Code § 42.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
5-4C-8: OBSTRUCTING DRAINAGE:
It is unlawful to divert, obstruct, impede, or fill up, without legal authority, any ditch, drain, or watercourse, or to break down any levee lawfully
established, constructed or maintained. (2000 Code § 42.08)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
5-4C-9: CRIMINAL MISCHIEF:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 110/439
It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally damage, deface, alter or destroy tangible property. (2000 Code § 42.09)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
5-4C-10: FRAUD:
It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in section 714.8 of the code of Iowa. (2000 Code § 42.10)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
5-4C-11: THEFT:
It is unlawful for any person to commit theft. A person commits theft when the person does any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
A. Takes possession or control of the property of another, or property in the possession of another, with the intent to deprive the other thereof.
B. Misappropriates property which the person has in trust, or property of another which the person has in the person's possession or control, whether
such possession or control is lawful or unlawful, by using or disposing of it in a manner which is inconsistent with or a denial of the trust or of the
owner's rights in such property, or conceals found property, or appropriates such property to the person's own use, when the owner of such
property is known to the person.
C. Obtains the labor or services of another, or a transfer of possession, control, or ownership of the property of another, or the beneficial use of
property of another, by deception.
D. Exercises control over stolen property, knowing such property to have been stolen, or having reasonable cause to believe that such property has
been stolen, unless the person's purpose is to promptly restore it to the owner or to deliver it to an appropriate public officer.
E. Takes, destroys, conceals or disposes of property in which someone else has a security interest, with intent to defraud the secured party.
F. Makes, utters, draws, delivers, or gives any check, share draft, draft, or written order on any bank, credit union, person or corporation, and obtains
property or service in exchange therefor, if the person knows that such check, share draft, draft or written order will not be paid when presented.
G. Obtains gas, electricity or water from a public utility or obtains cable television or telephone service from an unauthorized connection to the supply
or service line or by intentionally altering, adjusting, removing or tampering with the metering or service device so as to cause inaccurate readings.
H. Any act that is declared to be theft by any provision of the Code of Iowa. (2000 Code § 42.11)
5-4C-12: UNAUTHORIZED COMPUTER ACCESS:
It is unlawful for a person to knowingly and without authorization access a computer, computer system or computer network. (2000 Code § 42.13)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.6B)
5-4C-13: STANDING, LOITERING, AND OBSTRUCTING PERSONS:
A. With the exception of persons authorized to use the public right-of-way pursuant to title 7, "Public Ways And Property", of this Code, no person shall
congregate, stand, climb upon, lay upon, loaf, or loiter upon any street, bridge, trail, or crossing so as to obstruct the street, bridge, trail, or
crossing, or hinder or prevent persons passing or attempting or desiring to pass thereon.
B. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a Municipal infraction or a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 1045, 7-13-2017)
5-4C-14: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this article or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 42.12; amd. Ord. 1045, 7-13-2017)
ARTICLE D. OFFENSES INVOLVING DRUGS AND ALCOHOL
5-4D-1: MARIJUANA AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 111/439
A. Possession Of Marijuana: It is unlawful for any person, knowingly or intentionally, to possess marijuana as defined in chapter 124 of the code of
Iowa unless same was obtained directly from or pursuant to a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of said
practitioner's professional practice or as otherwise authorized by chapter 124 of the code of Iowa. (2000 Code § 43.01)
B. Controlled Substance Defined: The term "controlled substance", as used in this section, is defined as the term "controlled substance" is defined in
the uniform controlled substance act, chapter 124 of the code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended. (2000 Code § 43.02)
C. Drug Paraphernalia Defined: The term "drug paraphernalia", as used in this section, means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the uniform controlled substances act, chapter 124 of the code of
Iowa. It includes, but is not limited to:
1. Growing Kits: Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant
which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
2. Processing Kits: Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or
preparing controlled substances.
3. Isomerization Devices: Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance.
4. Testing Equipment: Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or
purity of controlled substances.
5. Scales: Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
6. Diluents: Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances.
7. Separators; Sifters: Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining, marijuana.
8. Mixing Devices: Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
9. Containers: Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
10. Storage Containers: Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
11. Injecting Devices: Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body.
12. Ingesting/Inhaling Device: Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana,
cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
a. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal
bowls;
b. Water pipes;
c. Carburetion tubes and devices;
d. Smoking and carburetion masks;
e. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held
in the hand;
f. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
g. Chamber pipes;
h. Carburetor pipes;
i. Electric pipes;
j. Air driven pipes;
k. Chillums;
l. Bongs;
m. Ice pipes or chillers. (2000 Code § 43.03)
D. Determining Factors: In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, for the purpose of enforcing this section, the following factors should
be considered in addition to all other logically relevant factors:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 112/439
1. Statements: Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use.
2. Prior Convictions: Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object under any state or federal law relating to any
controlled substance.
3. Proximity To Violation: The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the uniform controlled substance act, chapter 124 of
the code of Iowa.
4. Proximity To Substances: The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
5. Residue: The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
6. Evidence Of Intent: Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons who he
or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the uniform controlled substances act, chapter 124 of
the code of Iowa.
7. Innocence Of An Owner: The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the uniform controlled
substances act, chapter 124 of the code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug
paraphernalia.
8. Instructions: Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.
9. Descriptive Materials: Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use.
10. Advertising: National and local advertising concerning its use.
11. Displayed: The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
12. Licensed Distributor Or Dealer: Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
13. Sales Ratios: Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
14. Legitimate Uses: The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
15. Expert Testimony: Expert testimony concerning its use. (2000 Code § 43.04)
E. Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia: It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia, to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the uniform controlled substance act, chapter 124
of the code of Iowa. (2000 Code § 43.05)
F. Manufacture, Delivery Or Offering For Sale: It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, manufacture with intent to deliver,
or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably
should know that it will be used, or knowing that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of the uniform controlled substances act, chapter 124 of the code of Iowa. (2000 Code § 43.06)
G. Penalty: Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this section for any particular provision or subsection, any person violating any provision
of this section or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 43.07)
5-4D-2: ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION:
A. Persons Under Legal Age: As used in this section, "legal age" means twenty one (21) years of age or more.
1. A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in their
possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine or beer given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with
the knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a
physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine, and
beer during the regular course of the person's employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under state laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
2. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person's age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic
beverage, wine or beer from any licensee or permittee. (2000 Code § 45.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
B. Public Consumption Or Intoxication:
1. Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
ARREST: The same as defined in section 804.5 of the code of Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to section 232.19 of the code of
Iowa.
CHEMICAL TEST: A test of a person's blood, breath, or urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using devices
and methods approved by the commissioner of public safety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 113/439
POLICE OFFICER: The same as defined in section 801.4 of the code of Iowa.
SCHOOL: A public or private school or that portion of a public or private school which provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten through
grade twelve.
2. Possession And Consumption Restricted: A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the public streets or highways.
A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall not
possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine or beer on public school property or while attending any public or private school related function. A
person shall not be intoxicated or simulate intoxication in a public place.
3. Arrest For Public Intoxication: When a police officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication under this section, the police officer shall
inform the person that the person may have a chemical test administered at the person's own expense. If a device approved by the
commissioner of public safety for testing a sample of a person's breath to determine the person's blood alcohol concentration is available, that is
the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test
performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person's blood, breath,
or urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two (2) hours after the person's arrest on a charge of public intoxication is
presumed to be the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest. (2000 Code § 45.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
C. Open Containers In Motor Vehicles: See section 6-2-16 of this code. (2000 Code § 45.03)
D. Penalty: Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this section for any particular provision or subsection, any person violating any provision of
this section or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 45.04)
Chapter 5
MINORS
5-5-1: MINORS IN CERTAIN ESTABLISHMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of age (a "minor") or a person or club holding a liquor control license, wine permit or beer
permit issued in accordance with the provisions of chapter 123 of the code of Iowa, or such person's or club's agents or employees (collectively
"licensee") or the licensee's agents or employees to permit or allow a minor to remain upon the licensed premises unless one or more of the following
exceptions applies:
A. Over fifty percent (50%) of the dollar volume of the business establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods and nonalcoholic
beverages or from the sale of athletic and fitness club memberships; or
B. The minor is an employee of the license holder, or is performing a contracted service with respect to said license holder, and is on the licensed
premises during his or her scheduled work hours; or
C. The licensed premises is an events center. The term "events center" as used herein shall mean: 1) a facility with a capacity to seat five hundred
(500) or more persons, 2) which does not have any regular business hours, and 3) which is open exclusively for special events, such as sporting
events, musical events, weddings, private parties, banquets and similar activities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, at any public event at an events
center in which any minor is in attendance, the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be subject to the following restrictions: 1) the alcoholic beverages
shall be served only in a specially designated bar area or areas, which are physically separated from the remainder of the premises in a manner
reasonably acceptable to the chief of police; 2) only persons who are twenty one (21) years of age or over shall be admitted to the specially
designated bar area; 3) persons who are twenty one (21) years of age or over shall receive some form of physical identification, such as a
distinctive stamp or a wristband, which identifies their ability to consume alcoholic beverages; 4) no shots shall be served in the specially
designated area; and 5) a person shall not be able to leave the specially designated area with any alcoholic beverages. A "public event" is defined
as an event in which the general public is solicited to attend; or
D. The minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, who is twenty one (21) years of age or over; or
E. The license or permit has been issued for an outdoor community event or festival sponsored by a nonprofit entity to which the public is invited,
subject, however, to such restrictions as may be imposed by the city to determine whether a person in attendance is twenty one (21) years of age
or older; or
F. The licensee is a grocery, convenience store or pharmacy.
Violations of this section by a licensee may constitute a municipal infraction, subject to civil penalty as set forth in this code and may be considered
as grounds for suspension or revocation of the licensee's license or permit.
The licensee qualifying in subsection A of this section based upon satisfying certain revenue requirements shall submit certification to the city clerk
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 114/439
upon the clerk's request providing evidence that the applicable percentage requirements set forth above have been satisfied for the preceding year.
(Ord. 992, 10-16-2014)
5-5-2: FALSE ID:
It is unlawful for any person under legal age to present any false identification or to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or
attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage or beer, or to obtain unlawful admission to any business establishment. (2000 Code § 46.02)
5-5-3: CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO:
It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to smoke, use, possess, purchase or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products
or cigarettes. Possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by a person under eighteen (18) years of age shall not constitute a violation of this section
if said person possesses the cigarettes or tobacco products as part of the person's employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under chapter 453A of the code of Iowa and lawfully offers for sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products. (2000 Code § 46.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
5-5-4: CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY:
It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under eighteen (18) years of age to commit any act of delinquency. (2000 Code § 46.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
5-5-5: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 46.05)
Chapter 6
NUISANCES; ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
INOPERABLE CONDITION: A vehicle that: a) has a missing or defective part that is necessary for normal operation; or b) is on blocks, jacks or other
supports; or c) does not have a current license for operation on a public roadway.
JUNK: All refuse; rubbish; old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other nonferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances;
iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly
stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
JUNK VEHICLE: A motor vehicle which is in inoperable condition and is: a) partially dismantled; or b) is being used for sale of parts or as a source of
repair or replacement parts; or c) which is being kept for scrapping or salvage. Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the
finding that the vehicle is a "junk vehicle".
MOTOR VEHICLE: A "motor vehicle" as defined in chapter 321 of the code of Iowa, including motorized bicycles, motorcycles and all terrain vehicles.
NUISANCE: Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as
essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. (2000 Code § 50.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
5-6-2: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
A. Specific Nuisances: The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions which are deemed to be nuisances in the city:
1. Offensive Smells: Erecting, continuing or using any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort
or property of individuals or the public.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[1])
2. Filth Or Noisome Substance: Causing or suffering any offal, filth or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice
of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[2])
3. Air Pollution: Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[10])
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 115/439
4. Sanitary Sewer Facilities: Facilities for the storage or processing of sewage, such as privies, vaults, sewers, private drains, septic tanks,
cesspools and drain fields, which have failed or do not function properly or which are overflowing, leaking or emanating odors. Septic tanks,
cisterns and cesspools which are abandoned or no longer in use, unless they are emptied and filled in accordance with applicable laws,
ordinances or regulations. Any vault, cesspool or septic tank which does not comply with the Polk County or Dallas County department of health
regulations.
5. Water Pollution: Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[4])
6. Impeding Passage Of Rivers Or Streams: Obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of any rivers, streams, harbor or collection
of water.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[3])
7. Blocking Public And Private Ways: Obstructing or encumbering, by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys,
commons, landing places or burying grounds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[5])
8. Dense Growth Of Weeds, Vines, Brush And Other Vegetation: Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush or other vegetation in the city so as to
constitute a health, safety or fire hazard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[11])
9. Grasses And Weeds: Grasses and weeds on any developed lot that are allowed to grow to a height greater than ten inches (10"), grasses and
weeds on any undeveloped lot that are allowed to grow to a height greater than fifteen inches (15") and any growth of noxious weeds as defined
in the code of Iowa. This subsection does not apply to grasses grown as agricultural crops on undeveloped property or to grasses growing in an
area declared by the city council to be a natural woodlands area. For land zoned RE residential estate zoning classification, this subsection does
not apply to grasses grown on the portion of a lot zoned RE that does not contain the residence or the yard associated with the residence,
including grasses grown on such lots for agricultural purposes such as pastureland.
10. Dutch Elm Disease: Trees infected with Dutch elm disease.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[12])
11. Junk: Any junk stored outside on public or private property.
12. Storing Of Flammable Junk: Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in
such articles within the corporate limits of the city.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[9])
13. Vermin Harborage: Conditions which are conducive to the harborage or breeding of vermin.
14. Dilapidated Buildings: Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such
an unsafe or unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof or any building or structure defined as
a dangerous building in the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings.
15. Billboards: Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether erected and constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and
impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render
dangerous the use thereof. (See also section 6-2-12 of this code.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[7])
16. Houses Of Ill Fame: Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by chapter 723A of the code of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled
substances, as defined in section 124.101 of the code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches
of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[6])
17. Businesses: Businesses, the operation or maintenance of which adversely impacts nearby residential, commercial or industrial uses and which:
a. Jeopardizes or endangers the public health or safety, or the health or safety of persons residing or working on the premises or in the
surrounding area;
b. Has resulted in or facilitated any of the following activities: disturbances of the peace, illegal drug activity including sales or possession thereof,
public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults,
batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, illegal parking, excessive noise (particularly between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.),
noxious smells or fumes, traffic violations, or police detention, citations or arrests; or
c. Violates any other subsection of this section or any other city, state, or federal regulation, ordinance or statute.
B. Other Nuisances: Noncompliance with the conditions listed in sections 5-6-3 through 5-6-6 of this chapter is also declared to be a nuisance. (2000
Code § 50.02)
5-6-3: BUILDING MAINTENANCE:
Every building shall be maintained to be free from excessively peeling paint or other conditions suggestive of deterioration or inadequate maintenance.
Exterior surfaces shall not have any holes or broken glass; loose, cracked or damaged shingles or siding; or other defects in the exterior finish which
admit rain, cold air, dampness, rodents, insects or vermin. Basements, cellars and crawl spaces shall be free of standing water and hazards. All wood,
including floorboards, subfloors, joists, bridging, roof rafters and sheathing, and all other wood in any interior or exterior floor, wall, roof or other part of
the structure, shall be maintained to be free of cracks affecting structural integrity, termite damage, infestation or rot. Any and all damaged or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 116/439
deteriorating materials shall be replaced. If infestation exists in any basement, cellar or crawl space, such infestation shall be remedied in accordance
with industry standards. (2000 Code § 50.03)
5-6-4: HOUSEHOLD GOODS AND MACHINERY:
No furniture, household furnishings, appliances or other such items not designed for outside use, and no machinery, implements or other such
equipment which is in an inoperable condition, including component parts thereof, shall be stored or kept outside for a period of more than twenty four
(24) hours on any premises in a residential area, excluding the week prior to the annual spring cleanup program. (2000 Code § 50.04)
5-6-5: CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS:
Operable machinery, equipment and materials being used for construction purposes, including pipes, lumber, forms, dirt, sand and sod, shall not be
stored or kept in the open, except:
A. For use in the ordinary course of business as the inventory or asset of a contractor, supplier or government subdivision; or
B. On the job site of a project in progress for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days after construction has been completed or a separate certificate of
occupancy has been issued, whichever occurs first. (2000 Code § 50.05)
5-6-6: JUNK VEHICLES:
No junk vehicles shall be parked or stored outside for a period of more than twenty four (24) hours on private property. The provisions of this section
do not apply to any junk vehicle stored within:
A. Building: A garage or other enclosed building; or
B. Salvage Yard: An auto salvage yard or junkyard lawfully operated within the city. (2000 Code § 50.06)
5-6-7: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or
state law. (2000 Code § 50.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
5-6-8: NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
Whenever the mayor, city manager or other authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such officer shall cause to be served upon the
property owner a written notice to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time after notice. (2000 Code § 50.08)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5-6-9: NOTICE TO ABATE; CONTENTS:
The notice to abate shall contain:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
A. Description Of Nuisance: A description of what constitutes the nuisance.
B. Location Of Nuisance: The location of the nuisance.
C. Acts Necessary To Abate: A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance.
D. Reasonable Time: A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement.
E. Assessment Of City Costs: A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time
prescribed, the city will abate it and assess the costs against such person. (2000 Code § 50.09)
F. Request For Hearing: A statement that a hearing before the council may be requested by the person ordered to abate the nuisance to determine
whether a nuisance exists. The request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the clerk within the time stated in the notice to abate.
(Ord. 860, 9-7-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 117/439
5-6-10: METHOD OF SERVICE:
The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or sent by certified mail to the property owner. (2000 Code § 50.10)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5-6-11: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing must be made in
writing and delivered to the clerk within the time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as
ordered. The hearing will be before the council at a time and place fixed by the council. The findings of the council shall be conclusive and, if a
nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the circumstances. (2000 Code § 50.11)
5-6-12: FAILURE TO ABATE:
Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified
in the notice to abate is in violation of this code. (2000 Code § 50.12)
5-6-13: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the city may perform the required action to abate, keeping
an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall be filed with the clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the
city. (2000 Code § 50.13)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5-6-14: COLLECTION OF COSTS:
The clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred by regular mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and
if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within ten (10) business days after the mailing of such statement, the clerk shall certify the
costs to the county treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general property taxes. (Ord. 916, 7-16-2009)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5-6-15: INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT:
If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), the city shall permit the assessment to be paid in
up to ten (10) annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited
property under state law. (2000 Code § 50.15)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
5-6-16: ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY:
If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the city may perform any action
which may be required under this chapter without prior notice. The city shall assess the costs as provided in section 5-6-14 of this chapter after notice
to the property owner under the applicable provisions of sections 5-6-8, 5-6-9, and 5-6-10 of this chapter, and hearing as provided in section 5-6-11 of
this chapter. (2000 Code § 50.16)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5-6-17: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (2000 Code § 50.17)
Chapter 7
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL1
5-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 118/439
ANIMAL: A nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
AT LARGE: Found within the city upon any street, alley, sidewalk, public or private grounds. A dog, properly licensed as required by law, is not deemed
to be at large if:
A. It is on the premises of the owner; or
B. It is under the control of a person competent to restrain and control the dog, either by leash, cord, chain or other similar restraint or properly
restrained within a motor vehicle; or
C. It is properly housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel; or
D. It is accompanied by or at "heel" beside and obedient to the commands of the owner or a competent responsible person.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any dog is deemed at large at any time when attacking persons or domestic animals,
destroying property, or on a public school ground except when under restraint as set out in subsections B and D of this definition. Further, any
female dog in heat is deemed at large at any time when not under restraint as set out in subsections A and C of this definition.
CAT: Means and includes both male and female animals of the feline species.
DOG: Means and includes both male and female animals of the canine species.
KENNEL: Any business premises on which four (4) or more dogs, or four (4) or more cats, six (6) months old or older, are kept or raised solely for the
bona fide purpose of sale and which are kept under constant restraint.
LICENSED CAT: Any cat bearing a currently valid license under section 5-7-2 of this chapter.
LICENSED DOG: Any dog bearing a currently valid license under section 5-7-2 of this chapter.
LIVESTOCK: An animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine, ovine or porcine species; farm deer, as defined in section 481A.1 of the code of
Iowa; ostriches, rheas, emus or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
OWNER: Any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an animal.
PET SHOP: Any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding animals of any species, except the operation of a kennel,
agricultural or wildlife pursuits. (2000 Code § 55.01)
5-7-2: LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS:
A. Annual License Required: The owner of all dogs and cats six (6) months of age or older, shall annually obtain a license as hereinafter provided. It
shall be unlawful for any owner to have a dog or cat within the city without obtaining a license as required herein.
B. Applications: The owner of a dog or cat, for which a license is required, shall on or before April 30 of each year apply to the city clerk or designee for
a license for each dog or cat owned. Applications may be made at any time immediately following the possession of the dog or cat, or at such time
said dog or cat has reached the age of six (6) months. Applications for licenses shall state the breed, sex, age, color, markings, and name, if any, of
the dog or cat, and the name, address, and telephone number of the owner. A certificate from a licensed veterinarian must accompany all
applications claiming an animal has been spayed or neutered.
C. License Fee: The amount of the annual license fee for dogs and cats shall be established by resolution approved by the city council, subject to the
following provisions:
1. The owner of a certified service animal who applies for a dog or cat license may qualify for a waiver of the annual license fee.
2. If the owner of a dog or cat acquires the animal less than six (6) months prior to the expiration date of the license for that period, the license fee
shall be reduced fifty percent (50%) and the full regular license fee as herein provided shall henceforth be in effect the following calendar year.
D. Delinquency; Late Fee Penalty: All license fees for dogs and cats become delinquent on May 1 of the year in which they are due and payable, and
a late fee penalty shall be added to each unpaid license on and after said date. The late fee penalty schedule shall be established by resolution
approved by the city council.
E. Issuance Of License; Evidence Of Vaccination; Dangerous Dog Insurance:
1. The city clerk or designee shall issue dog and cat licenses when properly applied for and shall require evidence of rabies vaccination as herein
provided. The rabies vaccination required shall be an injection of antirabies vaccine approved by the state department of agriculture and land
stewardship, and the frequency of revaccination necessary for approved vaccinations shall be established by that state department. The vaccine
shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian and shall be given as approved by the state department of agriculture and land stewardship. The
veterinarian shall issue a tag with the certificate of vaccination, and the tag shall at all times be attached to the collar of the dog or cat. (Ord. 957,
1-19-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 119/439
2. The owner of a "dangerous dog" as defined in section 5-7A-1 of this chapter shall, at the time of procuring a license under this subsection,
provide to the city clerk an insurance policy or a certificate of insurance in compliance with the requirements of subsection 5-7A-6A of this
chapter. (Ord. 961, 3-15-2012)
F. Submission Of Rabies Vaccination Certificates By Veterinarians: Each veterinarian within the city limits shall forward to the city clerk or designee by
the tenth day of each month a copy of each certificate of rabies vaccination issued by the veterinarian during the preceding month. Each certificate
of vaccination shall be typed or printed so as to be clearly legible.
G. Transfer Or Chance Of Ownership: When the permanent ownership of a dog or cat is transferred and the animal remains within the city limits, the
new owner shall be required to apply for a new license as herein provided. The new owner shall have thirty (30) calendar days in which to obtain
the new license.
H. Duration Of License: All licenses shall expire on April 30 of the year following the date of issuance.
I. Exceptions To License Requirements: The requirements for licensing dogs and cats shall not apply in the following circumstances:
1. The animal is in transit through the city only.
2. The first thirty (30) calendar days of residency in the city by the owner, or the first thirty (30) calendar days the owner has owned the animal.
3. The animal has been temporarily housed in a veterinary hospital, an animal grooming shop, an established licensed kennel, or an accredited
institution for research.
J. License Tag; Use Of Tag: The city clerk or designee shall, upon receipt of application, payment of license fee, proof of rabies vaccination and other
necessary required evidence, deliver or mail to the applicant a license which shall be in the form of a metal, permanent tag. The license tag shall
be attached by the owner to the dog's or cat's collar and shall be kept on the dog or cat for which the license was issued at all times.
K. Tag Not Transferable: A license tag issued for one animal shall not be transferable to another animal. A license issued by another city partnering
with this city in a consolidated animal licensing agreement shall be honored when a resident moves from that city to this city with the same dog or
cat.
L. Duplicate Tag: Upon the filing of a written statement that the license tag has been lost or destroyed, the owner may obtain another tag upon
payment of the required license replacement fee, which shall be established by resolution approved by the city council. (Ord. 957, 1-19-2012)
5-7-3: ANIMAL AND LIVESTOCK NEGLECT:
A. Animals: It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in any place, an animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during
confinement with a sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined dog or cat with adequate shelter, or to torture, deprive of
necessary sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any means which causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering. (2000 Code § 55.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
B. Livestock: It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with
customary animal husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance or to injure or destroy livestock by any means which
causes pain or suffering in a manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices. (2000 Code § 55.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
5-7-4: ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS:
A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another
person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound. (2000 Code § 55.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
5-7-5: KEEPING LIVESTOCK:
It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the city except by written consent of the council or except in compliance with the city's zoning
regulations. (2000 Code § 55.05)
5-7-6: AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any owner to allow dogs, cats, cattle, horses, swine, sheep, chickens or other similar animals or fowl to run at large within the
corporate limits of the city. Any such animal or fowl at large may be impounded. The penalty for violation of this section is twenty five dollars ($25.00)
for the first offense within any one year period, fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second offense within any one year period, and seventy dollars ($70.00) for
the third offense, and each offense thereafter, within any one year period. (2000 Code § 55.06)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 120/439
5-7-7: DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE:
It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or
interference with, the premises. (2000 Code § 55.07)
5-7-8: ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE:
It is unlawful for the owner of a dog, or any person or kennel in possession of a dog, to allow or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or
disturbance to any person or persons by frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise; or, by running after or chasing persons,
bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles. (Ord. 898, 10-16-2008)
5-7-9: RABIES VACCINATION:
Every owner of a dog or cat which is six (6) months of age or over shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It is unlawful for any owner to own
or have a dog or cat in said person's possession within the city which is six (6) months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies.
(2000 Code § 55.09)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
5-7-10: DUTY TO REPORT ANIMAL BITING OR ATTACKING PERSON:
It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other animal which has bitten or attacked a person, or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack,
to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the
existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies. (2000 Code § 55.10)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
5-7-11: CONFINEMENT WHEN RABIES SUSPECTED:
When a local board of health receives information that any person has been bitten by an animal or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies,
it shall order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall
be apprehended and impounded by such board or its agent, and, after ten (10) days, the board or its agent may humanely destroy the animal. If such
animal is returned to its owner, the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment and care. (Ord. 1028, 2-9-2017)
5-7-12: NUMBER OF ANIMALS AND FOWL LIMITED:
A. Dogs, Cats And Livestock: Not more than four (4) dogs or cats or combinations thereof over the age of six (6) months shall be kept by any person
on any premises in the city except in bona fide kennels or pet shops. Not more than two (2) of any one or combination of horses, cattle, or other
bovine animals, sheep, goats or swine shall be kept by any person on any parcel of less than five (5) acres in area. (2000 Code § 55.12)
B. Fowl: Not more than twelve (12) of any one or any combination of poultry, pigeons or other fowl shall be kept by any person or persons on any
parcel of land less than one and one-half (11/2) acres in area. (2000 Code § 55.13)
5-7-13: SLAUGHTERING RESTRICTED:
No person shall slaughter any horse, bovine animal, sheep, goat or swine on any parcel of land less than five (5) acres in area, for any commercial or
personal use, other than as otherwise permitted by this code. (2000 Code § 55.14)
5-7-14: GRAZING AND FEEDING:
On any parcel of land less than five (5) acres in area, no grazing or feeding shall be permitted, nor any structure or enclosure for housing, feeding or
caring for horses, cattle or other bovine animals, sheep, goats, swine, poultry or other fowl, except pigeons, shall be located, within one hundred fifty
feet (150') from any human habitation or within fifty feet (50') of the property line of the parcel of land upon which such animals are kept. (2000 Code
§ 55.15)
5-7-15: REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person to place any dead animal in any street or other public place in the city or to allow any dead animal which said person
owned, or of which said person had control, to remain in any street or other public place or on the premises of any person within the city for more than
five (5) hours. Should an animal die in any street or other public place or on the premises of any person within the city, then the person who owned or
had possession and control of the animal prior to its death shall remove or cause to be removed the carcass within five (5) hours after the time the
animal dies, and have the same desiccated or cremated. Should any person violate the provisions of this section by failing to remove or cause to be
removed said carcass within said time and have the same desiccated or cremated, the city may cause such carcass to be removed and have the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 121/439
same desiccated or cremated and said person shall make payment to the city in the amount of thirty five dollars ($35.00) as a fee therefor. (2000 Code
§ 55.16)
5-7-16: IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS:
A. Contract For Impounding: The city may enter into a contract with any health department or any public or private agency or organization for the use
of its facilities for the restraining and impounding of dogs, cats, or other animals, for assisting in the collection of unlicensed dogs and cats, and for
the destruction or disposition of such animals as provided by ordinance or law. All animals so impounded shall be given humane care. (2000 Code
§ 55.17)
B. Notice Of Impounding: It is the duty of the police department to give notice to the owner of any animal impounded if such owner's name and
address appear on the animal's collar or if such owner is otherwise known. (2000 Code § 55.18)
C. Period For Keeping Dogs And Cats: All dogs and cats impounded that do not have a current license, collar or similar identification shall be kept for
not less than four (4) days after being impounded, unless sooner redeemed by the owner in accordance with this chapter. All dogs and cats
impounded that have a current license, collar or similar identification shall be kept for not less than seven (7) days after being impounded, unless
sooner redeemed by the owner in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 912, 4-2-2009)
D. Redemption Of Animals: The owner of any dog, cat, or other animal shall pay impoundment, pick up, and disposal fees to the city. The amounts of
the fees shall be established by resolution approved by the city council. (Ord. 957, 1-19-2012)
E. Disposition Of Animals: At the expiration of seven (7) days' impoundment, an unredeemed dog, cat or other animal, if not being held for
observation, at the discretion of the poundkeeper, may be humanely destroyed, or may be sold to a new owner. At the expiration of the observation
period, an unredeemed dog, cat or other animal being held for observation, at the discretion of the poundkeeper, may be humanely destroyed or
may be sold to a new owner. (2000 Code § 55.22)
5-7-17: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter are simple misdemeanors and may also be punishable as municipal infractions. Police officers, animal control officers, code
enforcement officers and the police chief's designees shall have the authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter, and shall have the
discretion to enforce this chapter as either a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction. (Ord. 957, 1-19-2012)
ARTICLE A. DANGEROUS DOGS AND OTHER DANGEROUS ANIMALS
5-7A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this article, the following terms are defined:
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: A. Means:
1. Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which is of a wild nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious
injury upon or causing disease among human beings; and
2. The following animals, which are deemed to be dangerous animals per se:
a. Wolves, coyotes and foxes;
b. Badgers, wolverines, weasels, mink and other Mustelids;
c. Bats;
d. Bears;
e. Gila monsters, and lizards that are venomous or poisonous;
f. All apes (including chimpanzees), baboons, and macaques;
g. Monkeys, except the squirrel monkey;
h. Elephants;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 122/439
i. Wild boar;
j. Black widow and brown recluse spiders and scorpions;
k. Snakes which are naturally venomous or poisonous;
l. Snakes which are constricting and exceeding six feet (6') in length;
m. All cats, except domestic cats (Carnivora of the family Felidae, including, but not limited to, lions, cougars, tigers, jaguars, leopards, lynx,
ocelots, bobcats, etc.); and
n. Raccoons, opossums, and skunks.
B. Dangerous animals shall not include dangerous dogs as defined in this section or potentially dangerous dogs as defined in this section.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that:
A. Causes a serious injury to a person or domestic animal; or
B. Has been designated as a potentially dangerous dog and engages in behavior that poses a threat to public safety as defined in this section or
"serious injury" as defined in this section.
IMPOUND: Taken into the custody under the direction of Clive police department.
OWNER: Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having control or custody
of a dog.
PET SAFETY COURSE: A course preapproved by the chief of police or his designee consisting of, but not limited to, instruction in safe management
of dogs.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: A dog that may reasonably be assumed to pose a threat to public safety as demonstrated by any of the following
behaviors:
A. Causing an injury to a person or domestic animal on public or private property that is less severe than a serious injury;
B. Without provocation, chases or approaches a person, a domestic animal or a wheeled conveyance upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or
private property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, causing injury or
otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals;
C. Running at large and impounded or owner cited by police department two (2) or more times for running at large within any twelve (12) month
period; or
D. Acts in a highly aggressive manner within a fenced yard/enclosure and appears to a reasonable person able to jump over or escape.
PROPER ENCLOSURE: "Proper enclosure" of potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs requires:
A. Potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs must be securely confined within an occupied house or residence or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or kennel, except when leashed as provided in this article. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top
attached to the sides or, in lieu of a top, walls at least six feet (6') in height and at least six feet (6') taller than any internal structure.
B. All pens or other structures designed, constructed or used to confine potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs must be locked with a key or
combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom, floor or foundation attached to the sides
of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet (2') so as to prevent digging under the walls by the
confined potentially dangerous or dangerous dog.
C. Any structures erected must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such structures must be adequately lighted and
ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No potentially dangerous or dangerous dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of
a house or structure that would allow the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog to exit such building on its own volition.
PROVOCATION: The threat, injury or damage caused by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a wilful trespass or
other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or was committing or attempting to
commit a crime.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 123/439
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person at least eighteen (18) years old who is able to keep the dog under complete control at all times.
SERIOUS INJURY: Any physical injury to a human being inflicted by a dog demonstrating an intent to harm resulting in a major fracture, muscle tears
or disfiguring lacerations or lacerations requiring multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery. (Ord. 865, 7-19-2007)
5-7A-2: ANIMAL REVIEW BOARD; APPEALS:
A. Board Created; Purpose: An animal review board is hereby created for the sole purpose of hearing and deciding administrative appeals regarding
dangerous animals, potentially dangerous dogs or dangerous dogs, according to the procedure set forth in this chapter. The animal review board
shall consist of the following three (3) persons: the city manager, and two (2) members of the council, to be appointed annually by the mayor.
B. Filing Of Appeal: In order to appeal an order to remove a dangerous animal or a determination that a dog is a potentially dangerous dog or
dangerous dog, written notice of appeal must be filed with the city clerk within three (3) days after receipt of the order or written determination.
Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal the order or determination of the chief of police.
C. Serving Notice; Hearing; Determination: The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by
certified mail to the city clerk. The hearing by the animal review board of such appeal shall be scheduled within seven (7) days of the receipt of
notice of appeal. After such hearing, the animal review board may affirm or reverse the order or determination of the chief of police. Such
determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with the city clerk within three (3) days after the hearing, or any continued
session thereof. The written decision shall immediately be served upon the person or entity against whom rendered in the same manner as the
order or determination of the chief of police. (Ord. 865, 7-19-2007)
5-7A-3: KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
No person shall keep, shelter or harbor any dangerous animal or act as a custodian for such animal, or keep such animal for any purpose or in any
capacity within the city except in the following circumstances:
A. The keeping of dangerous animals in a public zoo, bona fide educational or medical institution, humane society or museum where they are kept as
live specimens for the public to view or for the purpose of instruction, research or study.
B. The keeping of dangerous animals for exhibition to the public by a circus, carnival, exhibit or show where such circus, carnival, exhibit or show is of
a traveling nature, is displayed before large assemblages of people and maintains any and all required federal or state licenses.
C. The keeping of dangerous animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary hospital for treatment.
D. The keeping of dangerous animals by a wildlife rescue organization with appropriate permit from the state department of natural resources.
E. Any dangerous animals under the jurisdiction of and in the possession of the Iowa department of natural resources, pursuant to chapters 481A and
48IB of the code of Iowa. (Ord. 865, 7-19-2007)
5-7A-4: SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
A. City Authority To Destroy: In the event that a dangerous animal is found at large and unattended upon public property, park property, public right of
way or the property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to persons or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the
chief of police, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The city shall be under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a
dangerous animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction.
B. Investigation; Order Of Police Chief: Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal in
the city, the chief of police shall cause the matter to be investigated, and if after investigation, the facts indicate that such person is keeping,
sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal in the city, the chief of police shall order such person to safely remove such animal from the city, and
permanently place the animal with an organization or group allowed under section 5-7A-3 of this article to possess dangerous animals, or destroy
the animal, within three (3) days of the receipt of such order. Such order shall be contained in a notice to remove the dangerous animal, which
notice shall be given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering or harboring the dangerous animal, and shall be served personally or by certified
mail. Such order and notice to remove the dangerous animal shall not be required where the dangerous animal has previously caused serious
physical harm or death to any person, in which case, the chief of police shall cause the animal to be immediately seized and impounded or killed if
seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person.
C. Right To Appeal; Seizure Of Animal: The order to remove a dangerous animal, issued by the chief of police, may be appealed to the animal review
board as set forth in section 5-7A-2 of this article. If the animal review board affirms the action of the chief of police, the board shall order in its
written decision that the individual or entity owning, sheltering, harboring, or keeping such dangerous animal, remove such animal from the city,
permanently place such animal with an organization or group allowed under section 5-7A-3 of this article to possess dangerous animals, or destroy
it. If the original order of the chief of police is not appealed and is not complied with within three (3) days, or if the order of the animal review board
after appeal is not complied with within three (3) days of its issuance, the chief of police is authorized to seize and impound such dangerous
animal. An animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If at the end of the impoundment period, the individual or entity
against whom the decision and order of the animal review board was issued has not petitioned the Iowa district court for a review of said order, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 124/439
city shall cause the animal to be disposed of by sale, permanently place such animal with an organization or group allowed under section 5-7A-3 of
this article to possess dangerous animals, or destroy such animal in a humane manner. Failure to comply with an order of the city issued pursuant
hereto shall constitute a serious misdemeanor offense, punishable pursuant to this code. (Ord. 865, 7-19-2007)
5-7A-5: DETERMINATION OF POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG OR DANGEROUS DOG:
A. Determination Of Potentially Dangerous Dog:
1. After an investigation, which must be initiated within three (3) days after the situation becomes known to Clive police department, the chief of
police or his designee is authorized to make a determination whether a dog is potentially dangerous based on the factors listed in section 5-7A-1
of this article, definition of "potentially dangerous dog", and shall notify the owner of the dog in writing by certified mail or hand delivery with
signature of that status within five (5) days after the completion of the investigation.
2. Following attempted notice to the owner, if the chief of police or his designee has probable cause to believe that a dog is a potentially dangerous
dog and may pose a threat to public safety, the chief of police or his designee may obtain a search warrant pursuant to Iowa rules of civil
procedure and arrange for the impounding of the dog pending disposition of the case or until the dog owner has fulfilled the requirements of
section 5-7A-6 of this article. The owner of the dog shall be liable to the city for the costs of impounding and keeping the dog.
3. Upon notice, the owner may, within three (3) days after a determination that a dog is a potentially dangerous dog, appeal the determination to
the animal review board as set forth in section 5-7A-2 of this article. A decision by the animal review board overturning the determination of the
chief of police or his designee shall not affect the right of the chief of police or his designee to later declare a dog to be a potentially dangerous
dog or a dangerous dog, or to determine that the dog poses a threat to public safety, based on the dog's subsequent behavior.
B. Determination Of Dangerous Dog:
1. After an investigation, which must be initiated within three (3) days after the situation becomes known to the Clive police department, the chief of
police is authorized to make a determination whether a dog is dangerous based on the factors listed in section 5-7A-1 of this article, definition of
"dangerous dog", and shall notify the owner of the dog in writing by certified mail with signature or hand delivery of that status within five (5) days
after completing the investigation.
2. Following attempted notice to the owner and prior to the hearing, if chief of police or his designee has probable cause and believes the dog to be
a dangerous dog and that the animal poses an imminent threat to public safety, law enforcement, the chief of police or his designee may obtain a
search warrant pursuant to Iowa rules of civil procedure and impound the dog pending disposition of the case or until the dog owner has fulfilled
the requirements of section 5-7A-6 of this article. The owner of the dog shall be liable to the city for the costs of impounding and keeping the dog
if the dog is determined to be a dangerous dog.
3. The owner may, within three (3) days after a determination that a dog is a dangerous dog, appeal the determination to the animal review board
as set forth in section 5-7A-2 of this article. A decision by the animal review board overturning the chief of police's or his designee's
determination shall not affect the right of the chief of police or his designee to later declare a dog to be a dangerous dog or to determine that the
dog poses a threat to public safety based on the dog's subsequent behavior.
C. Exceptions To Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Dog Determination: No dog shall be declared a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog if:
1. The dog was used by a law enforcement or military official for legitimate law enforcement or military purposes;
2. The threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person:
a. Who was committing, at the time, a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises lawfully occupied by the owner of the dog; or
b. Who was provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or who can be shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented,
abused, or assaulted the dog; or
c. Who was committing or attempting to commit a crime; or
3. The dog was:
a. Responding to pain or injury or protecting its offspring; or
b. Protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an attack or assault.
D. Consequences Of Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Dog Determination:
1. If the chief of police or his designee determines that a dog is a potentially dangerous dog under subsection A of this section, the owner shall
comply with the requirements for proper enclosure under section 5-7A-1 of this article, definition of "proper enclosure", and for registration and
handling under subsection 5-7A-6A of this article, special security or care requirements which are reasonable.
2. If the chief of police or his designee determines that a dog is a dangerous dog under subsection A of this section, the owner shall comply with
the requirements for proper enclosure under section 5-7A-1 of this article, definition of "proper enclosure", and for registration and handling under
subsections 5-7A-6B and C of this article and any other special security or care requirements which are reasonable.
3. The chief of police or his designee may require impoundment of the dog if the owner is unable or unwilling to comply with the requirements of
subsection 5-7A-6A of this article until the owner of the dog has satisfied all the requirements of the certificate of registration holding permit. The
requirements must be met within thirty (30) days. If, after thirty (30) days, the owner has not satisfied all the requirements of the holding permit,
the animal may be humanely euthanized on the thirty first day. The owner of the dog shall be liable to the city for the costs of impounding and
keeping the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog whether or not they reclaim the dog. (Ord. 865, 7-19-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 125/439
5-7A-6: REGISTRATION AND HANDLING REQUIREMENTS FOR DANGEROUS DOGS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS
DOGS:
A. Requirements For Issuance Of Certificate Of Registration And Pet License: The city clerk, at the direction of the chief of police or his designee, shall
issue a certificate of registration and a valid city pet license to the owner of a potentially dangerous dog if the owner establishes to the satisfaction
of the chief of police or his designee that:
1. The owner of the potentially dangerous dog is eighteen (18) years of age or older;
2. The owner of the potentially dangerous dog shall present a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in
this state, providing personal liability insurance coverage as in a homeowner's policy, with a minimum liability amount of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) for the injury or death of any person, for damage to property of others and for acts of negligence by the owner or his or her
agents, in the keeping or owning of such potentially dangerous dog. The certificate shall require notice to the city, in conformity with general city
standards for certificates of insurance, if the underlying policy of insurance is cancelled for any reason. In lieu of such a certificate, a copy of a
current homeowner's policy designating these requirements shall be sufficient proof of insurance for purposes of this subsection. If a certificate of
insurance or policy is not immediately available, a binder indicating the coverage may be accepted for up to thirty (30) days subsequent to the
determination that a dog is potentially dangerous; however, if after thirty (30) days a certificate of insurance or a policy has not been submitted,
the dog shall be deemed unlicensed and subject to immediate impoundment or humane euthanasia at the owner's expense;
3. The potentially dangerous dog has a current rabies vaccination at the owner's expense;
4. The owner has a proper enclosure to prevent the entry of any person or animal and the escape of said "potentially dangerous dog" as defined in
section 5-7A-1 of this article;
5. The potentially dangerous dog has been spayed or neutered at the owner's expense;
6. The potentially dangerous dog has been implanted with a microchip containing owner identification information at the owner's expense. The
microchip information must be registered with the chief of police;
7. The potentially dangerous dog has been photographed for identification purposes;
8. The potentially dangerous dog owner shall satisfactorily complete a pet safety course preapproved by the chief of police or his designee at the
dog owner's expense; and
9. The owner of the potentially dangerous dog has written permission of the property owner or homeowner's association where the dangerous dog
will be kept, if applicable.
B. Confinement Of Animal; Warning Posted: The city clerk, at the direction of the chief of police or his designee, shall issue a certificate of registration
to the owner of a dangerous dog if the owner, in addition to satisfying the requirements for registration of a potentially dangerous dog pursuant to
subsection A of this section, establishes to the satisfaction of the chief of police or his designee that:
1. The owner will maintain the dangerous dog exclusively on the owner's property except for medical treatment or examination; and
2. The owner of the dangerous dog has posted on the premises a clearly visible written warning sign that there is a dangerous dog on the property
with a conspicuous warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog. The sign shall be very visible from the public
roadway or fifty feet (50'), whichever is less.
C. Impoundment Or Destruction Of Animal Authorized: The chief of police or his designee may order the immediate impoundment or humane
euthanasia of a dangerous dog if the owner fails to abide by the conditions for registration or confinement or handling of a dangerous or potentially
dangerous dog.
D. Review Of Prior Determination: If any dog previously determined to be a potentially dangerous dog has not exhibited any of the behaviors specified
for a potentially dangerous dog, as set forth in section 5-7A-1 of this article, definition of "potentially dangerous dog", within twelve (12) months
since the date of the potentially dangerous dog determination, then that dog is eligible for a review of the determination with the potential for lifting
the requirements of this article; provided, however, then that same dog may again be declared a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog if it again
exhibits any of the specified behaviors. Such a review shall be completed by the animal review board. (Ord. 865, 7-19-2007)
5-7A-7: OWNER RESPONSIBILITY FOR DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS:
It shall be unlawful to:
A. Keep a dog determined to be dangerous or potentially dangerous without a valid certificate of registration issued under section 5-7A-6 of this article.
B. Permit a potentially dangerous dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the potentially dangerous dog is under the control of a "responsible
person" as defined in section 5-7A-1 of this article, muzzled, and restrained by a substantial lead not exceeding six feet (6') in length. The muzzle
shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or obscure its vision or interfere with its respiration but shall prevent it from biting
any human being or animal.
C. Fail to maintain a dangerous dog exclusively on the owner's property as required except for medical treatment or examination. When removed from
the owner's property for medical treatment or examination, the dangerous dog shall be caged or under the control of a responsible person, muzzled
and restrained with a substantial lead not exceeding six feet (6') in length. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the
dog or obscure its vision or interfere with its respiration but shall prevent it from biting any human being or animal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 126/439
D. Permit a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash. Such dogs may not be leashed to inanimate
objects such as trees, posts, buildings, or any other object or structure.
E. Fail to notify the chief of police or his designee immediately in person or by telephone upon escape if a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is
on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another domestic animal, or has attacked a human being.
F. Fail to notify the Clive police department within seventy two (72) hours (3 days) with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of
the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog if the dog has been sold or has been given away to an owner inside or outside the jurisdiction; and if
requested by the chief of police or his designee, the owner must execute an affidavit under oath setting forth the complete name, address, and
telephone number of the person to whom the dog has been transferred.
G. Fail to notify the Clive police department within seventy two (72) hours (3 days) of a change of address or telephone number by the owner of the
dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
H. Fail to notify the Clive police department within seventy two (72) hours (3 days) if the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog has died; and if
requested by the chief of police or his designee, the owner must execute an affidavit under oath setting forth the circumstances of the dog's death.
I. Fail to surrender a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to the Clive police department to arrange for safe confinement pending a disposition of
the case when there is a reason to believe that the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog poses an imminent threat to public safety.
J. Fail to comply with any reasonable special security or care requirements for a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the chief of police or his
designee may have established pursuant to the finding that the dog was potentially dangerous or dangerous. (Ord. 865, 7-19-2007)
5-7A-8: PENALTIES:
A. An owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog who violates the provisions of sections 5-7A-6 and 5-7A-7 of this article shall be guilty of a
serious misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to
exceed ninety (90) days, or both, for a first offense and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90)
days, or both, for a second offense.
B. An owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog that causes serious injury to or kills a human being without provocation shall be fined up to
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
C. Civil fines, penalties, and fees may be imposed as alternative sanctions for any infraction of the provisions of this act, or the rules issued under
authority of this article. (Ord. 865, 7-19-2007)
ARTICLE B. BOW HUNTING IN DESIGNATED URBAN DEER MANAGEMENT ZONE
5-7B-1: DESIGNATION OF URBAN DEER MANAGEMENT ZONE:
The Iowa department of natural resources (DNR) has determined an area within the city limits in which there is an overabundance of deer, and the
area has been designated by the DNR to be the recommended urban deer management area. The parks and recreation board and the city council
shall annually review the recommended urban deer management area provided by the DNR. The parks and recreation board shall annually
recommend to the city council a designated urban deer management zone within the city's Greenbelt Park, and the city council may annually adopt a
designated urban deer management zone within the city's Greenbelt Park. (2000 Code § 58.01)
5-7B-2: HUNTING BY LICENSED BOW HUNTERS:
No person shall engage in any hunting activity within the city's corporate limits using a rifle, shotgun, bow and arrow or any other means, either on
public or private property, except licensed bow hunters may hunt deer in the designated urban deer management zone (DMZ) as specifically set forth
herein:
A. Dates And Hours: Bow hunting in the DMZ shall be restricted to the dates and hours established annually by the city council.
B. Number Of Permits: The annual number of permits issued for the DMZ shall be fixed by the city manager or his/her designee.
C. Application For Permit; Conditions: All hunters participating in the program must apply for and receive a Clive DMZ hunting permit ("Clive permit")
from the Clive parks and recreation department. Permits are valid for one hunting season. In order to receive the permit, a hunter must present a
valid state of Iowa special urban deer license and present proof of the following:
1. Successful completion of a onetime bow hunter safety education course approved by the International Bowhunter Education Foundation (IBEF).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 127/439
2. Successful completion of an authorized archery proficiency test using the bow with which the hunter proposes to hunt. The test must be taken at
a National Field Archery Association approved indoor lane and administered by a certified IBEF instructor. Testing must be performed under
rules approved by the Polk County deer management task force. The proficiency test must be successfully completed each hunting season.
D. Compliance With Procedures, Regulations: All hunters hunting under a Clive permit shall follow all procedures and regulations established by the
DNR applicable to deer hunting and special deer management zones. In addition, hunters shall abide by the following requirements:
1. Hunters must meet with the city's hunter coordinator to review the rules and boundaries of the DMZ prior to hunting.
2. All hunters must check in with the city's parks and recreation department prior to entering the DMZ to hunt, and must check out with the city's
parks and recreation department following access to the DMZ to hunt.
3. All shots must be made from an elevated stand and shall not be made in excess of twenty five (25) yards from the hunter's location. An elevated
stand must be a minimum height of at least six (6) vertical feet off the ground in an artificial or erected stand, or a natural growth, to ensure that
the hunter's body is not in contact with the ground and to ensure a downward thrust of the arrow released by bow hunting.
4. Elevated stands shall be portable, and no screw-in steps shall be allowed.
5. Elevated stands shall be located not less than two hundred feet (200') from a residence or residential building, one hundred fifty feet (150') from
a building in an industrial district and shall be located not less than seventy five feet (75') from any recreational trail, road or highway. Stands
shall be located in such a manner as to place the hunter's back toward the nearest building, recreational trail, road or highway when the hunter is
in a position to shoot.
6. Any hunter shall carry a bow in a case while traveling to and from the elevated stand site.
7. A hunter shall not dispose of deer entrails in a conspicuous place on public property.
8. All deer taken shall be processed for meat or the meat given to charity.
9. State law requires hunters to recover a wounded animal. If a hunter wounds a deer and is unable to locate the deer, the hunter shall report this
to the Clive parks and recreation department during regular business hours.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 481A.137)
10. While engaged in bow hunting, the hunter shall carry all necessary state, county and city hunting licenses and permits.
11. Hunters shall report the harvesting of a deer under a Clive permit to the Clive parks and recreation department under policies promulgated by
the Clive parks and recreation department.
12. All hunters must wear blaze orange clothing compliant with Iowa Code section 481A.122 while in the DMZ and while traveling to and from the
elevated stand site in the DMZ.
13. A hunter may not harvest more than three (3) deer in a single day under a Clive permit. A state license shall be required for each deer.
14. If it is necessary to cross private property to access the DMZ, permission must be obtained by the hunter from the property owner who has
agreed to allow access.
15. Hunters must remove themselves from any harassment situation and immediately report the incident to the Clive parks and recreation
department or the Clive police department.
16. The Clive parks and recreation department, upon review and approval of the Clive parks board, may promulgate additional regulations, not
inconsistent with this section, to administer this program and ensure the safety of the public. (Ord. 979, 8-29-2013)
5-7B-3: PENALTY:
Failure of a hunter to comply with city and/or state regulations may subject the hunter to revocation of his or her Clive permit and the city of Clive shall
report all incidences of noncompliance to the Polk County deer task force. Any person violating any provision of this article or any rule or regulation
adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed
thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 58.03)
ARTICLE C. FEEDING DEER PROHIBITED
5-7C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect the public's health, safety and general welfare and the general welfare of the deer by prohibiting residents of the
city from intentionally feeding deer for the following reasons:
A. Intentionally feeding deer creates an increased risk of spreading disease among the deer herd because the deer are concentrated in one place as a
result of intentionally feeding, which promotes contact between a sick animal and a higher number of healthy animals.
B. Intentionally feeding deer creates an increased chance of exposure for people and pets to deer ticks that carry Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi).
C. Intentional feeding of deer leads to reduced fear of humans in the deer, which leads to increased property damage caused by the deer, car/deer
accidents, and other concerns. (Ord. 923, 2-4-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 128/439
5-7C-2: PROHIBITION:
A. No person shall place or allow any feeding device or any fruit, grain, mineral, plant, salt, vegetable, or other material to be placed outdoors on any
public or private property for the purpose of attracting or feeding deer. Pursuant to this chapter, a rebuttable presumption is created that the
placement of fruit, grain, mineral, plant, salt, vegetable, or other materials ("feed materials") in a drop feeder, deer feeder kit, automatic feeder, or
similar device ("feeding device") regardless of the height of the fruit, grain, mineral, plant, salt, vegetable, or other material is for the purpose of
feeding deer.
B. Each property owner or occupant of the property shall have the duty to remove any feed materials placed on the owner's property in violation of this
article. Failure to remove feed materials within twenty four (24) hours after notice from the city shall constitute a violation of this article.
C. Each property owner or occupant of the property shall have the duty to remove any feeding device placed on the owner's property to which deer are
attracted or from which deer actually feed. Alternatively, a property owner or occupant may modify a feeding device or make other changes to the
property that prevent deer from having access to or feeding from the feeding device. Failure to remove such a feeding device or to make such
modifications within twenty four (24) hours after notice from the city shall constitute a violation of this article. (Ord. 923, 2-4-2010)
5-7C-3: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Naturally Growing Materials: This article does not apply to naturally growing materials, including, but not limited to, fruit, grain, nuts, seeds, and
vegetables.
B. Planted Materials: This article does not apply to planted materials growing in gardens, as standing crops, or in a wildlife food plot.
C. Stored Crops: This article does not apply to stored crops, provided that the stored crop is not intentionally made available to deer.
D. Incidental Spills: This article does not apply to spills of seed materials intended for planting or to crop materials that have been harvested if the spills
are incidental to normal agricultural operations and such materials are not intentionally made available to deer. (Ord. 923, 2-4-2010)
5-7C-4: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty for a municipal infraction as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties
in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord.
923, 2-4-2010)
Chapter 8
NOISE CONTROL
5-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the control of noise pollution in the city thereby protecting the public's health, safety and
general welfare. (2000 Code § 48.01)
5-8-2: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
This chapter applies to the control of all noise originating within the limits of the city, except in the following cases:
A. A state or federal agency has adopted a different standard or rule than prescribed within this chapter which preempts the regulation of noise from a
particular source so as to render this chapter inapplicable; or
B. The council has determined that, by reason of public acceptance of the activity producing a particular noise or noises, such noise is deemed
acceptable to the residents of the city. (2000 Code § 48.02)
5-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms have the following meanings. Definitions of
technical terms used in this chapter which are not herein defined shall be obtained from publications of acoustical terminology issued by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI):
APPLICATION: The application submitted to the city requesting a noise permit.
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical or psychological trauma or property damage which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 129/439
demands immediate action.
EMERGENCY WORK: Any work performed for the purpose of alleviating or resolving an emergency.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor powered vehicle designed to carry at least one passenger or driver and of the type typically licensed for use on the
public highways. (Note: "Motor vehicle" includes most motorcycles.)
MOTORCYCLE: Any two (2) or three (3) wheeled motor vehicle.
NOISE: Any sound which disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: Those sounds defined as "sounds not allowed" in section 5-8-5 of this chapter.
PERSON: Unless used in such a manner to denote only a human being, any firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust or other association or entity, city, county or state government and subdivisions or agencies thereof, and the federal government and
subdivisions and agencies thereof.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLE: Any self-propelled, airborne, waterborne or landborne model plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry
persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The traveled portion of any street or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by the city or other governmental
entity.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY: An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by
one person from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property division.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any motor powered vehicle designed to carry at least one passenger or driver and equipped for use in racing or other
recreational events or uses off of public right of way on public or private property; except, however, for the purposes of this chapter, any such vehicle
which is licensed for use on the public highways is deemed a "motor vehicle" (or "motorcycle" if 2 or 3 wheeled) and not a "recreational vehicle".
(Examples of recreational vehicles are snowmobiles, minibikes, stockcars or motorboats.)
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Any property on which is located a building or structure used wholly or partially for living or sleeping purposes.
SOUND: An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause
compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and
frequency.
SOUND EQUIPMENT: Any loudspeaker, amplifier, or other device for producing, reproducing or amplifying sound; except, however, "sound
equipment" does not include sirens and other equipment used to alert persons to the existence of an emergency; equipment used by law enforcement
and other public safety officials in the performance of their official duties; church carillons, bells or chimes; mobile radio or telephone signaling devices;
or automobile and truck radios or players of recorded music used and intended for the use and enjoyment of the occupants of the vehicle, provided
that the sound emitted from the vehicle does not exceed seventy (70) dB(A) or eighty (80) dB(C) when measured at a distance of twenty five feet (25').
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument, including a microphone, amplifier, output meter and weighting networks, that is sensitive to pressure
fluctuations. The output meter reads sound pressure level in decibels when properly calibrated and the instrument is of type 2 or better as specified in
American National Standards Institute, USA standard specification for general purpose sound level meters (S1.4-1971), and preferred center
frequencies for acoustical measurements (S1.6-1960), or any subsequent nationally adopted standard superseding such standards. A "weighted
sound level" or "sound level" means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A weighting network. The
level so read shall be designated as dB(A) or dBA. C "weighted sound level" or "sound level" means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured
on a sound level meter using the C weighting network. The level so read shall be designated as dB(C) or dBC. "Decibel" means a logarithmic and
dimensionless unit of measure often used in describing the amplitude of sound and is denoted as dB.
WEEK NIGHT: The dates of the week Sunday through Thursday evening.
WEEKEND NIGHT: The dates of the week Friday and/or Saturday evening. (2000 Code § 48.03; amd. Ord. 1023, 10-13-2016)
5-8-4: NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully make, continue, cause or allow any noise disturbance within the city. (2000 Code § 48.04)
5-8-5: SOUNDS NOT ALLOWED:
A. Noise Disturbance Described: The term "noise disturbance" means any of the following sounds:
1. Alarm Testing: The sound emitted by the intentional sounding outdoors of any privately owned fire alarm, burglar alarm, siren, whistle, or similar
stationary emergency signaling device for the essential testing of such device, when conducted between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (2000 Code § 48.05)
2. Automobile Radios: The sound emitted by an automobile or truck radio, tape deck or compact disc player, or other such standard equipment
used and intended for the use and enjoyment of such vehicle's occupants while such vehicle is on the public right of way, provided that the sound
emitted from the vehicle does not exceed seventy (70) dB(A) or eighty (80) dB(C) when measured at a distance of twenty five feet (25'). (Ord.
1023, 10-13-2016)
3. Chain Saws: The sound emitted by motor powered tree trimming equipment operated between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 130/439
4. Construction Noise: The sound made by privately owned and operated tools or equipment in erection, demolition, excavation, drilling, or other
such construction work which is received between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. at the real property
boundary of residential property.
5. Engine Brake Noise: The sound made by an engine brake device of a diesel engine truck.
6. Engine Repairs And Testing: The sound made by the repairing, rebuilding, modifying, or testing a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle which is
received between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. at the real property boundary of residential property.
7. Injurious Or Disturbing Sounds Generally: Any sound which endangers or injures the health, safety, or welfare of a human being, disturbs a
reasonable human being of normal sensitivities, or causes or tends to cause, an adverse physiological or physical effect on human beings, or
devalues or injures property.
8. Lawn And Garden Equipment: The sound emitted by motor powered, muffler equipped lawn and garden equipment operated between the hours
of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
9. Loading And Unloading: The sound made by outdoor loading, unloading, opening, closing, or handling of boxes, crates, containers, building
materials, trash cans, containers, receptacles, and/or dumpsters which are received at the real property boundary of residential property between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
10. Musical Instruments: The sound made by a drum, horn, reed and/or string instrument, or other musical instrument or device which is received
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. at the real property boundary of residential property.
11. Noisy Exhaust System: The sound made by a motor vehicle or a recreational vehicle whose exhaust system is defective or has been modified
by the installation of a muffler cutout or bypass.
12. Off Road Motorcycle And Recreational Vehicle Noise: The sound made on private or city owned property other than a public right of way by a
motorcycle or recreational vehicle and received between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. at the real property
boundary of residential property, provided; however, the sound made by a motorcycle when traveling from private property to a public right of
way, or vice versa, in pursuance of normal ingress or egress for purposeful transportation is not a "noise disturbance" unless made so by some
provisions of this section.
13. Powered Model Vehicles: The sound made by the operation of a powered model vehicle which is received between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. at the real property boundary of residential property.
14. Racing: The sound made by a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle on private property or public right of way during any racing event or time
trial, whether organized or unorganized.
15. Screeching Tires: The sound made by the intentional screeching or squealing of the tires of a motor vehicle.
16. Selling By "Hawking" Or "Barking": The sound of selling by shout or outcry when made within the area of the city zoned residential or
commercial. (2000 Code § 48.05)
17. Sound Equipment: The sound made by sound equipment (see definition of "sound equipment" under section 5-8-3 of this chapter) operated
upon the public right of way, in any building or upon any public or private premises shall be classified as a noise disturbance if either: a) the
sound is in excess of the maximum permitted levels shown in the chart below when measured at the property boundary, or anywhere within the
property, of a receiving land use, or if in a park, approximately two hundred feet (200') from the source of the sound or, when a complaint is
received, at the nearest boundary of the property where the complaining party was disturbed; or b) the sound is of a nature that cannot
accurately be measured by a sound level meter, and such sound is disturbing to a reasonable human being of normal sensitivities.
MAXIMUM PERMITTED LEVELS
Receiving Land Use Maximum dB Permitted
Residential 60 dBA or 70 dBC between 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
50 dBA or 60 dBC between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
Commercial 70 dBA or 80 dBC
Industrial 75 dBA or 85 dBC
Park 60 dBA or 70 dBC
18. Wind Energy Systems: The sound made by wind energy systems shall be classified as a noise disturbance if either: a) the sound is in excess
of fifty five (55) dBA when measured at the property boundary at the nearest boundary of the property where the complaining party was disturbed
or anywhere within the property of a receiving use, or b) the sound is of a nature that cannot accurately be measured by a sound level meter, and
such sound is disturbing to a reasonable human being of normal sensitivities. (Ord. 1023, 10-13-2016)
B. Noise Permit: Sound in excess of the maximum permitted levels shall not be a noise disturbance if such sound is emitted in accordance with a
noise permit issued by the city. (2000 Code § 48.05)
5-8-6: MEASUREMENT OF NOISE AND SOUND:
The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards
Institute. The instruments shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. A calibration check shall be made of the system at the time of any
noise measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise source. The microphone shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 131/439
positioned so as not to create an unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used when
required. The measurement shall be an A or C weighted, slow response sound level. (Ord. 1023, 10-13-2016)
5-8-7: NOISE PERMIT FOR SOUND EQUIPMENT:
No person shall use, operate or cause to be used or operated any sound equipment upon the public right of way, in any building or upon any public or
private premises, if the sound is in excess of the maximum permitted levels under subsection 5-8-5A17 of this chapter when measured at the property
boundary, or anywhere within the property, of a receiving land use, or if in a park, approximately two hundred feet (200') from the source of the sound
or, when a complaint is received, at the nearest boundary of the property where the complaining party was disturbed, unless such person has obtained
a noise permit in accordance with this section, and the actual use or operation of such sound equipment is not inconsistent with statements made in
the application, the conditions imposed in the sound equipment permit or the limitations specified in subsection D of this section. Any person who
operates any sound equipment in violation of this section, and without obtaining a noise permit, shall be subject to having the event stopped or the
sound equipment turned off or reduced to a legal level. Such remedy shall be in addition to any other rights and remedies of the city. A noise permit
shall not be transferable, and it shall be conspicuously displayed on or adjacent to the sound equipment. (Ord. 1023, 10-13-2016)
A. Application For Permit: Applications for noise permits shall be made in writing to the city clerk or deputy city clerk and shall contain the following
information:
1. Name, address, phone number(s) and signature of applicant.
2. The purpose for which the sound equipment will be used.
3. The location where the sound equipment will be used.
4. The number of days of use and proposed hours of operation of the sound equipment.
5. A general description of the sound equipment, including the license number of any motor vehicle upon which it is to be operated.
6. Any other information as may be required by the city clerk or deputy city clerk.
B. Permit Fee:
1. A permit fee shall be paid by the applicant for the permit, with the amount of the fee determined in accordance with an established fee schedule,
which fee schedule may be modified from time to time with the approval of the council.
2. No fee is required for a noise permit issued to city, state or federal government or any governmental subdivision or agency thereof.
C. Issuance Of Permit:
1. Applications for noise permits shall be reviewed and then issued or denied by either the city clerk or his/her designee. The applicant may appeal
the denial of a noise permit by filing a written request for appeal with the city clerk or his/her designee, requesting that the denial of the
application for noise permit be reviewed by the city council at the council's next regularly scheduled meeting. The city shall consider the following
factors in connection with the issuance of a noise permit:
a. The location of the proposed event or source of the noise in relation to surrounding residences or businesses;
b. The time of day and day of the week for which the permit is requested. The city shall not issue a noise permit that extends after ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. on a week night or after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on a weekend night or on the night of a holiday, except in unusual
circumstances, for good cause shown and approval by the city council;
c. The duration of the activity for which the noise permit is requested;
d. Whether the applicant has misrepresented any information in past noise permits;
e. Whether the applicant has failed to comply with conditions set forth in prior noise permits that have been issued by the city;
f. Whether the applicant has had prior violations of the noise ordinance; and
g. Such other considerations as are advisable to protect the health, welfare and quality of life for the residents and businesses of the city.
2. No person or establishment may be granted a noise permit between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. more
often than three (3) times in any calendar year, except in unusual circumstances, for good cause shown and approval by the city council.
D. Limitations:
1. Any other language in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, a sound equipment permit shall not be issued if:
a. The sound to be emitted by the sound equipment is other than human speech or music.
b. The sound equipment is to be operated for commercial advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to any
building, structure or vehicle for monetary profit or for the purpose of advertising such sound equipment.
c. The sound to be emitted by the sound equipment would be a noise disturbance under section 5-8-5 of this chapter (other than subsection A17
of said section).
2. A noise permit issued in violation of this subsection is void and of no force and effect. (2000 Code § 48.07)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 132/439
E. Conditions:
1. When a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter, the sound levels listed in the following table shall be the maximum levels permitted when
measured at the edge of the city street, the alley right of way or the property line, whichever reasonably appears to be nearest to the source of
the sound, or if in a park, approximately two hundred feet (200') from the source of the sound:
Receiving Land Use Maximum dB Permitted
Residential 70 dBA or 80 dBC between 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
60 dBA or 70 dBC between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
Commercial 75 dBA or 85 dBC
Industrial 75 dBA or 85 dBC
Park 70 dBA or 80 dBC
2. When granting the permit, the council may impose lower sound level limits based upon the location and length of the proposed event for which
the permit is requested and the council or city staff may impose other reasonable conditions and requirements to be met or fulfilled by the noise
permit holder preliminary to or at the time of the use or operation of the sound equipment. Such conditions shall be those necessary or advisable
to protect the health, welfare and quality of life of the residents of the city and may include, without limitation, restrictions on the time of day the
sound equipment can be used or operated and restrictions on the length of time that the sound equipment may be used or operated. The permit
holder shall be responsible for monitoring the level of sound to ensure that the conditions of the permit are not violated. (Ord. 1023, 10-13-2016)
F. Noncompliance By Permittee; City Authority: Should the person holding a permit not attentively observe all limitations and restrictions found in this
chapter and in the noise permit, the city authorities shall be authorized to stop such permitted event or to turn the sound equipment off or reduce it
to the level authorized by the noise permit. (2000 Code § 48.07)
5-8-8: OTHER LAWS AND ORDINANCES:
No provisions of this chapter should be construed to legalize or permit sounds, devices or activities made unlawful by other ordinances of the city or
state or federal statutes. (2000 Code § 48.08)
5-8-9: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (2000 Code § 48.09)
Chapter 9
ALARM SYSTEMS
5-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have the respective meanings given herein:
ALARM COMPANY: A business providing among its services alarm sales, installation, service, monitoring or billing of alarm users or the service of
receiving on a continuous basis, through trained employees, emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter immediately relaying the message
by live voice to the emergency dispatch center or such other places as directed by the city.
ALARM REVIEW BOARD: A three (3) member committee comprised of one representative of the Clive police department, one representative of Clive
fire department and one resident selected and appointed by the mayor of Clive, to serve a four (4) year term. In the event a vacancy shall occur during
the term of any member, the successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term in the same manner as the original appointment. Those
members from the police and fire departments shall be appointed by each department's chief.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any device used to detect or prevent intrusion, criminal activity or other such emergency situation which, when activated, causes
notification to be made directly or indirectly to the police department or fire department, or any such device or system designed primarily for the
purpose of giving an audible or visual signal of an attempted intrusion, criminal activity, fire or other such emergency. An alarm system, for the purpose
of this chapter, does not include an alarm installed on a motor vehicle.
ALARM SYSTEM OPERATOR: An alarm user or other person using an alarm system.
ALARM USER: The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building who owns,
leases, installs or contracts for or otherwise obtains an alarm system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm company to monitor and/or service
the alarm device, or who owns or operates an alarm system.
BUILDING: Any single-family housing, multi-family dwelling, apartment, commercial business, school, church, religious facility, structure or place within
the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 133/439
CHIEF: The police chief and/or fire chief or designated representative who is authorized by the chief to exercise any power or duty conferred to the
chief under this chapter.
CITY: The city of Clive, Iowa.
COORDINATOR: An individual designated to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
FALSE ALARM: A. Any alarm signal that is activated by error or mistake, system malfunction, malicious misuse, or on purpose when an emergency
situation requiring a response did not exist at or about the time of the response. "False alarm" does not include unintentional activations.
1. Error Or Mistake: Any action by an alarm user or any action by an agent or employee of the alarm user or any other person in the building
which results in the activation of the alarm system when no emergency exists, and no attempt to cancel the alarm by contacting the 911 call
center was made.
2. System Malfunction: Any unintentional activation of an alarm system caused by a mechanical malfunction, flaw in the design, installation or
maintenance of the alarm system. This does not include any activation caused by extraordinary violent conditions of nature.
3. Malicious Misuse: Any intentional activation of an alarm system when no emergency exists.
4. Unintentional Activation: Any system activation that did not constitute an emergency, however the system operated properly based on
conditions or human actions at that time. (Examples include: smoke detector activation from burned food, children activating a pull station,
unintentional security system activation with prompt follow up to the 911 call center, or extraordinary violent conditions of nature.)
B. The burden of proving that such an alarm signal was not a false alarm shall be on the alarm user.
MONITORING: The process by which an alarm company or its designated alarm answering service receives signals from an alarm system and relays
an alarm dispatch request to the emergency dispatch center, or other places as directed by the city, for the purpose of summoning police and/or fire
personnel to the building. (2000 Code § 126.01)
5-9-2: PURPOSE:
It is the finding of the city council that false alarms seriously undermine the morale and safety of fire and police department personnel as well as
unnecessarily expose to danger the citizens of the city who encounter emergency vehicles responding to false alarms, result in a waste of city
resources, and result in citizens ignoring alarm system signals. The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations applicable to alarm systems and
to encourage the effective use of alarm systems. The most significant desired result of this chapter is to enhance public safety and more efficiently and
safely use city emergency response resources by reducing the number of false alarms received. (2000 Code § 126.02)
5-9-3: ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION:
A. Grace Period After Installation Of An Alarm System:
1. Upon the installation date of a new or replacement alarm system, a grace period of fourteen (14) calendar days will be allowed for the alarm user
and alarm system operators to become familiar with the operations of the alarm system and to make corrections to the operation of the alarm
system. Service charges for false alarms shall be waived during the grace period, provided the number of false alarms during the grace period is
not excessive. An excessive number of false alarms is:
a. Equal to three (3) or more false alarms in one calendar day or twenty four (24) hour period.
b. Equal to six (6) or more false alarms in the first fourteen (14) calendar days since installation of the alarm system.
2. The appropriate chief, or chief's designated representative, may waive the service charge fee for an excessive number of false alarms during the
grace period, at their discretion, due to extenuating circumstances as determined on a case by case review.
B. Excessive False Alarms; Service Charge Fees:
1. Because a false alarm for security, intrusion, robbery and other nonfire causes usually requires from one to three (3) police officers to respond in
individual vehicular units, depending on the type of alarm, and a false alarm for fire suppression or other firefighting incidents usually requires
multiple firefighters from the fire department to respond in multiple and specialized firefighting equipment, depending on the type of alarm, the
city shall assess a service charge fee to any alarm user that generates an unnecessary number of false alarm responses during a calendar year
as listed below ("false alarm fee"). The alarm user shall pay the city the assessed false alarm fee within twenty (20) days of the date an invoice is
given to the alarm user for any false alarm created by the alarm user's alarm system in accordance with the following schedule:
The first and second false alarms during a calendar year $ 0.00
The third false alarm during a calendar year 75.00
The fourth false alarm during a calendar year 100.00
The fifth false alarm and each false alarm thereafter during a calendar year 150.00
2. After the second false alarm, the alarm user shall receive a written notice from the chief. The notice shall require that by a specified date the
alarm user shall have his/her alarm system inspected by an alarm company and alarm user shall review operational procedures with the alarm
system operator and any other individuals having access to the use and operation of the alarm system. Notice or billing from the city to any alarm
user shall be deemed to have been given or rendered on the date such notice or billing is deposited in the U.S. mail, first class postage,
addressed to the alarm user at the address shown for the alarm user. The alarm user shall notify the applicable chief, in writing, after the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 134/439
inspection by the alarm company has been completed, and shall provide to the chief a copy of any report of service, repair or inspection of the
alarm system given by the alarm company. An alarm company providing an inspection or repair of an alarm system shall notify the chief in
advance of such service. The alarm company shall be assessed a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) by the city when the police department
and/or fire department respond to a false alarm and it is determined by the city that an on site employee of the alarm company directly caused
the false alarm. In such a circumstance, the false alarm shall not count against the alarm user.
C. Appeal Process For False Alarm Service Charges: An alarm user assessed a false alarm fee may appeal the false alarm fee in writing to the alarm
review board. The filing of an appeal with the alarm review board stays the assessment of the false alarm fee until the alarm review board makes a
final decision.
1. The alarm user shall file a written appeal to the alarm review board by setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten (10) days after receipt of
the false alarm fee invoice. The alarm review board will review relevant information, including conditions of nature for the date and time of the
occurrence of the false alarm. The alarm review board may reverse the assessment of the false alarm fee only if there was no false alarm or the
false alarm was not contributed to by the act(s) or omission(s) of the alarm user and/or the alarm user's family, pets, guests, employee(s) and/or
invitees.
2. The alarm review board shall notify the alarm user, the alarm company and the coordinator of its decision within five (5) working days. The
decision of the alarm review board is final as to administrative remedies of the city. (2000 Code § 126.03)
5-9-4: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The city shall not be liable for any defects in the operation of any alarm system, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an
alarm from such a source, for any failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation, operation, disconnection or removal of equipment,
the transmission of alarm signals or the relaying of such signals or messages. (2000 Code § 126.04)
5-9-5: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. Any person who
intentionally activates a false alarm shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor, which is punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) to five hundred
dollars ($500.00) and/or up to thirty (30) calendar days in jail. (2000 Code § 126.05)
Chapter 10
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
5-10-1: SCOPE:
This chapter shall apply to the release of hazardous substances and the notification, cleanup and recovery of costs associated with the mitigation of
hazardous conditions. (2000 Code § 36.01)
5-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, these words have the following meanings:
CLEANUP: The removal of the hazardous substances to a place where the waste will not cause any danger to persons or the environment, in
accordance with the state statutes, rules and regulations therefor, or the treatment of the material as defined herein to eliminate the hazardous
condition, including the restoration of the area to a general good appearance without noticeable odor as far as practicable. "Cleanup" includes all
actions necessary to contain, collect, identify, analyze, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a hazardous substance and to restore the site from which
such hazardous substance was cleaned up.
HAZARDOUS CONDITION: Any situation involving the actual, imminent or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance:
A. Within the city or onto city property located outside the city which, because of the quantity, strength and toxicity of the hazardous substance, its
mobility in the environment and its persistence, creates an immediate potential danger to the public health or safety; or
B. Onto land, into the waters within the state of Iowa or into the atmosphere, but outside the city, which, because of the quantity, strength and
toxicity of the hazardous substance, its mobility in the environment and its persistence, creates an immediate potential danger to the public
health or safety of persons or property within the city. "Hazardous condition" includes any accident involving hazardous materials required to be
reported under section 321.266(4) of the code of Iowa.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE: Any substance or mixture of substances that presents a danger to the public health or safety or environment and
includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an irritant or that, in confinement, generates pressure through
decomposition, heat, or other means. The following are examples of substances which, in sufficient quantity, may be hazardous: acids; alkalis;
explosives; fertilizers; heavy metals such as chromium, arsenic, mercury, lead and cadmium; industrial chemicals; paint thinners; paints; pesticides;
petroleum products; poisons; radioactive materials; sludges; and organic solvents. "Hazardous substance" includes any hazardous waste identified or
listed by the administrator of the United States environmental protection agency under the solid waste disposal act as amended by the resource
conservation and recovery act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under section 307 of the federal water pollution control act of 1976 as amended to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 135/439
January 1, 1977, or any hazardous substance designated under section 311 of the federal water pollution control act as amended to January 1, 1977,
or any hazardous material designated by the secretary of transportation under the hazardous materials transportation act, or any hazardous substance
listed under the comprehensive environmental response, compensation and liability act of 1980.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The person, whether the owner, agent, lessor or tenant, in charge of the hazardous substance being stored, processed or
handled, or the owner or bailee transporting hazardous wastes or substances whether on public ways or grounds or on private property where the spill
would cause danger to the public or to any person or to the environment.
TREATMENT: A method, technique, or process, including neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of a hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to render the substance nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery,
amenable for storage, or to reduce it in volume. "Treatment" includes any activity or processing designed to change the physical form or chemical
composition of a hazardous substance to render it nonhazardous. (2000 Code § 36.02)
5-10-3: NOTIFICATIONS:
When a hazardous condition is created, the responsible person shall notify the department of natural resources and the Clive fire department
immediately upon discovery of the condition but in no instance later than thirty (30) minutes after the discovery of the hazardous condition. The fire
chief, once notified of the hazardous condition, shall immediately notify the department of natural resources. (2000 Code § 36.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.386)
5-10-4: CLEANUP REQUIRED:
Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the
hazardous substance, or a constituent of the hazardous substance, may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters,
including ground waters, the fire chief or the chief's designee may remove or provide for the removal and disposal of the hazardous substance at any
time, unless the fire chief or the chief's designee determines such removal will be properly and promptly accomplished by the responsible person. If
the responsible party does not initiate and complete cleanup within the time designated by the fire department, the city may proceed to remedy the
hazardous condition by performing the necessary cleanup services. (2000 Code § 36.04)
5-10-5: LOSS, BURDEN OR COSTS:
A responsible person shall be liable to the city for all cleanup costs incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, fees payable by the city to any
public or private agency for assistance pursuant to any 28E agreement, local ordinance or emergency request of the city, for chemical damage, for
contamination of equipment, and for the use of consumable materials, but shall not be liable for those losses, burdens or costs normally associated
with response to fire emergencies which do not involve hazardous conditions. If charges for such cleanup costs are not paid within thirty (30) days
after invoice, the city may proceed to obtain payment by all legal means. A public or private agency providing assistance to the city pursuant to any
28E agreement, local ordinance or emergency request of the city may directly bill the responsible party for the fees for assistance provided in regard to
cleanup of a hazardous substance. The responsible party shall be responsible for the payment of such fees to same extent as if the fees were billed by
the city to the responsible party. (2000 Code § 36.05)
5-10-6: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 36.06)
Chapter 11
ROADSIDE SOLICITATION
5-11-1: PURPOSE:
A. The City Council does hereby find that:
1. It is the intent of the City Council by enacting this chapter to recognize free speech rights for all citizens while at the same time ensuring the
safety of all citizens on and along the public roadways within the City,
2. However, the City Council finds that certain types of actions directed at users of the public roadways in Clive and conducted in specific areas
within the City pose an increased safety risk for pedestrians and users of public roadways within the City, and
3. The City Council finds that the presence of solicitors in certain specific areas creates increased safety risks to pedestrians and users of public
roadways within the City, and
4. The City Council further finds that certain forms of solicitation impede the orderly flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic along and on the public
roadways within the City, and
5. This chapter is not intended to impermissibly limit an individual's right to exercise free speech with solicitation; rather it aims to impose specific
time, place, and manner restrictions on solicitation and associated conduct in certain limited circumstances and in certain locations, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 136/439
6. In promulgating this chapter, the City Council seeks to impose regulations that are narrowly tailored to serve the aforementioned significant
government interests. (Ord. 1066, 1-10-2019)
5-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
HICKMAN ROAD, UNIVERSITY AVENUE, AND RAMP TERMINAL ZONES: For the purpose of this chapter, means an area in the City of Clive, Iowa,
and Polk County, Iowa, comprised of the following:
Ramp terminal zones are the off ramp terminals located where Interstate 35-80 exits to and intersects with Hickman Road, and where Interstate
35-80 exits to and intersects with University Avenue, which would include the entire off ramp paved surface and the additional area consisting of
sixteen feet (16') from the edge of the paved surface;
Hickman Road zone means the area in the City of Clive, Iowa, one hundred fifty feet (150') east and west of the ramp terminal zone (area where
Interstate 35-80 intersects with Hickman Road) which would include the entire paved surface of Hickman Road and the additional area consisting
of sixteen feet (16') from the edge of the paved surface; and
University Avenue zone means the area in the City of Clive, Iowa, one hundred fifty feet (150') east and west of the ramp terminal zone (area
where Interstate 35-80 intersects with University Avenue) which would include the entire paved surface of University Avenue and the additional
area consisting of sixteen feet (16') from the edge of the paved surface.
PERSON: Means and includes both individual persons and organizations.
ROADSIDE SOLICITATION: For the purpose of this chapter, "roadside solicitation" is any communication made in person requesting action or inaction
by another person. For example, requesting an immediate donation of money or other thing of value would constitute roadside solicitation. Purchase of
an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a
donation, is a donation for the purpose of this chapter.
However, roadside solicitation does not include passively standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that one is seeking donations or other
action, without addressing any request to any specific person other than in response to an inquiry by that person, as long as said individual maintains
the distance set forth in the definition of Hickman Road, University Avenue, and ramp terminal zones. (Ord. 1066, 1-10-2019)
5-11-3: PLACE OF ROADSIDE SOLICITATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roadside solicitation when the person solicited is in any of the following places within the City limits of
Clive, Iowa:
A. In any vehicle on the street;
B. On public property in the "Hickman Road, University Avenue, and ramp terminal zones", as defined in section 5-11-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1066, 1-
10-2019)
5-11-4: PENALTIES:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
as provided for in this Code. (Ord. 1066, 1-10-2019)
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6-1-1: TITLE:
This title may be known and cited as the CLIVE TRAFFIC CODE. (2000 Code § 60.01)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Where words and phrases used in the traffic code are defined by state law, such definitions apply to their use in said traffic code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 137/439
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway when fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of
three hundred feet (300') or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty
percent (40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings
and buildings in use for business.
SCHOOL DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway for a distance of two hundred feet (200') in either direction from a
schoolhouse.
STAND OR STANDING: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
STOP: When required, the complete cessation of movement.
STOP OR STOPPING: When prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
SUBURBAN DISTRICT: All other parts of the city not included in the business, school or residence districts.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE: All signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this title, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of
regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley. (2000
Code § 60.02)
6-1-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
Provisions of this traffic code and state law relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the police chief. (2000 Code § 60.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
6-1-4: POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC:
A police officer, and, in the absence of a police officer, any officer of the fire department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws. (2000 Code § 60.04)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 102.4 and 321.236[2])
6-1-5: TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS; REPORTS:
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the city shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa department of
transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the city for the confidential use of police officers and shall be subject to the provisions of section
321.271 of the code of Iowa. (2000 Code § 60.05)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.273 and 321.274)
6-1-6: POLICE OFFICER'S AUTHORITY:
A police officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the driver's license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or other manifest of
employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such vehicle. A
police officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the vehicle. (2000
Code § 60.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
6-1-7: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or
regulate traffic. (2000 Code § 60.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
6-1-8: ARREST OR CITATION:
Whenever a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any provision of the traffic code, such officer may:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 138/439
A. Immediate Arrest: Immediately arrest such person and take such person before a local magistrate; or
B. Issue Citation: Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a uniform traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa commissioner
of public safety and deliver the original and a copy to the court where the defendant is to appear, two (2) copies to the defendant and retain the fifth
copy for the records of the city; or
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 805.6 and 321.485)
C. Notice To Appear; Promise To Appear: Proceed as provided in section 6-1-13 of this chapter; or
D. Simple Notice Of Fine: In the case of violations of chapter 4, "Parking Regulations", of this title, without arresting the person, prepare in triplicate a
simple notice of fine as provided herein. Deliver one copy thereof to the person so charged, or attach it to the vehicle parked in violation of such
chapter as provided in section 6-1-9 of this chapter, as a notice of violation and promise to appear; the original shall be sworn to by the police
officer as a complaint and filed in the office of either the clerk or the clerk of the district court in and for Polk County or Dallas County as the council
has by resolution appointed and directed pursuant to section 6-1-11 of this chapter; and another copy shall be delivered to and retained by the
police department for the records of the city. (2000 Code § 69.01)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 805.6, 805.8, 321.236, 321.485)
6-1-9: PARKING VIOLATIONS; VEHICLE UNATTENDED:
When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the traffic code, and the driver is not present, the simple notice of fine or citation as herein
provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. (2000 Code § 69.02)
6-1-10: PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING:
In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed
such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
A. Described Vehicle: The particular vehicle described in the information was parked in violation of the traffic code; and
B. Registered Owner: The defendant named in the information was the registered owner at the time in question. (2000 Code § 69.03)
6-1-11: SIMPLE NOTICE OF FINE:
A. Either the city clerk or the clerk of the district court in and for Polk County or Dallas County shall by resolution of the council be appointed and
directed to assume the duties and responsibilities connected with the collection of all fines for violations of chapter 4, "Parking Regulations", of this
title, which are charged pursuant to a simple notice of fine under subsection 6-1-8D of this chapter and are admitted and collected pursuant to this
section and for the administration and processing of those violations which are so charged, whether or not they are admitted and collected.
B. The city clerk shall provide to the police department sets of triplicate simple notices of fines for issuance pursuant to this chapter, each identified by
separate serial numbers on each copy of each notice.
C. Any person notified or summoned by a simple notice of fine provided for in this chapter who desires to enter a plea of guilty to any charge of
violating the parking regulations of this title as stated on the notice, may pay the penalty provided on the notice to the clerk of the district court in
and for Polk County or Dallas County or the city clerk, as the council has appointed and directed by resolution, prior to the designated date of
payment at any of the locations provided for such payment.
D. In the event that any person notified or summoned by a simple notice of fine wishes to admit the violation and pay the penalty provided on the
notice on or before the date designated for such payment pursuant to such notice, the city clerk or the clerk of the district court in and for Polk
County or Dallas County, as the council has appointed and directed by resolution, is hereby authorized and directed to receive the amount of such
fine on behalf of the city. (2000 Code § 69.04)
E. The clerk of the district court in and for Polk County or Dallas County or the city clerk, as the council has appointed and directed by resolution, shall
retain the copy of the notice until collection of the fine for an admitted violation. In the event that such fine is not paid prior to or on the date
designated in the notice, the city clerk or the clerk of the district court in and for Polk County or Dallas County shall deliver the notice to the clerk of
the district court in and for Polk County or Dallas County and such violation shall be filed with the court for purposes of the defendant's appearance
and trial, and such violation shall be prosecuted as any other traffic violation. (2000 Code § 69.04; amd. 2008 Code)
F. If any person notified by a simple notice of fine, as provided in this chapter, has not paid the fine prior to or on the date designated in the notice, but
has executed authority for the entry of a plea of guilty or has been found guilty of the violation, the clerk of the district court in and for Polk County
or Dallas County is hereby authorized and directed to receive the amount of the fine of the city as established by the court.
G. The clerk of the district court is authorized to destroy any simple notice of fine based upon violations of chapter 4 of this title at any time after the
same shall have been on file in the clerk's office for a period of more than three (3) years. (2000 Code § 69.04)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 139/439
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 805.3 and 321.236)
6-1-12: IMPOUNDING VEHICLES:
A. A police officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot, highway or privately
owned property or area developed as an off street parking facility to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the city, and to treat the vehicle as an "abandoned vehicle" pursuant to the provisions of sections 321.89 and 321.90 of the code of
Iowa under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
1. Disabled Vehicle: When a vehicle is upon a roadway and is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in
charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
2. Illegally Parked Vehicle: When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; or when any vehicle is a habitual violator under section 6-4-12 of this title; or when any vehicle is
and has been in violation of section 6-4-7 of this title for more than twenty four (24) hours and the owner, lessee or person in charge of the
privately owned property or facility has posted a sign or signs in a conspicuous location indicating that parking is prohibited except to customers
of the business located on the property or serviced by the facility and that vehicles found in violation will be towed away at the owner's expense.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
3. Snow Removal: When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on parking during snow removal operations.
4. Parked Over Twenty Four Hour Period: When any vehicle is left parked upon a street for a continuous period of twenty four (24) hours or more.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
B. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of the traffic
code shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage, as well as the fines associated with any outstanding parking tickets. (2000
Code § 69.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
6-1-13: NOTICE TO APPEAR; PROMISE TO APPEAR:
A. Whenever a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any provision of the traffic code or of chapter 321 of the code
of Iowa punishable as a simple, serious or aggravated misdemeanor, such officer may, without arresting the person, either:
1. Prepare a written citation to appear in court containing the name and address of such person, the nature of the offense, the operator or chauffeur
license number, if any, the registration number, if any, of his or her vehicle, the time when and place where such person shall appear in court and
the penalty for nonappearance; or
2. If the violation charged is of a provision of chapter 321 of the code of Iowa, prepare a memorandum of the alleged traffic violation containing the
name and address of such person, the registration number, if any, of his or her vehicle, the offense alleged to have been committed, and such
other information as may be prescribed by the commissioner of public safety with the concurrence of the director of transportation.
B. If the officer prepares either a citation or a memorandum as provided in this section, the alleged offender shall be requested to sign it. If the person
signs, the person may be released without arrest. In case a citation is issued, the signing shall constitute a written promise to appear as stated in
the citation. A copy of the citation shall be presented to the person named therein. The police officer issuing the citation shall cause to be filed a
complaint in the court in which the cited person is required to appear, as soon as practicable, charging the crime stated in the citation. If a
memorandum is prepared, the original shall be retained by the officer, and a copy shall be sent to the department, and a copy shall be presented to
the person named therein.
C. For preparing the summons or memorandum for a violation of chapter 321 of the code of Iowa, there shall be charged to the person named in the
summons or memorandum, upon conviction, a fee of two dollars ($2.00). The fee shall be assessed as part of the court costs.
D. The number of copies and the form of the citations and memorandums for violation of chapter 321 of the code of Iowa shall be as prescribed by the
commissioner of public safety with the concurrence of the director of transportation.
E. This section does not apply to a traffic offense which must be charged upon a uniform citation and complaint as provided in code of Iowa, section
805.6, and chapter 805 of the code of Iowa shall control such procedures. This section does not apply to violations of parking regulations charged
upon a simple notice of fine as provided in this code and in code of Iowa, sections 805.8 and 321.236, and this code shall control such procedures.
F. Any person receiving a simple notice of fine herein provided for in subsection 6-1-8D of this chapter or a uniform citation and complaint, or knowing
that one such notice or citation and complaint has been attached to any vehicle owned or controlled by said person, shall appear before the
magistrate court at the place and not later than the time and date specified in this notice. (2000 Code § 69.06)
6-1-14: VIOLATION OF PROMISE TO APPEAR:
Any person who wilfully fails to appear in court as specified in a citation, a memorandum, a uniform citation and complaint or a simple notice of fine,
given as provided in this chapter, is guilty of a simple misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with the standard penalty provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which said person was cited. Venue shall be in the county where the defendant was to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 140/439
appear or in the county where said person resides. An appearance in response to a citation for a violation of this title may be made either in person or
by counsel. (2000 Code § 69.07)
6-1-15: PROCEDURE NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of the traffic code shall govern all police officers in making arrests without a warrant for violations of the traffic code for offenses
committed in their presence, but the procedure prescribed herein shall not be exclusive of any other method prescribed by law for the arrest and
prosecution of a person. (2000 Code § 69.08)
Chapter 2
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
6-2-1: VIOLATION OF STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Any person who wilfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a police officer or direction of a fire department officer during a fire, or who
fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in violation
of this section. These sections of the code of Iowa are adopted by reference and are as follows:
Iowa Code
Section
Subject
321.20B Proof of security against liability
321.32 Registration card, carried and exhibited
321.37 Display of plates
321.38 Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited
321.79 Intent to injure
321.91 Penalty for abandonment
321.98 Operation without registration
321.99 Fraudulent use of registration
321.174 Operators licensed
321.174A Operation of motor vehicles with expired license
321.180 Instruction permits
321.180B Graduated driver's licenses for persons aged fourteen (14) through seventeen (17)
321.193 Restricted licenses
321.194 Special minor's licenses
321.216 Unlawful use of license and nonoperator's identification card
321.216B Use of driver's license or nonoperator's identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol
321.216C Use of driver's license or nonoperator's identification card by underage person to obtain cigarettes or tobacco products
321.219 Permitting unauthorized minor to drive
321.220 Permitting unauthorized person to drive
321.221 Employing unlicensed chauffeur
321.222 Renting motor vehicle to another
321.223 License inspected
321.224 Record kept
321.232 Radar jamming devices; penalty
321.234A All-terrain vehicles
321.235A Electric personal assistive mobility devices
321.247 Golf cart operation on city streets
321.259 Unauthorized signs, signals or markings
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 141/439
321.262 Damage to vehicle
321.263 Information and aid
321.264 Striking unattended vehicle
321.265 Striking fixtures upon a highway
321.275 Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles
321.278 Drag racing prohibited
321.288 Control of vehicle; reduced speed
321.295 Limitation on bridge or elevated structures
321.297 Driving on right hand side of roadways; exceptions
321.298 Meeting and turning to right
321.299 Overtaking a vehicle
321.302 Overtaking on the right
321.303 Limitations on overtaking on the left
321.304 Prohibited passing
321.306 Roadways laned for traffic
321.307 Following too closely
321.308 Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance requirements
321.309 Towing; convoys; drawbars
321.310 Towing four (4) wheel trailers
321.312 Turning on curve or crest of grade
321.313 Starting parked vehicle
321.314 When signal required
321.315 Signal continuous
321.316 Stopping
321.317 Signals by hand and arm or signal device
321.319 Entering intersections from different highways
321.320 Left turns; yielding
321.321 Entering through highways
321.322 Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection
321.323 Moving vehicle backward on highway
321.323A Approaching certain stationary vehicles
321.324 Operation on approach of emergency vehicles
321.329 Duty of driver - pedestrians crossing or working on highways
321.330 Use of crosswalks
321.332 White canes restricted to blind persons
321.333 Duty of drivers
321.340 Driving through safety zone
321.341 Obedience to signal of train
321.342 Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning
321.343 Certain vehicles must stop
321.344 Heavy equipment at crossing
321.344B Immediate safety threat - penalty
321.354 Stopping on traveled way
321.359 Moving other vehicle
321.362 Unattended motor vehicle
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 142/439
321.363 Obstruction to driver's view
321.364 Preventing contamination of food by hazardous material
321.365 Coasting prohibited
321.367 Following fire apparatus
321.368 Crossing fire hose
321.369 Putting debris on highway
321.370 Removing injurious material
321.371 Clearing up wrecks
321.372 School buses
321.381 Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles
321.381A Operation of low speed vehicles
321.382 Upgrade pulls; minimum speed
321.383 Exceptions; slow vehicles identified
321.384 When lighted lamps required
321.385 Headlamps on motor vehicles
321.386 Headlamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles
321.387 Rear lamps
321.388 Illuminating plates
321.389 Reflector requirement
321.390 Reflector requirements
321.392 Clearance and identification lights
321.393 Color and mounting
321.394 Lamp or flag on projecting load
321.395 Lamps on parked vehicles
321.398 Lamps on other vehicles and equipment
321.402 Spot lamps
321.403 Auxiliary driving lamps
321.404 Signal lamps and signal devices
321.404A Light restricting devices prohibited
321.405 Self-illumination
321.406 Cowl lamps
321.408 Backup lamps
321.409 Mandatory lighting equipment
321.415 Required usage of lighting devices
321.417 Single beam road lighting equipment
321.418 Alternate road lighting equipment
321.419 Number of driving lamps required or permitted
321.420 Number of lamps lighted
321.421 Special restrictions on lamps
321.422 Red light in front
321.423 Flashing lights
321.430 Brake, hitch and control requirements
321.431 Performance ability
321.432 Horns and warning devices
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 143/439
321.433 Sirens, whistles, and bells prohibited
321.434 Bicycle sirens or whistles
321.436 Mufflers, prevention of noise
321.437 Mirrors
321.438 Windshields and windows
321.439 Windshield wipers
321.440 Restrictions as to tire equipment
321.441 Metal tires prohibited
321.442 Projections on wheels
321.444 Safety glass
321.445 Safety belts and safety harnesses - use required
321.446 Child restraint devices
321.449 Motor carrier safety regulations
321.450 Hazardous materials transportation
321.454 Width of vehicles
321.455 Projecting loads on passenger vehicles
321.456 Height of vehicles; permits
321.457 Maximum length
321.458 Loading beyond front
321.460 Spilling loads on highways
321.461 Trailers and towed vehicles
321.462 Drawbars and safety chains
321.463 Maximum gross weight
321.465 Weighing vehicles and removal of excess
321.466 Increased loading capacity reregistration
(2000 Code § 62.01)
6-2-2: SPEED REGULATIONS:
A. General: Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable
and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a
vehicle on any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having
the right to assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law. (2000 Code § 63.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
B. State Code Speed Limits: The following speed limits are established in section 321.285 of the code of Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is
unlawful unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone:
1. Business district, twenty (20) miles per hour.
2. Residence or school district, twenty five (25) miles per hour.
3. Suburban district, forty five (45) miles per hour. (2000 Code § 63.02)
C. Cemeteries And Parking Lots: A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in any cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful. (2000 Code § 63.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
D. Special Speed Restrictions: In accordance with requirements of the Iowa state department of transportation, or whenever the council shall
determine upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in subsection B of this section is greater or less than
is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the city street system, the council
shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following special
speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 144/439
1. Special Twenty Miles Per Hour Speed Zones: A speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated
streets or parts thereof:
Streets within city parks.
2. Special Twenty Five Miles Per Hour Speed Zones: A speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following
designated streets or parts thereof:
Campus Drive.
Clark Street, from the east boundary line of N.W. 114th Street to the east boundary line of Cownie Park Plat, an official auditor's plat, located in
and forming a part of the city of Clive, Polk County, Iowa.
Forest Avenue, from the west boundary line of N.W. 114th Street to the most westerly point thereof lying east of Interstate I-35/I-80.
N.W. 114th Street, from the south boundary line of Hickman Road south to a point located five hundred feet (500') south of the south end of the
bridge over Walnut Creek.
3. Special Twenty Five Miles Per Hour School Zones: A speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following
designated streets or parts thereof during the designated school speed limit hours as designated by flashing amber lights and warning signs:
Douglas Parkway from two hundred feet (200') west of the Berkshire Parkway east to corporate limits.
4. Special Thirty Miles Per Hour Speed Zones: A speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets
or parts thereof:
Swanson Boulevard, from the west line of N.W. 86th Street west to a point located at the west property line of 9289 Swanson Boulevard and
Swanson Boulevard.
N.W. 86th Street, from the south line of University Boulevard to south line of Hickman Road.
5. Special Thirty Five Miles Per Hour Speed Zones: A speed in excess of thirty five (35) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following
designated streets or parts thereof:
Alice's Road, from 280th Street north to a point two-tenths (2/10) of a mile south of Meredith Drive.
Douglas Parkway, from east corporate limits to west corporate limits.
Hickman Frontage Road, from the east line of N.W. 111th Street to the west line of N.W. 108th Street.
Swanson Boulevard, from the east line of N.W. 100th Street east to a point located at the west property line of 9289 Swanson Boulevard and
Swanson Boulevard.
University Avenue, from the east corporate limits to a point located seven hundred feet (700') west of the intersection with the southbound exit
ramp of Interstate I-35/I-80.
University Boulevard, from the eastern terminus thereof west to the east line of N.W. 86th Street.
N.W. 86th Street, from the south corporate limits to the south line of University Boulevard.
N.W. 100th Street, from the south corporate limits to the north corporate limits.
N.W. 114th Street, from the south boundary line of Interstate Investment Subdivision, an official plat, located in and forming a part of the city of
Clive, Polk County, Iowa, to the north boundary line of University Avenue.
N.W. 128th Street, from the south corporate limits to the north corporate limits.
N.W. 156th Street, from the south corporate limits north to the north corporate limits.
6. Special Forty Miles Per Hour Speed Zones: Based upon Iowa department of transportation study and recommendation, a speed in excess of
forty (40) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
Hickman Road from a point located one thousand three hundred feet (1,300') west of the intersection with N.W. 86th Street to the east corporate
limits.
N.W. 142nd Street.
7. Special Forty Five Miles Per Hour Speed Zones: Based upon Iowa department of transportation study and recommendation, a speed in excess
of forty five (45) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
Hickman Road or U.S. Highway 6 from a point located six hundred fifty feet (650') west of the intersection with N.W. 100th Street to a point
located one thousand three hundred feet (1,300') west of the intersection with N.W. 86th Street.
8. Special Fifty Miles Per Hour Speed Zones: Based upon Iowa department of transportation study and recommendation, a speed in excess of fifty
(50) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
Hickman Road, also known as U.S. Highway 6 from a point three hundred feet (300') west of the intersection with Woodlands Parkway east to a
point located six hundred fifty feet (650') west of the intersection with N.W. 100th Street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 145/439
9. Special Fifty Five Miles Per Hour Speed Zones: A speed in excess of fifty five (55) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated
streets or parts thereof:
Hickman Road, also known as U.S. Highway 6 from a point located three hundred feet (300') west of the intersection with Woodlands Parkway
west to the west corporate limits.
10. Special Sixty Five Miles Per Hour Speed Zones: A speed in excess of sixty five (65) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following
designated streets or parts thereof:
Interstate I-35/I-80 from the south corporate limits to the north corporate limits. (Ord. 936, 10-7-2010)
E. Minimum Speed: No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law. (2000 Code § 63.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
6-2-3: TURNING REGULATIONS:
A. Authority To Mark: The city manager may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and
direct, as traffic conditions require, that a different course from that specified by the state law be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and
when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by
such markers, buttons or signs. (2000 Code § 64.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
B. U-Turns: It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection; provided, however, that U-turns are prohibited at intersections where
there are automatic traffic signals. (2000 Code § 64.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
C. Right Turn On Red Signal Prohibited: Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal shall not proceed or make a right turn at locations when
appropriate signs are in place. (2000 Code § 64.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.257[2])
D. No Turns Permitted: When appropriate signs are in place, no driver shall make either a right or left turn at the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
Hickman Frontage Road: Vehicles traveling west on Hickman Frontage Road shall not turn left at N.W. 86th Street.
N.W. 86th Street: Vehicles traveling north on N.W. 86th Street shall not turn left at the entrance to 8737 University Avenue.
8737 University Avenue: Vehicles exiting 8737 University Avenue onto N.W. 86th Street shall not turn left onto N.W. 86th Street. (2000 Code
§ 64.04)
6-2-4: LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
A. Temporary Embargo: If the council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that
certain streets will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall
be operated on streets so designated by such signs. (2000 Code § 66.01)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.471 and 472)
B. Permits For Excess Size And Weight: The director of public works may, upon application and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special
permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the
maximum specified by state law or the city over those streets or bridges named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the city and for
which the city is responsible for maintenance. A fee shall be paid by the applicant for the permit, with the amount of the fee determined in
accordance with an established fee schedule, which fee schedule may be modified from time to time with the approval of the council. Immediately
upon issuing such permit, the director of public works shall notify the police chief. (2000 Code § 66.02)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.473 and 321E.1)
C. Truck Traffic Prohibited:
1. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any motor truck licensed to carry more than ten (10) tons upon any of the
following streets or parts of streets:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.473 and 475)
None.
2. The council may, by motion, grant special permission allowing a person to operate motor trucks where prohibited by subsection C1 of this
section for a period of not more than one year per request, provided the person establishes each of the following:
a. Denial of special permission for such usage would prohibit all motor truck access to the person's real property.
b. Denial of special permission for such usage would create an unreasonable hardship to the person and the person's real property. (2000 Code
§ 66.03)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 146/439
D. Load Limits On Bridges: Where it has been determined that any city bridge has a capacity less than the maximum permitted on the streets of the
city, or on the street serving the bridge, the director of public works may cause to be posted and maintained signs on said bridge and at suitable
distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits, and no person shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or
unloaded, upon said bridge in excess of such posted limit. (2000 Code § 66.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
E. Truck Routes: Truck route regulations are established as follows:
1. Definitions: For use in this subsection, the following terms are defined:
LIGHT DELIVERY TRUCK, PANEL DELIVERY TRUCK, DELIVERY TRUCK OR PICKUP TRUCK: Any motor vehicle designed to carry not more
than two thousand (2,000) pounds of merchandise or freight of any kind.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[5])
MOTOR TRUCK: Every motor vehicle designed primarily for carrying livestock, merchandise, freight of every kind, or over nine (9) persons as
passengers, except light delivery trucks, panel delivery trucks, delivery trucks, and pickup trucks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[4])
2. Truck Routes Designated: Motor trucks, as defined in subsection E1 of this section, having no fixed terminal within the city or making no
scheduled or definite stops within the city for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon the following streets within the city and
none other:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
Hickman Road.
Interstate 35/80 from the south corporate limits to the north corporate limits.
University Avenue.
University Boulevard.
N.W. 86th Street.
3. Deliveries Off Truck Route: Any "motor truck", as defined in subsection E1 of this section, having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite
stop within the city for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the designated routes set out in this section to the nearest
point of its scheduled or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload and return, by the most direct route to its point of departure from
said designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
4. Employer's Responsibility: The owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise directing the driver of any motor truck shall not require or
knowingly permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
5. Exceptions: The provisions of this section do not apply to fire apparatus, school buses, and other motor vehicles owned and operated by a
governmental agency, road machinery, implements of husbandry temporarily moved upon a highway, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of
a special permit issued as provided in this title. (2000 Code § 66.05)
6-2-5: VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS:
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at a driveway. (2000 Code § 62.02)
6-2-6: CLINGING TO VEHICLE:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the city unless all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway. (2000 Code § 62.03)
6-2-7: QUIET ZONES:
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or
other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency. (2000 Code § 62.04)
6-2-8: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
Upon the immediate approach of a funeral procession, the driver of every other vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, shall yield the right
of way. An operator of a motor vehicle which is part of a funeral procession shall not be charged with violating traffic rules and regulations relating to
traffic signals and devices while participating in the procession unless the operation is reckless. (2000 Code § 62.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.324A)
6-2-9: TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 147/439
It is unlawful for any person, either individually or in association with one or more other persons, to wilfully injure or tamper with any vehicle or break or
remove any part or parts of or from a vehicle without the consent of the owner. (2000 Code § 62.06)
6-2-10: ELUDING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE PURSUING LAW ENFORCEMENT VEHICLE:
It is unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to wilfully fail to bring the motor vehicle to a stop or otherwise elude or attempt to elude a marked official
law enforcement vehicle driven by a uniformed police officer after being given a visual or audible signal to stop. The signal given by the police officer
shall be by flashing red light or siren. (2000 Code § 62.07)
6-2-11: EXCESSIVE TIRE NOISE:
No person shall skid, slide or spin the tires of the motor vehicle which said person is operating so as to cause the emission of excessive or unusual
noise when the same is not necessary for the safe operation of the vehicle. (2000 Code § 62.08)
6-2-12: OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS:
It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other object to obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of
traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be
abated in the manner provided by title 5, chapter 6 of this code. (2000 Code § 62.09)
6-2-13: SAFETY BELTS:
A. Required Use: The driver and front seat occupants of a type of motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to section 321.18 of the code of Iowa,
except a motorcycle or motorized bicycle as defined in section 321.1 of the code of Iowa, shall each wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety
belt or safety harness any time the vehicle is in forward motion on a street or highway, except that a child under six (6) years of age shall be
secured as required in section 6-2-14 of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.445[2])
B. Exceptions: Subsection A of this section does not apply to:
1. The driver or front seat occupants of a motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with safety belts or safety harnesses under rules
adopted by the Iowa state department of transportation.
2. The driver and front seat occupants of a motor vehicle who are actively engaged in work which requires them to alight from and re-enter the
vehicle at frequent intervals, provided the vehicle does not exceed twenty five (25) miles per hour between stops.
3. The driver of a motor vehicle while performing duties as a letter carrier for the United States postal service. This exemption applies only between
the first delivery point after leaving the post office and the last delivery point before returning to the post office.
4. Passengers on a bus.
5. A person possessing a written certification from a physician on a form provided by the Iowa state department of transportation that the person is
unable to wear a safety belt or safety harness due to physical or medical reasons. The certification shall specify the time period for which the
exemption applies. The time period shall not exceed twelve (12) months, at which time a new certification may be issued.
6. Front seat occupants of an authorized emergency vehicle while they are being transported in an emergency. However, this exemption does not
apply to the driver of the authorized emergency vehicle.
C. Failure To Use Safety Belts: The driver and the front seat passengers may each be charged separately for improperly used or nonused equipment
under this section. (2000 Code § 62.10)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.445[3])
6-2-14: CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEMS:
A. Children Under Three: A child under three (3) years of age who is being transported in a motor vehicle subject to registration which has a gross
weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less as specified by the manufacturer, except a school bus or motorcycle as defined in section 321.1 of
the code of Iowa, shall be secured during transit by a child restraint system which meets federal motor vehicle safety standards and the system
shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. A person who is first charged for a violation of this subsection and who has not
purchased or otherwise acquired a child restraint system shall not be convicted if the person produces in court, within a reasonable time, proof that
the person has purchased or otherwise acquired a child restraint system which meets federal motor vehicle safety standards.
B. Children Over Three But Under Six: A child at least three (3) years of age but under six (6) years of age who is being transported in any such motor
vehicle described in subsection A of this section shall be secured during transit by either a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards and is used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, or by a safety belt or safety harness of a type approved under
section 321.445 of the code of Iowa.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 148/439
C. Exceptions: This section does not apply to the following:
1. Police officers acting on official duty;
2. Transportation of children in 1965 model year or older vehicles or authorized emergency vehicles; and
3. Transportation of a child who has been certified by a physician licensed under chapter 148, 150 or 150A of the code of Iowa as having a
medical, physical, or mental condition which prevents or makes inadvisable securing the child in a child restraint system, safety belt or safety
harness. (2000 Code § 62.11)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.446)
6-2-15: RECKLESS DRIVING:
No person shall drive any vehicle in such manner as to indicate a wilful or a wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. (2000 Code
§ 62.12)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277)
6-2-16: OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. Drivers: A driver of a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an open or
unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284)
B. Passengers: A passenger in a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an open
or unsealed bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284A)
C. Passenger Area Defined; Legal Transporting: As used in this section, "passenger area" means the area of a motor vehicle designed to seat the
driver and passengers while the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in their
seating positions, including the glove compartment. An open or unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported in the
trunk of the motor vehicle. An unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported behind the last upright seat of the motor
vehicle if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk. (2000 Code § 62.13)
6-2-17: PEDESTRIANS:
A. Pedestrian Use Of Roadway: No person shall stand in a roadway, including the roadway medians, curbs, traffic islands and shoulders, for the
purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. (Ord. 921, 9-3-2009)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
B. Pedestrian Crossing: Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at
an intersection shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. (2000 Code § 67.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
C. Pedestrian Crossings Established: Pedestrian crossings controlled by traffic control signals are hereby established at the intersections of the
following designated streets:
Intersection of University Avenue and N.W. 90th Street.
Intersection of N.W. 86th Street (Clive Road) and Franklin Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 86th Street (Clive Road) and Harbach Boulevard.
Intersection of N.W. 100th Street and University Avenue.
(2000 Code § 67.03)
D. Pedestrian Traffic Control Legend: Whenever pedestrians are controlled by a traffic control signal at a pedestrian crossing, the following words shall
be used and said words shall indicate the following:
1. Walk: Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the pedestrian crossing within the marked crosswalk.
2. Don't Walk: Pedestrians facing the signal shall stop before entering the street and shall not cross the street until "Walk" is shown. (2000 Code
§ 67.04)
E. Pedestrian Right Of Way: The driver of any vehicle which is required to stop at a pedestrian crossing by a traffic control signal shall bring such
vehicle to a full stop at a point ten feet (10') from the approach side of the marked crosswalk in accordance with such traffic control signal and shall
yield the right of way to all pedestrians within the crosswalk. (2000 Code § 67.05)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 149/439
F. Duty Of Drivers: Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
within a marked crosswalk at a pedestrian crossing and shall exercise due care upon observing any child or confused or incapacitated person
within or in the vicinity of the marked crosswalk of a pedestrian crossing and shall yield the right of way to them. (2000 Code § 67.06)
G. Turning Through Crosswalks: No driver of a vehicle traveling on a street which intersects a street upon which a pedestrian crossing is located within
close proximity of such pedestrian crossing shall turn a vehicle through the marked crosswalk when the traffic control signal controlling the
pedestrian crossing exhibits the word "Walk". (2000 Code § 67.07)
6-2-18: GOLF CARTS:
A. Operation On City Streets By Person With Disabilities: A person with disabilities, as defined by chapter 321L of the code of Iowa, possessing a valid
motor vehicle operator's license issued pursuant to chapter 321 may operate a golf cart on city streets except Hickman Road, University Avenue,
University Boulevard and N.W. 86th Street during daylight hours and subject to the following conditions:
1. Identification: A person with a disabilities permit issued pursuant to section 321L.2 of the code of Iowa shall be prominently displayed on the golf
cart at all times during operation.
2. Registration: Operation shall not commence until the person with disabilities has registered his or her name, address, operator's license number,
person with disabilities identification number, and a brief description of the golf cart to be operated with the Clive police department.
3. Equipment: The golf cart shall be equipped with a slow moving vehicle sign, bicycle safety flag, adequate brakes and reflectorized warning
devices on the front and rear. (2000 Code § 78.01)
B. Street Crossings: Authorized persons operating golf carts pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be allowed to cross University Boulevard but
shall cross Hickman Road, University Avenue, and N.W. 86th Street only at intersections controlled by traffic control signal lights. (2000 Code
§ 78.02)
C. Motor Vehicle Law: Persons authorized to operate golf carts pursuant to subsection A of this section shall obey all statutes and ordinances
governing the operation of motor vehicles. (2000 Code § 78.03)
D. Penalty: Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this section for any particular provision or subsection, any person violating any provision of
this section or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 78.04)
6-2-19: PUBLIC MASS TRANSIT VEHICLES:
A. Conduct Prohibited: No person, while a passenger on any vehicle which transports members of the public at large from place to place in
consideration for the payment of a fare, shall intentionally do any of the following acts:
1. Smoke or possess any lighted or smoldering pipe, cigar or cigarette;
2. Consume any beverages, food or alcohol;
3. Deface, damage, alter, destroy, write upon, or soil any part of such vehicle;
4. Spit, urinate, or defecate in or upon or from any part of such vehicle;
5. Throw, deposit or place any paper, bottles, cans, or any other garbage or solid waste in or upon such vehicle;
6. Throw any object of any kind within such vehicle or out any door or window of such vehicle;
7. Play or operate any radio, television, tape players, record player or similar electronic sound amplification device unless it is played through an
earphone;
8. Bring any pet or animal onto such vehicle other than a seeing eye dog accompanying a blind person or an animal in a cage or held exclusively
on the lap of a rider;
9. Stand or remain in front of any white line marked on the forward end of the floor of such vehicle after being asked to step back by the driver;
10. Enter such a vehicle through the rear door unless authorized to do so by the driver or other transit authority employee;
11. Interfere in any way with the bus driver's operation of such vehicle; or
12. Make loud and raucous noise which causes unreasonable distress to another person, engage in fighting or violent behavior or in any manner
disrupt or impede the safe operation of such vehicle. (2000 Code § 79.01)
B. Penalty: Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this section for any particular provision or subsection, any person violating any provision of
this section or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 79.02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 150/439
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
6-3-1: INSTALLATION:
The city manager shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control devices when and as required under this traffic code or under state law, or
emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to regulate,
guide or warn traffic. The city manager shall keep a record of all such traffic control devices. (2000 Code § 61.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
6-3-2: CROSSWALKS:
The city manager is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the council by resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic
control devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such
other places as traffic conditions require. (2000 Code § 61.02)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
6-3-3: TRAFFIC LANES:
The city manager is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with the
traffic code of the city. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such
vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(2000 Code § 61.03)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
6-3-4: STANDARDS:
Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by the "Manual Of Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways". (2000
Code § 61.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
6-3-5: AUTOMATED RED LIGHT ENFORCEMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 980, 10-3-2013, eff. 7-1-2014)
6-3-6: COMPLIANCE:
No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless
at the time otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under section
321.231 of the code of Iowa. (2000 Code § 61.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
Chapter 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
6-4-1: PARK ADJACENT TO CURB:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement
and with the right hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of but not closer than two inches (2") to the curb or edge of the roadway. It is
also unlawful to drive any vehicle against or upon any curb so as to damage any part thereof. (2000 Code § 68.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
6-4-2: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL:
No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than twenty four (24) hours or for any of the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
A. Sale: Displaying such vehicle for sale;
B. Repairing: For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such vehicle, except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 151/439
C. Advertising: Displaying advertising;
D. Merchandise Sales: Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under this
Code. (2000 Code § 68.02)
6-4-3: PARKING PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibited Places: No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. Crosswalk: On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])
2. Center Parkway: On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
3. Mailboxes: Between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M., Monday through Saturday, within twenty feet (20') on
either side of a mailbox which is so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
4. Sidewalks: On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])
5. Driveway: In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])
6. Intersection: Within, or within thirty feet (30') of an intersection of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
7. Fire Hydrant: Within five feet (5') of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])
8. Stop Sign Or Signal: Within ten feet (10') upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side
of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])
9. Railroad Crossing: Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a
red light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])
10. Fire Station: Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])
11. Excavations: Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])
12. Double Parking: On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])
13. Signs: At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking of vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13 and 14])
14. Hazardous Locations: When, because of restricted visibility or when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the council may cause curbs to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
15. Churches, Nursing Homes And Other Buildings: A space of fifty feet (50') is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theater,
auditorium, hotel having more than twenty five (25) sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other building
where large assemblages of people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing,
parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such
purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
16. Ramps: In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
17. In More Than One Space: In any designated parking space so that any part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes
beyond the markings designating such space.
18. Parking Or Terrace: Upon the parking or terrace, designated as that unpaved area between the curb line and the sidewalk line, except when
duly approved by resolution of the council. Parking may be permitted at such locations when requested in writing by property owners. Each such
location must be properly marked by approved metal signs at the extremities of such location. The expense of such signs shall be borne by
property owners. (2000 Code § 68.03)
B. East-West Streets: On the north side of all streets going east and west, except in those locations set forth below where parking is prohibited on the
south side of the street:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 152/439
Bay Hill Court.
Bay Hill Drive.
Forest Avenue between N.W. 105th Street and N.W. 109th Street.
Hawthorn Drive between N.W. 137th Street and N.W. 142nd Street.
Hazelwood Drive between N.W. 128th Street and N.W. 131st Street.
Hickory Avenue between Country Club Boulevard and N.W. 132nd Street.
Hickory Court.
Lake Pointe Drive between Willow Drive and N.W. 142nd Street.
Lakeview Drive between Country Club Boulevard and N.W. 149th Street.
Lincoln Avenue between N.W. 128th Street and N.W. 131st Street.
Ricardo Road between N.W. 104th Street and Rio Valley Drive.
Ridgeview Drive between N.W. 152nd Street and N.W. 155th Street.
Sheridan Avenue between N.W. 156th Street and Berkshire Parkway.
South Shore Drive between Lake Pointe Drive and N.W. 142nd Street.
Summit Drive between N.W. 138th Street and N.W. 152nd Street.
Sunset Terrace between N.W. 102nd Street and Rio Valley Drive.
Walnut Ridge Circle.
Walnut Ridge Drive between N.W. 108th Street and N.W. 109th Street.
Wellington Ridge Drive from N.W. 123rd Street, west to its western terminus.
Wildwood Drive from N.W. 142nd Street west to N.W. 148th Street and from N.W. 156th Street west to N.W. 159th Street.
Woodcrest Drive from N.W. 149th Street, west to its western terminus.
Woodlands Parkway between N.W. 128th Street and Cedarwood Avenue. (Ord. 1008, 1-14-2016)
C. North-South Streets: On the west side of all streets going north and south, except in those locations set forth below where parking is prohibited on
the east side of the street:
Country Club Boulevard between University Avenue and Hickman Road.
Dover Bay Drive.
Lake Pointe Drive between University Avenue and Bay Hill Drive.
N.W. 75th Street between University Avenue and Harbach Boulevard.
N.W. 80th Court between Garrison Road and Northwest Drive.
N.W. 81st Street between University Boulevard and Harbach Boulevard.
N.W. 85th Street between Clark Street and Harbach Boulevard.
N.W. 90th Street between University Avenue and Indian Hills Drive.
N.W. 93rd Court.
N.W. 94th Street.
N.W. 97th Street between Lincoln Avenue and Clark Street.
N.W. 98th Street between Lincoln Avenue and Sunset Terrace.
N.W. 100th Place between Lincoln Avenue and N.W. 101st Street.
N.W. 102nd Street between N.W. 101st Street and Clark Street.
N.W. 104th Street between University Avenue and Rio Valley Drive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 153/439
N.W. 109th Street between Walnut Ridge and University Avenue.
N.W. 121st Court.
N.W. 122nd Street.
N.W. 123rd Street.
N.W. 129th Street.
N.W. 131st Street.
N.W. 132nd Street between Cedarwood Avenue and Hickory Avenue.
N.W. 135th Street.
N.W. 136th Street.
N.W. 138th Street between University Avenue and Lake Pointe Drive.
N.W. 139th Street between Hawthorn Drive and Summit Drive.
N.W. 140th Street between Hawthorn Drive and Summit Drive.
N.W. 141st Street between Hawthorn Drive and Summit Drive.
N.W. 145th Street between Hawthorn Drive and Summit Drive.
N.W. 148th Street between Summit Drive and Wildwood Drive.
N.W. 150th Court.
N.W. 151st Court.
N.W. 152nd Street.
N.W. 155th Street.
N.W. 157th Street between Sheridan Avenue and the north corporate limits.
N.W. 159th Street between Wildwood Drive and Hickman Road.
N.W. 160th Street between Sheridan Avenue and the north corporate limits.
N.W. 161st Street between Sheridan Avenue and the north corporate limits.
N.W. 166th Street between Horton Drive and N.W. 165th Street.
N.W. 168th Street between Douglas Parkway and Baxter Drive. (Ord. 1008, 1-14-2016; amd. Ord. 1025, 12-8-2016)
6-4-4: PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING:
The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons with disabilities parking spaces:
A. Nonresidential Off Street Facilities: Nonresidential off street parking facilities shall set aside persons with disabilities parking spaces in accordance
with the following:
1. Municipal off street public parking facilities or an entity providing nonresidential parking in off street public parking facilities shall provide not less
than two percent (2%) of the total parking spaces in each parking facility as persons with disabilities parking spaces, rounded to the nearest
whole number of persons with disabilities parking spaces. However, such parking facilities having ten (10) or more parking spaces shall set aside
at least one persons with disabilities parking space.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3a])
2. An entity providing off street nonresidential public parking facilities shall review the utilization of existing persons with disabilities parking spaces
for a one month period not less than once every twelve (12) months. If upon review, the average occupancy rate for persons with disabilities
parking spaces in a facility exceeds sixty percent (60%) during normal business hours, the entity shall provide additional persons with disabilities
parking spaces as needed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3b])
3. An entity providing off street nonresidential parking as a lessor shall provide a persons with disabilities parking space to an individual requesting
to lease a parking space, if that individual possesses a persons with disabilities parking permit issued in accordance with section 321L.2 of the
code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3c])
4. A new nonresidential facility in which construction has been completed on or after July 1, 1991, providing parking to the general public shall
provide persons with disabilities parking spaces as stipulated below:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 154/439
10 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 See note 1
1,001 and over See note 2
Notes:
1. 2 percent of total.
2. 20 spaces plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3d])
B. Residential Buildings And Facilities: All public and private buildings and facilities, temporary and permanent, which are residences and which
provide ten (10) or more tenant parking spaces, excluding extended healthcare facilities, shall designate at least one persons with disabilities
parking space as needed for each individual dwelling unit in which a person with a disability resides. Residential buildings and facilities which
provide public visitor parking of ten (10) or more spaces shall designate persons with disabilities parking spaces in the visitors' parking area in
accordance with the table contained in subsection A4 of this section.
(IAC, 661-18.7[321L])
C. Business District: With respect to any on street parking areas provided by the city within the business district, not less than two percent (2%) of the
total parking spaces within each business district shall be designated as persons with disabilities parking spaces.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[4a])
D. Other Spaces: Any other person may set aside persons with disabilities parking spaces on the person's property, provided each parking space is
clearly and prominently designated as a persons with disabilities parking space. No unauthorized person shall establish any on street persons with
disabilities parking space without first obtaining council approval.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3e])
E. Improper Use: The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of
a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this code:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
1. Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with disabilities parking permit.
2. Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being
transported in accordance with section 321L.2[1b] of the code of Iowa.
3. Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under section 321L.8 of the code of Iowa.
F. Wheelchair Parking Cones: No person shall use or interfere with a wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
1. A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must comply with the requirements of section 321L.2A(1) of the code of Iowa when
utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
2. A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone which is properly placed under the provisions of section 321L.2A(1) of the code of
Iowa. (2000 Code § 68.04)
6-4-5: NO PARKING ZONES:
No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic control signal:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
Total Parking Spaces In Lot
Required Minimum Number Of Persons With Disabilities Parking Spaces
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 155/439
A. No Parking On Certain Streets And Near Certain Intersections: On streets intersecting with the following designated streets, except N.W. 81st
Street intersection with University Boulevard, no one shall park within one hundred feet (100') of such intersections, nor shall they park upon the
following designated streets:
Douglas Parkway.
Hickman Court.
Hickman Road.
Stratford Drive.
University Avenue.
University Boulevard.
N.W. 86th Street.
N.W. 94th Street.
N.W. 100th Street.
N.W. 111th Street.
N.W. 114th Street.
N.W. 118th Street.
N.W. 128th Street.
N.W. 142nd Street.
N.W. 156th Street.
B. No Parking In Specific Areas:
Berkshire Parkway from Hickman Road north to Alice's Road.
Clark Street from a point 120 feet east of N.W. 101st Street west to 130 feet west of N.W. 101st Street.
Clark Street from a point 115 feet east of N.W. 102nd Street west to 115 feet west of N.W. 102nd Street.
Country Club Boulevard from a point 165 feet north of Hickman Road south to Hickman Road.
Country Club Boulevard from a point 300 feet north of University Avenue south to University Avenue.
Forest Avenue from N.W. 114th Street west to its terminus in the 11500 block of Forest Avenue including the cul-de-sac.
Harbach Boulevard from N.W. 84th Street west to N.W. 86th Street.
Lake Pointe Drive from a point 220 feet north of University Avenue south to University Avenue.
Lake Shore Drive from a point 85 feet west of Woodlands Parkway east to Woodlands Parkway.
Sheridan Avenue from a point 610 feet east of Berkshire Parkway west to Berkshire Parkway.
Swanson Boulevard from N.W. 86th Street west to N.W. 100th Street.
Wildwood Drive from a point 50 feet east of N.W. 159th Street west to 159th Street.
Woodlands Parkway from a point 515 feet west of N.W. 128th Street east to N.W. 123rd Street.
Woodlands Parkway from Lake Shore Drive north to Hickman Road.
N.W. 80th Place from a point where the south curb line of Garrison Road intersects with N.W. 80th Place, north to Hickman Road.
N.W. 81st Street from a point 143 feet north of University Boulevard south to University Boulevard.
N.W. 90th Street from a point 150 feet north of University Avenue south to University Avenue.
N.W. 92nd Court from a point 385 feet north of Swanson Boulevard south to Swanson Boulevard.
N.W. 93rd Court at Clark Street for 50 feet on either side of the persons with disabilities west sidewalk ramp.
N.W. 99th Court from Clark Street to Colby Avenue.
N.W. 104th Street from a point 250 feet north of University Avenue south to University Avenue.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 156/439
N.W. 108th Street from Hickman Road south to the cul-de-sac in the 2100 block of N.W. 108th Street.
N.W. 121st Street from University Avenue north to Stratford Drive.
N.W. 123rd Street from a point 620 feet north of University Avenue south to University Avenue.
N.W. 123rd Street from a point 400 feet south of Woodlands Parkway north to Woodlands Parkway.
N.W. 124th Court from Stratford Drive north to include the cul-de-sac.
N.W. 124th Street from University Avenue north to Stratford Drive.
N.W. 138th Street from University Avenue north to Lake Pointe Drive.
N.W. 149th Street from a point 140 feet north of Hickman Road south to Hickman Road.
N.W. 152nd Street from a point 150 feet south of Buena Vista Drive north to Buena Vista Drive.
N.W. 159th Street from a point 60 feet north of Wildwood Drive south to Wildwood Drive.
N.W. 161st Street from Hickman Road north to Sheridan Avenue. (Ord. 939, 10-21-2010)
6-4-6: PARKING LIMITED TO SPECIFIED HOURS:
A. No Parking Eight O'Clock A.M. To Four O'Clock P.M.: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically designated
streets or portions of streets between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M., Monday through Friday, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device:
Indian Hills Drive from N.W. 94th Court to N.W. 92nd Street.
B. No Parking Six O'Clock A.M. To Six O'Clock P.M.: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically designated streets
or portions of streets between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., Monday through Friday, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device:
Clark Street from a point 229 feet west of N.W. 100th Street east to N.W. 100th Street. (2000 Code § 68.06)
6-4-7: ILLEGAL OFF STREET PARKING:
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle upon privately owned property or area developed as an off street parking facility without the consent of
the owner, lessee, or person in charge of the privately owned property or facility. Persons who stop, stand, or park a vehicle upon privately owned
property or area developed as an off street parking facility where such property is used for business purposes or such facility primarily serves a
business premises shall be presumed to be in violation hereof when the business located on said property or served by said facility is not open to
serve customers or members of the general public. A violation of this section shall place any such vehicle in the status of an illegally parked vehicle,
and, upon complaint of the owner, lessee, or person in charge of the privately owned property or facility, the vehicle may be dealt with pursuant to
chapter 1 of this title. In the event the owner, lessee or person in charge of the privately owned property or facility requests that a vehicle located
thereon be impounded pursuant to section 6-1-12 of this title, said owner, lessee or person in charge of the privately owned property or facility shall
make such request in writing and further agree in writing to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its elected officials, officers, agents,
employees and police officers from and against any and all claims, demands or causes of action that assert any liability for injury or damage caused
by, arising out of or in any way related to such impoundment, including reasonable attorney fees incurred thereby in connection with any such claim,
demand or cause of action. (2000 Code § 68.07)
6-4-8: TRUCK PARKING LIMITED:
No person shall park a: a) motor truck, b) semitractor and/or trailer (whether or not the trailer is attached thereto), or c) other motor vehicle with a trailer
attached thereto, if the truck has a freight capacity greater than one ton, except when such vehicles are actually engaged in the delivery or receiving of
merchandise or cargo, on any streets abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or R-5, as defined in the zoning ordinance1 for the City. While
actually delivering or receiving merchandise or cargo, such vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere with other traffic.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to pickup, light delivery or panel delivery trucks. (2000 Code § 68.08)
6-4-9: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL:
No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any public street, alley, or City owned off street parking area during any one of the
following times or periods:
A. When snow and/or freezing rain (ice) is falling on such street.
B. When snow is drifting onto such street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 157/439
C. The twenty four (24) hour period immediately following the end of any such snowfall and/or icing event (a 48 hour period if such snow and/or ice
has not been removed from such street, curb to curb).
D. The twenty four (24) hour period immediately following the end of any such drifting of snow (a 48 hour period if such snow has not been removed
from such street, curb to curb).
E. The twenty four (24) hour period beginning one hour after a police officer, the City Manager or the Director of Public Works has requested that such
vehicle be removed from such street so that the snow and/or ice currently existing thereon can be removed if such request shall have been made
to the owner of such vehicle, to an employee or a partner of such owner, to such owner's spouse or adult child if he or she resides with such owner,
to the person last driving such vehicle or to the person in whose care the vehicle was then entrusted. (Ord. 1063, 11-8-2018)
6-4-10: FIRE LANES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a fire lane as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236)
A. Fire Lanes Established: The Fire Chief may designate fire lanes on any private road or driveway where deemed necessary to assure access to
property or premises by authorized emergency vehicles.
B. Signs And Markings: Wherever a fire lane has been designated, the Police Chief shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed
identifying such fire lanes and the parking prohibition established by this section.
C. Exception: The provisions of this section do not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. (2000 Code § 68.10)
6-4-11: CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES:
Parking restrictions on controlled access facilities are as specified in chapter 6 of this title. (2000 Code § 68.11)
6-4-12: PENALTY:
The standard penalty provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code shall apply to violations in this chapter, except for such violations which constitute
scheduled violations within the meaning of section 805.8 of the Code of Iowa, or for such violations charged, admitted and collected pursuant to a
simple notice of fine as established by chapter 1 of this title, or for those violations of section 6-4-4, 6-4-9, or 6-4-10 of this chapter. In the event a
violation of this chapter constitutes a scheduled violation within the meaning of section 805.8 of the Code of Iowa, the penalty provided in that section
shall control. In the event a violation of this chapter constitutes a violation charged, admitted and collected pursuant to a simple notice of fine as
established by chapter 1 of this title, the fine shall be as follows:
Violation of section 6-4-4 of this chapter regarding parking for persons with disabilities $100.00
Violation of section 6-4-9 of this chapter regarding snow and ice removal 25.00
Violation of section 6-4-10 of this chapter regarding fire lanes 50.00
Violation of all other parking regulations 15.00
(2000 Code § 68.12; amd. Ord. 1063, 11-8-2018)
Provided, however, in the event such violation is charged but not admitted and collected pursuant to a simple notice of fine, the standard penalty
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code shall apply. The fine for violation of a parking regulation charged under a simple notice of fine shall be increased
by five dollars ($5.00) if such fine is not paid within thirty (30) days of the date upon which the violation occurred. (2000 Code § 68.12; amd. Ord. 893,
6-5-2008)
6-4-13: HABITUAL VIOLATORS:
Any vehicle on which four (4) or more overtime and/or illegal parking citations or complaints from the City have been issued and have become
delinquent shall be deemed to be a habitual violator. For purposes of this chapter, a delinquent parking citation or complaint is one which has not been
paid within thirty (30) days of the date upon which the violation occurred. No person shall park a vehicle and permit it to remain standing upon any
public street or public metered lot or City owned parking facility in the City when there are four (4) or more delinquent parking citations or complaints
from the City outstanding against that vehicle. A violation of this section shall place such vehicle in the status of an illegally parked vehicle, and the
vehicle may be dealt with pursuant to section 6-1-12 of this title. (2000 Code § 68.13)
Chapter 5
STOP OR YIELD STREETS AND INTERSECTIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 158/439
6-5-1: THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED:
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless a yield is permitted by this chapter, at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or before
entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering an intersection with the following designated through streets:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.322 and 321.345)
Alice's Road from the south corporate limits to the north corporate limits.
Berkshire Parkway from Hickman Road north to Alice's Road.
Boston Parkway from N.W. 156th Street west to its terminus.
Buffalo Road from the east corporate limits to the west corporate limits.
Country Club Boulevard from University Avenue to Hickman Road.
Douglas Parkway from the east corporate limits to the west corporate limits.
Harbach Boulevard from N.W. 78th Street to N.W. 86th Street.
Hawthorn Drive from N.W. 142nd Street west to N.W. 152nd Street.
Hickman Road from the east corporate limits to the west corporate limits.
Lake Pointe Drive from University Avenue to South Shore Drive/Willow Drive.
Meredith Drive from the east corporate limits to the west corporate limits.
Sheridan Avenue from N.W. 156th Street to Berkshire Parkway.
University Avenue from N.W. 86th Street west to the west corporate limits.
University Avenue from the east corporate limits to N.W. 78th Street.
University Boulevard from N.W. 78th Street to N.W. 86th Street.
Woodlands Parkway from N.W. 123rd Street to N.W. 128th Street.
N.W. 80th Place from Hickman Road to Harbach Boulevard.
N.W. 86th Street from University Avenue to Hickman Road.
N.W. 100th Street from University Avenue to Hickman Road.
N.W. 114th Street from University Avenue to Hickman Road.
N.W. 123rd Street from University Avenue to Woodlands Parkway.
N.W. 128th Street from University Avenue to Hickman Road.
N.W. 142nd Street from University Avenue to Hickman Road.
N.W. 152nd Street from Hickman Road to the north corporate limits.
N.W. 156th Street from the south corporate limits to the north corporate limits. (Ord. 1064, 12-13-2018)
6-5-2: STOP REQUIRED:
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the
intersection or at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering the following intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.322 and 321.345)
Ashleaf Court: Vehicles traveling east on Ashleaf Court shall stop at Cedarwood Avenue.
Ashleaf Drive: Vehicles traveling west on Ashleaf Drive shall stop at Cedarwood Avenue.
Beechwood Avenue: Vehicles traveling west on Beechwood Avenue shall stop at N.W. 152nd Street.
Boston Parkway: Vehicles traveling east on Boston Parkway shall stop at N.W. 152nd Street.
Buena Vista Drive: Vehicles traveling west on Buena Vista Drive shall stop at N.W. 152nd Street.
Campbell Park Recreation Area: Vehicles exiting Campbell Park recreation area shall stop at N.W. 123rd Street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 159/439
Carpenter Avenue: Vehicles traveling north on Carpenter Avenue shall stop at Clark Street.
Cedarwood Avenue: Vehicles traveling north on Cedarwood Avenue shall stop at Woodlands Parkway.
Clark Street: Vehicles traveling on Clark Street shall stop at N.W. 91st Street.
Clark Street: Vehicles traveling west on Clark Street shall stop at N.W. 93rd Court.
College Drive: Vehicles traveling south on College Drive shall stop at Harbach Boulevard.
Country Club Boulevard: Vehicles traveling north on Country Club Boulevard shall stop at Hickman Road.
Drake Court: Vehicles traveling west on Drake Court shall stop at N.W. 78th Street.
Drake Street: Vehicles traveling east on Drake Street shall stop at N.W. 78th Street.
Elmcrest Drive: Vehicles traveling east on Elmcrest Drive shall stop at N.W. 104th Street.
Elmcrest Drive: Vehicles traveling west on Elmcrest Drive shall stop at N.W. 109th Street.
Forest Avenue: Vehicles traveling west on Forest Avenue shall stop at N.W. 109th Street.
Harbach Boulevard: Vehicles traveling on Harbach Boulevard shall stop at N.W. 78th Street.
Harbach Boulevard: Vehicles traveling west on Harbach Boulevard shall stop at Swanson Boulevard.
Hawthorn Circle: Vehicles traveling east on Hawthorn Circle shall stop at N.W. 159th Street.
Hawthorn Drive: Vehicles traveling west on Hawthorn Drive shall stop at N.W. 159th Street.
Hazelwood Drive: Vehicles traveling west on Hazelwood Drive shall stop at N.W. 131st Street.
Hickman Frontage Road: Vehicles traveling east on Hickman Frontage Road shall stop at N.W. 108th Street.
Indian Hills Drive: Vehicles traveling west on Indian Hills Drive shall stop at N.W. 96th Street.
Lake Shore Drive: Vehicles traveling on Lake Shore Drive shall stop at Lakeview Drive.
Lincoln Avenue: Vehicles traveling west on Lincoln Avenue shall stop at N.W. 131st Street.
Madison Circle: Vehicles traveling west on Madison Circle shall stop at N.W. 169th Street.
Maddox Parkway: Vehicles traveling north on Maddox Parkway shall stop at Swanson Boulevard.
Maple Street: Vehicles traveling on Maple Street shall stop at Devonshire Parkway.
Ricardo Road: Vehicles traveling east on Ricardo Road shall stop at N.W. 104th Street.
Ridgeview Drive: Vehicles traveling east on Ridgeview Drive shall stop at N.W. 152nd Street.
Rosewood Drive: Vehicles traveling east on Rosewood Drive shall stop at N.W. 149th Street.
Rosewood Drive: Vehicles traveling on Rosewood Drive shall stop at N.W. 152nd Street.
Summit Drive: Vehicles traveling east on Summit Drive shall stop at N.W. 149th Street.
Sunset Terrace: Vehicles traveling on Sunset Terrace shall stop at N.W. 103rd Street.
Sunset Terrace: Vehicles traveling on Sunset Terrace shall stop at N.W. 104th Street.
Sunset Terrace: Vehicles traveling west on Sunset Terrace shall stop at N.W. 131st Street.
Walnut Ridge Circle: Vehicles traveling on Walnut Ridge Circle shall stop at N.W. 131st Street.
Walnut Ridge Road: Vehicles traveling on Walnut Ridge Road shall stop at N.W. 108th Street.
Wildwood Drive: Vehicles traveling east on Wildwood Drive shall stop at N.W. 149th Street.
Wildwood Park Entrance: Vehicles exiting Wildwood Park shall stop at Wildwood Drive.
Woodcrest Drive: Vehicles traveling east on Woodcrest Drive shall stop at N.W. 149th Street.
Woodcrest Drive: Vehicles traveling west on Woodcrest Drive shall stop at Lakeview Drive.
N.W. 80th Place: Vehicles traveling north on N.W. 80th Place shall stop at Hickman Road.
N.W. 80th Place: Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 80th Place shall stop at Harbach Boulevard.
N.W. 90th Court: Vehicles traveling on N.W. 90th Court shall stop at Indian Hills Drive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 160/439
N.W. 90th Street: Vehicles traveling north on N.W. 90th Street shall stop at Indian Hills Drive.
N.W. 90th Street: Vehicles traveling on N.W. 90th Street shall stop at Franklin Avenue.
N.W. 91st Street: Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 91st Street shall stop at Indian Hills Drive.
N.W. 92nd Court: Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 92nd Court shall stop at Swanson Boulevard.
N.W. 93rd Court: Vehicles traveling on N.W. 93rd Court shall stop at Indian Hills Drive.
N.W. 94th Court: Vehicles traveling north on N.W. 94th Court shall stop at Indian Hills Drive.
N.W. 94th Street: Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 94th Street shall stop at Swanson Boulevard.
N.W. 99th Court: Vehicles traveling on N.W. 99th Court shall stop at Clark Street.
N.W. 103rd Street: Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 103rd Street shall stop at Clark Street.
N.W. 105th Street: Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 105th Street shall stop at Clark Street.
N.W. 106th Street: Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 106th Street shall stop at Clark Street.
N.W. 107th Street: Vehicles traveling on N.W. 107th Street shall stop at Clark Street.
N.W. 108th Street: Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 108th Street shall stop at Clark Street.
N.W. 122nd Street: Vehicles traveling on N.W. 122nd Street shall stop at Sunset Terrace.
N.W. 152nd Street: Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 152nd Street shall stop at Wildwood Drive.
N.W. 153rd Street: Vehicles traveling south on N.W. 153rd Street shall stop at Boston Parkway.
N.W. 164th Street: Vehicles traveling on N.W. 164th Street shall stop at Tanglewood Drive. (Ord. 1026, 12-8-2016)
6-5-3: FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS:
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the
intersection or at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering the following designated four-way stop intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.322 and 321.345)
Clark Street And N.W. 92nd Street: All vehicles approaching the intersection of Clark Street and N.W. 92nd Street shall stop before entering such
intersection.
Clark Street And N.W. 104th Street: All vehicles approaching the intersection of Clark Street and N.W. 104th Street shall stop before entering such
intersection.
Clark Street And N.W. 109th Street: All vehicles approaching the intersection of Clark Street and N.W. 109th Street shall stop before entering such
intersection.
Country Club Boulevard And Lake Shore Drive: All vehicles approaching the intersection of Country Club Boulevard and Lake Shore Drive shall stop
before entering such intersection.
Dellwood Drive And Devonshire Parkway: All vehicles approaching the intersection of Dellwood Drive and Devonshire Parkway shall stop before
entering such intersection.
Franklin Avenue And N.W. 82nd Street: All vehicles approaching the intersection of N.W. 82nd Street and Franklin Avenue shall stop before entering
such intersection.
Indian Hills Drive And N.W. 92nd Street: All vehicles approaching the intersection of N.W. 92nd Street and Indian Hills Drive shall stop before entering
such intersection.
Lake Pointe Drive And South Shore Drive/Willow Drive: All vehicles approaching the intersection of Lake Pointe Drive and South Shore Drive/Willow
Drive shall stop before entering such intersection.
Sunset Terrace And N.W. 123rd Street: All vehicles approaching the intersection of N.W. 123rd Street and Sunset Terrace shall stop before entering
such intersection. (Ord. 1064, 12-13-2018)
6-5-4: YIELD REQUIRED:
Every driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety, shall stop at
the first opportunity at either a clearly marked stop line or before entering a crosswalk or before entering the intersection or traffic circle or at the point
nearest the intersecting roadway or where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway or within a traffic circle. After slowing
or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle on the intersecting roadway which has entered the intersection, or an approaching
vehicle within a traffic circle, or which is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 161/439
within an intersection or a traffic circle. Drivers shall yield in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.322 and 321.345)
Alice Avenue: Vehicles traveling east on Alice Avenue shall yield at N.W. 82nd Street.
Berkshire Parkway: Vehicles traveling on Berkshire Parkway shall yield at Boston Parkway.
Berkshire Parkway: Vehicles traveling on Berkshire Parkway shall yield at Sheridan Avenue.
Boston Parkway: Vehicles traveling on Boston Parkway shall yield at Berkshire Parkway.
Boston Parkway: Vehicles traveling on Boston Parkway shall yield at N.W. 156th Street.
Carpenter Avenue: Vehicles traveling west on Carpenter Avenue shall yield at N.W. 94th Court.
Clark Street: Vehicles traveling east on Clark Street shall yield at N.W. 84th Street.
Clark Street: Vehicles traveling on Clark Street shall yield at N.W. 101st Street.
Clark Street: Vehicles traveling on Clark Street shall yield at N.W. 102nd Street.
Franklin Avenue: Vehicles traveling east on Franklin Avenue shall yield at N.W. 81st Street.
Hickman Frontage Road: All vehicles turning right from Hickman Road at 10930 Hickman Road shall yield to vehicles on the Hickman Frontage Road
before entering roadway.
Northwest Drive: Vehicles traveling on Northwest Drive shall yield at N.W. 81st Street.
Northwest Drive: Vehicles traveling west on Northwest Drive shall yield at N.W. 82nd Street.
Sheridan Avenue: Vehicles traveling west on Sheridan Avenue shall yield at Berkshire Parkway.
N.W. 101st Street: Vehicles traveling on N.W. 101st Street shall yield at Clark Street.
N.W. 102nd Street: Vehicles traveling on N.W. 102nd Street shall yield at Clark Street.
N.W. 156th Street: Vehicles traveling on N.W. 156th Street shall yield at Boston Parkway. (Ord. 937, 10-7-2010; amd. Ord. 1026, 12-8-2016)
6-5-5: STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK; RIGHT OF WAY:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the
sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when said driver can do so without danger to pedestrian traffic, and said driver
shall yield the right of way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which said driver's vehicle is entering. The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross
a highway from a private road or driveway shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving on said highway and shall yield the right of way to all
vehicles approaching on said highway. (2000 Code § 65.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
6-5-6: STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED:
Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle. (2000 Code § 65.06)
6-5-7: YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS:
Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to
yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection. (2000 Code § 65.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
6-5-8: OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS AND PEDESTRIAN CONTROLS:
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the
intersection or at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering the following intersections, and every driver and pedestrian shall observe and comply with the directions provided by official traffic control
signals at the following intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321.322 and 321.256)
Intersection of Country Club Boulevard and University Avenue.
Intersection of Hickman Road and the northbound exit-entrance ramps to Interstate 35/80.
Intersection of Hickman Road and the southbound exit-entrance ramps to Interstate 35/80.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 162/439
Intersection of Patricia Drive and Hickman Road.
Intersection of N.W. 12th Avenue (commonly known as University Avenue) and the northbound entrance ramp of Interstate 35/80.
Intersection of N.W. 12th Avenue (commonly known as University Avenue) and the southbound exit ramp of Interstate 35/80.
Intersection of N.W. 82nd Street and Hickman Road.
Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and Alice Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and Dahl's Driveway.
Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and Franklin Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and Harbach Boulevard.
Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and Hickman Road.
Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 86th Street and University Boulevard.
Intersection of N.W. 88th Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 90th Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 94th Court and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 100th Street and Clark Street.
Intersection of N.W. 100th Street and Hickman Road.
Intersection of N.W. 100th Street and Lincoln Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 100th Street and Swanson Boulevard.
Intersection of N.W. 100th Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 102nd Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 104th Street and Hickman Road.
Intersection of N.W. 104th Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 107th Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 111th Street and Hickman Road.
Intersection of N.W. 111th Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 114th Street and Forest Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 114th Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 118th Street and Hickman Road.
Intersection of N.W. 118th Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 123rd Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 128th Street and Hickman Road.
Intersection of N.W. 128th Street and Sunset Terrace.
Intersection of N.W. 128th Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 128th Street and Woodlands Parkway.
Intersection of N.W. 138th Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 142nd Street and Hickman Road.
Intersection of N.W. 142nd Street and University Avenue.
Intersection of N.W. 156th Street and Hickman Road. (2000 Code § 65.08; amd. 2008 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 163/439
Chapter 6
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
6-6-1: EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER:
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city under chapter 306A, code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and for the promotion of the general welfare. (2000 Code § 140.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
6-6-2: DEFINITION:
The term "controlled access facility" means a highway or street especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants
of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement, or only a controlled right or easement of access, light, air or view by reason of the fact
that their property abuts upon such controlled access facility, or for any other reason. (2000 Code § 140.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)
6-6-3: RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED:
No person has any right of ingress or egress to or from abutting lands onto or across any controlled access facility, except at such designated points at
which access is permitted. (2000 Code § 140.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
6-6-4: ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED:
There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities within the city, described as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3)
Project U-6-4(4) - 40-77. On the primary road system extension improvement, project U-6-4(4) - 40-77, primary road U.S. 6, within the city,
described as follows:
On Hickman Road (U.S. 6) from the west corporation line to the east corporation line
regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway all in accordance with the plans for such improvement identified as project U-6-
4(4) - 40-77, on file in the office of the clerk. (2000 Code § 140.04)
6-6-5: UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY:
It is unlawful for any person to:
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 306A.3 and 321.366)
A. Cross Dividing Line: Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any curb, central dividing section, or other separation or dividing line on such controlled
access facilities.
B. Turns: Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation or
line.
C. Use Of Lanes: Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane provided for that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the central
dividing curb, separation, section or line.
D. Enter Facility: Drive any vehicle into the controlled access facility from a local service road except through an opening provided for that purpose in
the dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line which separates such service road from the controlled access facility property. (2000 Code
§ 140.05)
6-6-6: PARKING RESTRICTED:
The parking of vehicles on or along controlled access facilities is restricted as follows:
A. Minor Street Approaches: Parking shall be prohibited on all minor street approaches for a distance of one hundred feet (100') in advance of the stop
sign.
B. Minor Street Exits: Parking shall be prohibited on the exit side of a minor street for a distance of one hundred feet (100').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 164/439
C. Hickman Road: Parking is prohibited on that portion of Hickman Road (U.S. 6) lying within the corporate limits of the city from the west corporation
line to the east corporation line.
D. Service Roads: Parking is prohibited on the following service roads:
1. From N.W. 114th Street (State Farm Road) easterly to the street connection at station 586+79.
2. From station 644+32 easterly six hundred forty feet (640') to the street connection at station 650+72.
3. From N.W. 86th Street (Clive Road) (station 665+65) easterly three hundred thirty feet (330') to station 668+95. This street is approximately two
hundred ten feet (210') south of and parallel to Hickman Road (U.S. 6).
E. N.W. 86th Street: Parking is prohibited on N.W. 86th Street (Clive Road) from Hickman Road (U.S. 6) south five hundred feet (500').
F. N.W. 82nd Street: Parking is prohibited on N.W. 82nd Street from Hickman Road (U.S. 6) south one hundred fifty feet (150'). (2000 Code § 140.06)
6-6-7: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 140.07)
Chapter 7
BICYCLE REGULATIONS AND REGISTRATION
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
BICYCLE: Either of the following:
A. A device having up to four (4) wheels and having at least one saddle or seat for the use of a rider which is propelled by human power.
B. A device having up to four (4) wheels with fully operable pedals and an electric motor of one horsepower or less.
MULTIUSE TRAIL: A way or place, the use of which is controlled by the city as an owner of real property, or under the control of the city by easement,
designated by the multiuse recreational trail maps, as approved by resolution by the city council, and no multiuse trail shall be considered as a street
or highway. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-2: ALTERATION OF SERIAL FRAME NUMBER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the manufacturer's serial frame number of any bicycle.
(Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-3: SIRENS AND WHISTLES PROHIBITED:
A bicycle shall not be equipped with and a person shall not use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle. This section shall not apply to bicycles ridden by
peace officers in the line of duty. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-4: LAMPS AND REFLECTORS:
A. Every bicycle ridden at any time from sunset to sunrise and at such other times when conditions such as fog, snow, sleet, or rain provide insufficient
lighting to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of three hundred feet (300') ahead shall be equipped with a
lamp on the front exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at least three hundred feet (300') to the front.
B. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of three hundred feet (300') to the rear; except
that a red reflector may be used in lieu of a rear light.
C. Equivalent equipment such as headlamps and red light attachments to the arm or leg may be used in lieu of a lamp on the front and a red light on
the rear of the bicycle, provided such equipment is visible from a distance of at least three hundred feet (300') to both the front and rear of the
bicycle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 165/439
D. A peace officer riding a police bicycle is not required to use either front or rear lamps if duty so requires. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-5: STOPPING:
Every bicycle used upon the city streets, sidewalks, highways, park roads or multiuse trails shall be able to come to a complete stop within a safe
distance. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-6: APPLICABILITY OF MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS:
Every person operating a bicycle upon the city streets, highways, park roads, or multiuse trails shall be subject to this chapter and other city traffic
ordinances and the state statutes applicable to the drivers of motor vehicles, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those
provisions of ordinances and statutes which by their nature can have no application or those provisions for which specific exceptions have been set
forth regarding police bicycles. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-7: OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS:
Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the directions of official traffic signals, signs and other control devices applicable to other vehicles, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer, and shall obey direction signs relative to turns permitted, unless such person dismounts from the bicycle, when
he or she shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-8: IMPROPER RIDING:
A. A person propelling a bicycle on any street, sidewalk, highway, park road or multiuse recreational trail, shall not ride other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached to the bicycle and shall not use a bicycle to carry more persons at one time than the number of persons for
which the bicycle is designed and equipped.
B. This section does not apply to the use of a bicycle in a parade or special event authorized by the city. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-9: CARRYING PACKAGES:
No person operating a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk, highway, park road or multiuse trail shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents
the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-10: CONTROL WITH HANDS ON HANDLEBARS:
The operator of a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk, highway, park road or multiuse trail shall keep the bicycle under control at all times and at all times
during operation shall have one or both hands upon the handlebars and the feet engaged with the braking device if the braking device is designed to
be actuated by the feet. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-11: PLACE OF RIDING:
A. Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at a speed less than the normal speed of traffic moving in the same direction shall ride as close as
practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway except under any of the following situations:
1. When overtaking and passing another bicycle vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
2. When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.
3. When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions (including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, animals,
surface hazards, or substandard width lanes) that make it unsafe to continue along the right hand curb or edge. For purposes of this section, a
"substandard width lane" is a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle and a vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
4. A facility that would allow bicycle traffic on the left side of the roadway.
B. Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway which carries traffic in one direction only and has two (2) or more marked traffic lanes, may ride as
near the left hand curb or edge of such roadway as practicable.
C. When so riding upon any multiuse trail with other cyclists, there shall not be more than two (2) abreast.
D. This section does not apply to the use of a bicycle in a parade or special event authorized by the city. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-12: BICYCLE LANES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 166/439
A. Whenever a bicycle lane has been established on a roadway, any person operating a bicycle upon the roadway moving in the same direction may
ride within the bicycle lane.
B. Any person operating a bicycle within a bicycle lane may move out of the lane when overtaking and passing another bicycle, vehicle, or pedestrian
within the lane or about to enter the lane if such overtaking and passing cannot be done safely within the lane.
C. No person operating a bicycle shall leave a bicycle lane until the movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after giving an
appropriate signal.
D. No person shall drive a motor vehicle in a bicycle lane established on a roadway except as follows:
1. To park where parking is permitted.
2. To enter or leave the roadway.
3. To prepare for a turn within a distance of two hundred feet (200') from the intersection. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-13: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY:
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area and upon entering the roadway shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-14: OPERATION ON SIDEWALK:
Bicycles may be operated upon the public sidewalks in a careful and prudent manner, except where signs are erected to prohibit riding on the
sidewalk. Every person lawfully operating a bicycle upon a public sidewalk, shall yield the right of way when approaching a pedestrian and shall give
an audible signal before overtaking and passing. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-15: CLINGING TO OTHER VEHICLES:
No person riding upon any bicycle on a street, sidewalk, highway, park road or multiuse trail shall attach the bicycle or himself or herself to any moving
vehicle by towrope, handgrip or otherwise. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-16: FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
No person riding a bicycle shall follow closer than five hundred feet (500') of an emergency vehicle as defined by Iowa Code section 321.1 which has
emergency lights and/or siren activated, and shall not stop, park, or leave a bicycle within five hundred feet (500') of an emergency vehicle stopped in
response to an emergency. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-17: PARKING:
No person shall leave a bicycle lying on its side on any sidewalk, or shall park a bicycle on a sidewalk in any other position, so that there is not an
adequate path for pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-18: RECKLESS OPERATION:
No person shall operate a bicycle with wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-19: REGISTRATION:
A. Voluntary Registration: Each resident of the city who is the owner of a bicycle may make application for registration thereof to the police chief, the
duration of which registration shall extend for a two (2) year period, whereupon renewal of said application shall be due. If the bicycle complies with
the provisions hereof, the police chief shall issue an identification plate, which shall be securely fastened to the bicycle described in the application.
The police chief shall maintain a record of the name and address of the owner, a description of such bicycle by name or make, the frame number
thereof and the number of the identification sticker used.
B. Condition Precedent: All bicycles submitted for registration shall be equipped as provided in this chapter, and the police chief shall refuse to register
any bicycle found not to be so equipped or found to be in unsafe mechanical condition.
C. Registration Fee: A fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be charged by the city for each bicycle registered.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 167/439
D. Transfer Of Ownership: Upon sale or other transfer of a registered bicycle, the owner shall, upon proper application to the police department,
transfer his or her identification plate to the new owner.
E. Removal Of Identification Sticker: No person shall remove any identification sticker from a bicycle during the period for which issued, except in the
event a bicycle is dismantled for repair or otherwise no longer used upon any street or public way in the city.
F. Alteration Of Registration Number Sticker: It is unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter any registration number sticker during
the period when such registration is operative.
G. Duplicate Registration Stickers: In the event of loss by the owner of a registration sticker, a duplicate sticker may be obtained from the police chief
upon application and the payment of twenty five cents ($0.25). (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
6-7-20: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 946, 10-6-2011)
Chapter 8
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
6-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles within the city. (2000 Code § 75.01)
6-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE OR ATV: A motorized flotation tire vehicle with not less than three (3) low pressure tires, but not more than six (6) low
pressure tires, or a two (2) wheeled, off road motorcycle, that is limited in engine displacement to less than eight hundred (800) cubic centimeters and
in total dry weight to less than eight hundred fifty (850) pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars
for steering control. Two (2) wheeled, off road motorcycles shall be considered all-terrain vehicles only for the purpose of titling and registration. An
operator of a two (2) wheeled, off road motorcycle is exempt from the safety instruction and certification program requirements of sections 321I.24 and
321I.25 of the code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1[1])
SNOWMOBILE: A motorized vehicle weighing less than one thousand (1,000) pounds which uses sled type runners or skis, endless belt type tread, or
any combination of runners, skis or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or ice. (2000 Code § 75.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1[18])
6-8-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
No person shall operate an ATV within the city in violation of chapter 321I of the code of Iowa or a snowmobile within the city in violation of the
provisions of chapter 321G of the code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the natural resource commission of the department of natural
resources governing their registration, numbering, equipment and manner of operation. (2000 Code § 75.03)
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G and Ch. 321I)
6-8-4: OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES:
The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as to where snowmobiles may be operated within the city:
A. Streets: Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets which have not been plowed during the snow season.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
B. Exceptions: Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under the following circumstances:
1. Direct Route: Snowmobiles may be operated on any street within the city for the sole and exclusive purpose of using the most direct roadway for
the ingress to and egress from the city. No snowmobile shall be driven on any roadway solely for entertainment or pleasure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
2. Direct Crossing: Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a prohibited street, provided all of the following occur:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 168/439
a. The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing;
b. The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the street;
c. The driver yields the right of way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and
d. In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
C. Railroad Right Of Way: Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an operating railroad right of way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a
railroad right of way only at an established crossing, and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of
the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
D. Trails: Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4g])
E. Parks And Other City Land: Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park, playground or upon any other city owned property without the express
permission of the city.
F. Sidewalk Or Parking: Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the "parking" except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is
authorized by this chapter. (2000 Code § 75.04)
6-8-5: OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES:
The operators of ATVs shall comply with the following restrictions as to where ATVs may be operated within the city:
A. Streets: ATVs may be operated on streets only in accordance with section 321.234A of the code of Iowa or on such streets as may be designated
by resolution of the council for the sport of driving ATVs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 and 2A])
B. Trails: ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[3])
C. Railroad Right Of Way: ATVs shall not be operated on an operating railroad right of way. An ATV may be driven directly across a railroad right of
way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established
crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[h])
D. Parks And Other City Land: ATVs shall not be operated in any park, playground or upon any other city owned property without the express
permission of the city.
E. Sidewalk Or Parking: ATVs shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the "parking". (2000 Code § 75.05)
6-8-6: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No ATV or snowmobile shall be operated in the city between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., except for emergency
situations or for loading and unloading from a transport trailer. (2000 Code § 75.06)
6-8-7: THAW BAN:
Snowmobiles shall not be operated during a publicized thaw ban in areas posted to prohibit such operation. (2000 Code § 75.07)
6-8-8: NEGLIGENCE:
The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile.
The owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the
time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner's consent to operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage
occurred. (2000 Code § 75.08)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321G.18 and 321I.19)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 169/439
6-8-9: ACCIDENT REPORTS:
Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an
accident report, in accordance with state law. (2000 Code § 75.09)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 321G.10 and 321I.11)
6-8-10: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 75.10)
Chapter 9
ABANDONED VEHICLES
6-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1])
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any of the following:
A. A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more than twenty four (24) hours and lacks current registration plates or two (2) or
more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
B. A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than twenty four (24) hours.
C. A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for
more than twenty four (24) hours.
D. A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days. However, a
police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the ten (10) day period by commencing the notification process.
E. Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
F. A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to section 321J.4B of the code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the
impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out the impoundment order.
DEMOLISHER: A person licensed under chapter 321H of the code of Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or scrap
metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
POLICE AUTHORITY: The Iowa state patrol or any law enforcement agency of a county or city. (2000 Code § 80.01)
6-9-2: AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION:
A police authority, upon the authority's own initiative or upon the request of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall
take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority
may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or hire a private entity, equipment and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving,
storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. If a police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall
provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the registered owners, all lien holders of record, and any other known claimant to the
vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle. (2000 Code § 80.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
6-9-3: NOTICE BY MAIL:
The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an abandoned vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail, the last known
registered owner of the vehicle, all lien holders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the vehicle,
addressed to the parties' last known addresses of record, that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be deemed given when
mailed. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the
vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, and inform the persons receiving the notice of their right to reclaim the
vehicle and personal property within ten (10) days after the effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of the notice. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lien
holders or claimants to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner,
lien holders and claimants of all right, title, claim and interest in the vehicle or personal property, and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal
property is deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher and to disposal of the personal
property by sale or destruction. The notice shall state that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the
planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 170/439
may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to contest those matters. If the persons receiving the notice do not ask for a hearing or
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the ten (10) day reclaiming period, the owner, lien holders or claimants shall no
longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property. A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any
right, title, claim, or interest of the owner, lien holders or claimants after the expiration of the ten (10) day reclaiming period. (2000 Code § 80.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
6-9-4: NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER:
If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of the last registered owner and all lien holders, notice by one
publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice
under section 6-9-3 of this chapter. The published notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be
published within the same time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice in section 6-9-3 of this chapter. (2000
Code § 80.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])
6-9-5: FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT:
The owner, lien holder or claimant shall pay ten dollars ($10.00) if claimed within five (5) days of impounding, plus two and one-half dollars ($2.50) for
each additional day within the reclaiming period, plus towing charges, if stored by the city, or towing and storage fees, if stored in a public garage,
whereupon said vehicle shall be released. The amount of towing charges, and the rate of storage charges by privately owned garages, shall be
established by such facility. (2000 Code § 80.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
6-9-6: DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided in this chapter, the police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to
whether or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with state law. (2000
Code § 80.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
6-9-7: DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES:
The city or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor
vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without
notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two (2) or more wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally
inoperable. The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant shall then apply to the county treasurer for a junking
certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title. (2000 Code § 80.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
6-9-8: PROCEEDS FROM SALES:
Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing and notification
required, in accordance with state law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lien holder for ninety (90) days, and then
shall be deposited in the state road use tax fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs, the police authority
shall apply for reimbursement from the department of transportation. (2000 Code § 80.08)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
6-9-9: DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER:
Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or otherwise demolish
such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate
issued for the vehicle. (2000 Code § 80.09)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
6-9-10: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 80.10)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 171/439
Chapter 1
STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS
7-1-1: EXCAVATIONS1:
Except to install a mailbox, no person shall dig, excavate or in any manner disturb any street, parking or alley except in accordance with the following:
A. Permit Required: No excavation shall be commenced without first obtaining a permit therefor. A written application for such permit shall be filed with
the city and shall contain the following:
1. An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
2. A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is to be made;
3. The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and restoration of the street or alley surface; and
4. Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
B. Public Convenience: Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the
uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
C. Barricades, Fencing And Lighting: Adequate barricades, fencing and warning lights meeting standards in the manual of uniform traffic control
devices and as otherwise specified by the city shall be so placed as to protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the city in providing or
maintaining adequate barricades, fencing or warning lights shall be paid to the city by the permit holder/property owner.
D. Restoration Of Public Property: Streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the
condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner satisfactory to the city, at the expense of the permit holder/property
owner.
E. Inspection: All work shall be subject to inspection by the city. Backfill shall not be deemed completed, nor resurfacing of any improved street or alley
surface begun, until such backfill is inspected and approved by the city. The permit holder/property owner shall provide the city with notice at least
twenty four (24) hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is desired.
F. Completion By City: Should any excavation in any street or alley be discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of twenty four (24) hours
after the approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the city has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and
charge any expenses therefor to the permit holder/property owner.
G. Responsibility For Costs: All costs and expenses incident to the excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. The permit
holder and owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
H. Notification: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of the excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, the
person performing the excavation shall contact the statewide notification center and provide the center with the information required under section
480.4 of the code of Iowa.
I. Permit Issued: Upon approval of the application, a permit shall be issued. A separate permit shall be required for each excavation. (2000 Code
§ 135.10)
7-1-2: VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS:
A. Power To Vacate: When, in the judgment of the council, it would be in the best interest of the city to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any
public grounds, the council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this section. (2000 Code § 137.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])
B. Planning And Zoning Commission: Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds shall be referred by the council to
the planning and zoning commission for its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the council. The commission shall submit a
written report including recommendations to the council within thirty (30) days after the date the proposed vacation is referred to the commission.
(2000 Code § 137.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
C. Notice Of Vacation Hearing: The council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be
considered. (2000 Code § 137.03)
D. Findings Required: No street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds shall be vacated unless the council finds that:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 172/439
1. Public Use: The street, alley, portion thereof or any public ground proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore,
its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
2. Abutting Property: The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
(2000 Code § 137.04)
E. Disposal Of Vacated Streets Or Alleys: When in the judgment of the council it would be in the best interest of the city to dispose of a vacated street
or alley, portion thereof or public ground, the council may do so in accordance with the provisions of section 364.7, code of Iowa. (2000 Code
§ 137.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
F. Disposal By Gift Limited: The city may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental body for a public purpose. (2000 Code § 137.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7[3])
7-1-3: STREET GRADES:
A. Established Grades: The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been heretofore established by ordinance are hereby confirmed,
ratified and established as official grades. (2000 Code § 138.01)
B. Record Maintained: The clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon request. (2000
Code § 138.02)
C. Datum Plane: The United States coast and geodetic survey datum plane shall be used as the reference plan in establishing all elevations and
grades within the city. The official bench mark system shall be on file in the office of the global information systems (GIS) coordinator. (2000 Code
§ 138.03; amd. 2008 Code)
7-1-4: NAMING OF STREETS:
A. Naming New Streets: New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
1. Extension Of Existing Street: Streets added to the city that are natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing
street.
2. Resolution: All street names, except streets named as a part of a subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
3. Planning And Zoning Commission: Proposed street names shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission for review and
recommendation. (2000 Code § 139.01)
B. Changing Name Of Street: The council may, by resolution, change the name of a street. (2000 Code § 139.02)
C. Recording Street Names: Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the mayor and clerk shall file a copy thereof with the
county recorder, county auditor and county assessor. (2000 Code § 139.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
7-1-5: RAILROAD REGULATIONS:
A. Definitions: For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
OPERATOR: Any individual, partnership, corporation or other association which owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad train.
RAILROAD TRAIN: An engine or locomotive, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails. (2000 Code § 81.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[29])
B. Warning Signals: Operators shall sound a horn at least one thousand feet (1,000') before a street crossing is reached and after sounding the horn,
shall ring the bell continuously until the crossing is passed. (2000 Code § 81.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.13)
C. Obstructing Streets:
1. Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a period of time in excess
of ten (10) minutes, except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
a. Comply With Signals: When necessary to comply with signals affecting the safety of the movement of trains.
b. Avoid Striking: When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on the track.
c. Disabled: When the train is disabled.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 173/439
d. Safety Regulations: When necessary to comply with governmental safety regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed
regulations.
e. In Motion: When the train is in motion, except while engaged in switching operations.
f. No Traffic: When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the crossing.
2. An employee is not guilty of a violation of this subsection if the employee's action was necessary to comply with the direct orders or instructions
of a railroad corporation or its supervisors. Guilt is then with the railroad corporation. (2000 Code § 81.03)
D. Crossing Maintenance: Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient and safe crossings over any street traversed by their rails. (2000
Code § 81.04)
(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
7-1-6: REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES:
It is unlawful for a person to wilfully remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or
thing, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said
street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof. (2000 Code § 135.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
7-1-7: OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING:
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any street or alley in any manner. (2000 Code § 135.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
7-1-8: DEBRIS DEPOSITS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass or any other debris or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle or which, if washed into the storm sewer,
could contaminate waterways or clog the storm sewer. (2000 Code § 135.03; amd. 2008 Code)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
7-1-9: PLAYING IN STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on streets or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by resolution of the city for such
purposes. (2000 Code § 135.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
7-1-10: TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREETS OR ALLEYS:
It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed
thereon by the authority or permission of any city official, police officer or member of the fire department. (2000 Code § 135.05)
7-1-11: USE OF PARKINGS:
It is unlawful to park, store, place, temporarily or permanently, any car, truck, vehicle, junk or any other goods, wares and merchandise of any kind
upon any street parking without permission of the council. (2000 Code § 135.06)
7-1-12: USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES:
It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering same for sale, without permission of the council. (2000 Code § 135.07)
7-1-13: WASHING VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk or street for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck, equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind. (2000 Code § 135.08)
7-1-14: BURNING PROHIBITED:
No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish or other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley. (2000
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 174/439
Code § 135.09)
7-1-15: MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE2:
It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain that portion of the public right of way outside the lot and property lines and
inside the curb lines of the public streets (the "public parking"), except that the abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees
or deadwood on the public parking. The public parking area shall be planted entirely with: a) turf grass; b) approved vegetative ground cover; c)
permitted plantings, as planted and maintained at a height not to exceed forty eight inches (48") in an area located within thirty six inches (36") of a
single mailbox that is used for U.S. mail delivery; or d) approved landscape materials or permitted plantings, as authorized in a right of way
landscaping permit approved by the public works director, consistent with the standards set forth in this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
public parking must be easily traversable by individuals and any materials or plantings placed in the public parking may not: a) interfere with the ability
of individuals to freely enter or exit their vehicles from or onto the public parking; b) interfere with the ability of motorists to see vehicles or pedestrians
on the public right of way, including the public sidewalk or trail; or c) interfere with the use, maintenance of utilities or drainage of the right of way, all as
determined by the public works director or his or her designee.
The term "approved vegetative ground cover" means a ground cover that does not grow higher than ten inches (10") and is of a species approved by
the public works director. The term "permitted plantings" means nonwoody, thornless plantings. The term "approved landscape materials" means
permeable landscape materials such as pebbles, wood chips or such other permeable materials as are approved from time to time by the public works
director.
Maintenance of the public parking includes timely mowing, trimming of any permitted trees, shrubs and plantings, and picking up litter. Specifically, but
not by way of limitation of the foregoing, the property owner shall maintain all grass areas or approved vegetative ground cover in the public parking to
a height or length not to exceed ten inches (10"), except as otherwise specifically allowed in this section.
In the event the city or any public utility shall disturb the public parking for utilities or street work, the city or public utility shall restore any turf grass
area to a similar condition existing prior to the disturbance, by reseeding such turf grass area. The city or public utility shall have no duty to replace any
plantings, bushes or vegetation in the public parking other than turf grass. (Ord. 899, 11-6-2008)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c and e])
7-1-16: DUMPING OF SNOW:
It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; or to push, throw, place or cause to be thrown, pushed or placed such ice or snow onto any adjoining property not owned
by such person. (2000 Code § 135.13)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
7-1-17: UNDERGROUND IRRIGATION SYSTEMS IN PARKING:
Abutting property owners may install and maintain underground lawn irrigation systems in the parking, provided that all related equipment, except
necessary and direct connections from the water supply to the underground irrigation system, is located solely in an area within one foot (1') of the
street side of the sidewalk, or between five (5) and six feet (6') of the property line in areas where sidewalks are not installed. Abutting property owners
acting pursuant to these provisions do so at their own risk and without any right, title or interest in the parking or in the free use and enjoyment of the
parking for the purpose allowed in this section. Abutting property owners acting pursuant to this section should take notice of the fact that installations
in the parking will be subject to damage or destruction at any time that the city or a person with a utility easement deems it necessary to enter upon the
parking for construction, maintenance or any other purpose. Removal of underground lawn irrigation systems may be required at any time by the city.
(2000 Code § 135.14; amd. 2008 Code)
7-1-18: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 135.15)
Chapter 2
SIDEWALK/SHARED USE PATH REGULATIONS
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
BICYCLE/RECREATIONAL TRAIL: A PCC, blacktop or gravel bicycle/recreational route developed primarily for outdoor recreational purposes. Trails
are largely designed for pedestrians and other users to "experience" the outdoors and may be used by a variety of users, but they are not primarily
designed for transportation purposes.
PROPERTY: Land situated in the city, whether or not improved with buildings or other structures.
PROPERTY OWNER: A person who, alone or with another person or other persons, holds the legal title to property; except, however, where property
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 175/439
has been sold on contract to a person who has the present right to possess the property and the contract has been filed for record in the office of the
Polk County recorder or the Dallas County recorder, the person so purchasing the property, whether alone or with another person or other persons, is
the "property owner" and not the person retaining bare legal title to the property as security for the balance of the purchase price.
PUBLIC SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property line or within easements
on private property that is paved or improved and intended for use by pedestrians. In accordance with section 12-5-9 of this code, a public sidewalk
must be a minimum of four feet (4') in width. A sidewalk's primary purpose is to provide pedestrians with connections to neighborhoods, shopping
centers, businesses and other venues of interest.
SHARED USE PATH: A paved pathway, typically from eight (8) to twelve feet (12') in width, physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic within
the roadway right of way or within an easement adjacent to the roadway right of way. Primarily used by pedestrians and bicyclists, shared use paths
are also used by joggers, skaters, wheelchair users (both nonmotorized and motorized). A shared use path's primary purpose is to provide pedestrians
with connections to trails, other neighborhoods, shopping centers, businesses and other venues of interest. In addition, the shared use path may be
used for recreational purposes.
TRAILHEAD: An outdoor system developed to serve as an access point to a bicycle/recreational trail which generally includes an area to park vehicles
and typically is a beginning or ending point of a bicycle/recreational trail. The junction of two (2) or more trails, where no other access point is provided
to the trails, is not a trailhead. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
7-2-2: DUTY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS:
Every property owner is required to maintain, at his or her own expense, the public sidewalk or the shared use path on that length and side of the
public street or streets to which said property owner's property abuts in accordance with the city's sidewalk/shared use path inspection and repair
policy ("repair policy") approved by the city council. This obligation to maintain includes, without limitation, the duty to keep the public sidewalk or
shared use path open, free of debris, snow and ice and other obstacles as required by this chapter and in a reasonable state of repair so as not to
present a hazard to persons using the public sidewalk or shared use path; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to require a
property owner to take any action with respect to a public sidewalk or shared use path when said action is made necessary by the excavation or other
activity of the city or a public utility. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
7-2-3: PERFORMANCE BY CITY:
If the property owner does not perform an action required by this chapter, and more particularly set forth in the repair policy, within a reasonable time,
the council may cause such required action to be performed and assess the costs and expenses therefor against the abutting property for collection in
the same manner as property taxes. Provided, however, no such assessment shall be made for the repair, reconstruction or replacement of a public
sidewalk unless the city has served upon the person shown by the records of the Polk County auditor or the Dallas County auditor to be the owner of
the abutting property, by certified mail, a notice requiring said person to repair, reconstruct or replace the public sidewalk within forty five (45) days
from the date said notice is mailed. For a shared use path, the city shall perform the repair, reconstruction or replacement of the shared use path in
accordance with the repair policy and the property owner shall be responsible to pay to the city the cost of repairing, reconstructing or replacing that
portion of the shared use path which is equal in width to the minimum width of a sidewalk under this code, as such amount is reasonably determined
by the city engineer. The remaining cost of reconstructing or replacing the shared use path shall be borne by the city. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
(Code of Iowa, Secs. 364.12[2d and e])
7-2-4: RIGHT TO SPECIALLY ASSESS RESERVED:
The city is not prevented by this chapter from paying for or recouping the costs and expenses of repairing, reconstructing or replacing the public
sidewalk, the portion of the public shared use path equal in width to the minimum width of a sidewalk under this code or the public parking by special
assessment where otherwise authorized by city ordinance and the laws of the state. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
7-2-5: SIDEWALK STANDARDS:
Public sidewalks/shared use paths repaired, replaced or constructed within the city shall meet the standards for such construction adopted by
resolution of the council. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
7-2-6: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE ACCUMULATIONS:
The owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge of property abutting sidewalks and shared use paths shall remove snow and ice accumulations from
sidewalks and from a portion of shared use paths equal in width to the minimum width of a sidewalk under this code within twenty four (24) hours after
a snowfall or the deposit or formation of ice thereon. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
7-2-7: AWNINGS:
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any sidewalk or shared use path unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least
eight feet (8') above the surface of the sidewalk or shared use path and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or other suitable material
supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the sidewalk or shared use
path or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
7-2-8: ENCROACHING STEPS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 176/439
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk or shared use path without permission
by resolution of the council. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
7-2-9: OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES:
It is unlawful for a person to:
A. Stairs And Railings: Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk or shared use
path, or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk or shared use path with a railing without permission by resolution of the council.
B. Openings: Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on any sidewalk or shared use path except while in actual use with adequate
guards to protect the public.
C. Protect Openings: Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on or within six feet (6') of any sidewalk or shared use path. (Ord. 978, 6-20-
2013)
7-2-10: FIRES OR FUELS ON SIDEWALKS:
It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or shared use path or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk or
shared use path. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
7-2-11: DEFACING:
It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or writing on any sidewalk or shared use path. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
7-2-12: DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS:
It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk or shared use path any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage,
rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
7-2-13: MERCHANDISE DISPLAY:
It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk or shared use path, any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner
as to interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk or shared use path; in no case shall more than three feet (3') of
the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such purposes. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
7-2-14: SALES STANDS:
It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables, candy, soft drinks or other substances or
commodities on any sidewalk or shared use path without first obtaining a written permit from the council. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
7-2-15: EFFECT UPON OTHER LAWS:
This chapter shall not be construed to allow any use of the public sidewalk, shared use path or the public parking that is otherwise prohibited by the
laws of the state of Iowa or by other ordinances of the city or to lessen the duty of care otherwise imposed upon property owners by the laws of the
state. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
7-2-16: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 978, 6-20-2013)
Chapter 3
DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 177/439
7-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall create a new ingress or egress for the establishment of a driveway onto private property from a public thoroughfare or make any curb
cuts or remove any curbs without first obtaining a permit therefor from the community development department. (2000 Code § 141.01)
7-3-2: TIME OF COMPLETION:
All construction commenced pursuant to said permits authorizing curb cuts or curb removal shall be completed as follows:
A. Summer Construction: All such construction commenced hereunder after March 15 and on or before September 15 of any year shall be completed
no later than thirty (30) days after commencement of said construction, or October 15 of that year, whichever comes first.
B. Winter Construction: All such construction commenced after October 15 and before March 15 of any year shall be completed no later than seventy
two (72) hours after commencement of said construction. (2000 Code § 141.02; amd. 2008 Code)
7-3-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The application for said permit shall contain a rough drawing showing said proposed ingress or egress for the establishment of a driveway and for any
curb cut or curb removal and its location with reference to the public right of way and the lot lines of property owned by said applicant. (2000 Code
§ 141.03)
7-3-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
The council may from time to time prescribe regulations providing for restrictions, limitations and conditions for the granting of such new ingress or
egress and driveways onto private property from a public thoroughfare and the size thereof. (2000 Code § 141.04)
7-3-5: CURB REMOVAL:
A. Residential: All curbs removed in a residential area shall be ground off and not sawed. Only in special circumstances will sawing be allowed and
must be approved by the director of public works. When sawing is allowed, it shall be done with a concrete saw. All curbs shall be cut to the closest
longitudinal joint if less than forty two inches (42") or a minimum of eighteen inches (18") on a longitudinal line from the back of curb. Other
requirements shall also be subject to the city's standard specifications adopted by the council. (2000 Code § 141.05)
B. Commercial: All curbs removed in a commercial area shall be made by sawing the curb and street to the nearest longitudinal joint on the public
street. Other requirements shall also be subject to the city's standards specifications adopted by the council. (2000 Code § 141.06)
7-3-6: PROTECTION PROVIDED:
All openings in the curb and the street and all work performed therein shall, during the progress of the work, be protected as prescribed by the MUTCD
(manual on uniform traffic control devices). (2000 Code § 141.07)
7-3-7: COMPLIANCE:
The person receiving said permit must comply completely with the regulations or requirements of the permit when issued, and any deviation therefrom
shall subject the party obtaining the permit to penalty. (2000 Code § 141.08)
7-3-8: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 141.09)
Chapter 4
MAILBOXES
7-4-1: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 178/439
The city's right of way is held by the city primarily for the purpose of pedestrian and vehicular passage and for the city's provision of essential public
safety services, including police, fire and emergency medical response services, and public health services, including sanitary sewer, water and storm
drainage. The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for mailboxes in order to maintain the safety and the visual character of the city's right of
way. (2000 Code § 142.01)
7-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
BREAKAWAY SUPPORT: A supporting post which shall be no larger than a four inch by four inch (4" x 4") wood post or a metal post with a strength
no greater than a two inch (2") diameter schedule 40 steel pipe and which is buried no more than twenty four inches (24") deep. Such a support post
shall not be set in concrete unless specifically designed as a breakaway support system as defined in "A Guide For Erecting Mailboxes On Highways",
published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, May 24, 1984 (AASHTO).
CLEAR ZONE: An unobstructed flat area adjacent to the traveled portion of a roadway that is used for the recovery of errant vehicles.
CLUSTER STYLE MAILBOX: A style whereby mailboxes, meeting the specifications of the United States postal service (USPS) with the inscription
plainly legible "U.S. MAIL" and "APPROVED BY THE POSTMASTER GENERAL", are assembled and grouped together on a single area of land so
that they are regarded as one unit. Cluster style mailboxes must be manufactured cluster style mailboxes approved by both the city and the USPS.
CURBSIDE MAILBOX: A mailbox consisting of a lightweight sheet metal or plastic box meeting the specifications of the United States postal service
(USPS) with the inscription plainly legible "U.S. MAIL" and "APPROVED BY THE POSTMASTER GENERAL", which is erected at the edge of a
roadway or curbside of a street and is mounted on a breakaway support post, and is intended or used for the collection of mail and is to be served by a
mail carrier from a vehicle.
CUSTOM BUILT MAILBOX: A mailbox erected at the edge of a roadway or curbside of a street constructed using materials that do not meet the
definition of a "curbside mailbox" and "breakaway support". (2000 Code § 142.02)
7-4-3: VISIBILITY; OBSTRUCTION:
All mailboxes must be erected:
A. Away from the intersection of any street and, in no case closer than seventy five feet (75') measured from the centerline of the intersecting street, in
order to prevent obstruction of free and clear vision; and
B. Away from any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any
authorized traffic control device. (2000 Code § 142.03)
7-4-4: CLUSTER STYLE MAILBOXES:
A. New Developments: All new residential or commercial developments constructed after the enactment of the regulations contained in this chapter
(October 2, 2003) which are situated on any public cul-de-sac, street, avenue or other roadway that is maintained by the city and receive curbside
delivery of mail shall have cluster style mailboxes. Any housing development constructed and already receiving mail service before the regulations
in this chapter are enacted is not required to have cluster style mailboxes. (2000 Code § 142.04)
B. Requirements: Cluster style mailboxes serving housing developments situated on any public street or roadway shall be located between the
sidewalk and curb, outside of the three foot (3') clear zone. Cluster style mailboxes shall not be installed anywhere within a cul-de-sac bulb. Cluster
style mailboxes shall have a four foot (4') concrete access from the public street and the public sidewalk. The location of the cluster style mailboxes
shall not exceed six hundred feet (600') from the property line of those residents served by that cluster style mailbox. Cluster style boxes shall be
located on property lines on the same side as what the future no parking areas will be. The location of the cluster style mailbox is to be approved
by the city and by the USPS. The cost of installation, including, but not limited to, box units and concrete pad, shall be borne by the developer, and
subsequent maintenance shall be carried out by the USPS. No driveway or street access shall be constructed within five feet (5') of a cluster style
mailbox. (2000 Code § 142.05)
7-4-5: CURBSIDE MAILBOX REQUIREMENTS:
While curbside mailboxes may be installed in developments constructed and already receiving mail service before the adoption of this chapter
(October 2, 2003), the mailbox owner must comply with the following installation requirements:
A. The bottom of the mailbox shall be forty two inches (42") from the top of curb. On streets without curbs, the bottom of the mailbox shall be forty eight
inches (48") from the edge of pavement, as defined by USPS installation requirements.
B. Lateral placement of the mailbox shall be six inches (6") to eight inches (8") from the face of the curb, as defined by USPS installation requirements.
C. The mailbox support post shall be of a "breakaway support" design, as defined by AASHTO.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 179/439
D. The post-to-box attachment shall be of sufficient strength to prevent the box from separating from the post if a vehicle strikes the post.
E. Property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the curbside mailbox. (2000 Code § 142.06)
7-4-6: CUSTOM BUILT MAILBOX REQUIREMENTS:
A custom built mailbox may be installed in developments constructed and already receiving mail service before the adoption of this chapter (October 2,
2003) if an application for approval of a custom built mailbox is submitted to the city of Clive for review and is approved. A custom built mailbox must
conform to the following requirements and the rules set forth in the application:
A. The structure supporting the mailbox shall be at least twelve inches (12") from the back of curb.
B. The mailbox structure shall not exceed the dimensions of two feet (2') in width, two feet (2') in depth, five feet (5') in height.
C. The mailbox structure shall be located on a two foot six inch (2'6") wide by two foot six inch (2'6") deep by four inch (4") thick concrete pad. The
mailbox structure shall not be permanently affixed to the concrete pad in an attempt to make structure rigid.
D. The local postmaster shall approve and sign off on the application before submittal to the city.
E. Property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the custom built mailbox. If the mailbox is damaged beyond use by the city, a standard
"curbside mailbox" and breakaway post as defined in this chapter will be provided or the property owner can be reimbursed up to a maximum
replacement amount set by council in a fee schedule. If the property owner performs the replacement, reimbursement will not exceed the
established cost for a standard curbside mailbox and breakaway post. Property owner must submit an application for a custom built mailbox with
the city prior to making any needed repairs. (2000 Code § 142.07)
7-4-7: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPERTY OWNER:
Any type of mailbox located in the city right of way is subject to damage or destruction, at any time, as a result of the city or a person with a utility
easement entering upon the city right of way to construct, repair or maintain the utilities located in the city right of way or as a result of the city
engaging in activities to maintain the public street or right of way, such as snow removal, pavement repair or street cleaning. If a curbside or cluster
style mailbox located in the city right of way is damaged during such activities, the city or the utility that damaged the mailbox shall replace said
mailbox with a mailbox of the same design, if it has been approved for installation by the USPS with the proper markings inscribed "U.S. Mail" and
"Approved By The Postmaster General", and if it is still available for purchase and complies with this chapter. Property owner may choose to be
reimbursed in full or have the city reinstall a new mailbox meeting stated requirements. If the property owner chooses to purchase an approved
mailbox and be reimbursed, the city will install the mailbox at the property owner's request. (2000 Code § 142.08)
Chapter 5
TREES
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
dbh: A commonly used term referring to the diameter of a tree at breast height (41/2 feet).
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to
which the public has free access as a park.
PARKING: That part of the street right of way in the city not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line; or, on unpaved
streets, that part of the street right of way lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
PRIVATE TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on private property to which the city has no responsibility. (Ord. 962, 4-19-
2012)
7-5-2: PLANTING RESTRICTIONS:
No trees, shrubs, bushes or woody vegetation shall be planted in any parking or within island medians of divided streets unless otherwise permitted by
the council. (Ord. 962, 4-19-2012)
7-5-3: PUBLIC TREE CARE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 180/439
Except as limited by section 7-5-2 of this chapter, the city has the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines
of all streets, avenues, stands and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of
such public grounds. (Ord. 962, 4-19-2012)
7-5-4: TREE TOPPING:
It is unlawful as a normal practice for any person or city department to top any street tree on public property. "Topping" is defined as the severe cutting
back of limbs to stubs within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms, diseases or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be
exempted from this chapter at the determination of the city. (Ord. 962, 4-19-2012)
7-5-5: DUTY TO TRIM:
A. Private Trees: Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right of way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches do not
obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there is a clear space of eight feet (8') above the
surface of the sidewalk and fifteen feet (15') above the traveled surface of the street. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous
trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city has the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device
or sign, or violates the terms of this subsection.
B. Trees In Parking: In the case of trees existing in the parking, the owner or person in possession of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or
overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least fifteen feet (15') above the surface of the street and eight feet (8') above the
sidewalks. (Ord. 962, 4-19-2012)
7-5-6: CITY ABATEMENT; ASSESSMENT OF COST:
If the abutting property owner or person in possession of the abutting property fails to trim the trees as required in subsection 7-5-5B of this chapter,
the city may serve notice on the abutting property owner requiring the property owner to do so within thirty (30) days. If the property owner fails to trim
the trees within that time, the city may perform the required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner
as a property tax. (Ord. 962, 4-19-2012)
7-5-7: REMOVAL OF TREES AND STUMPS:
A. Dead Or Diseased Tree Removal On Private Property: The owner or person in possession of private property shall remove any trees constituting a
hazard to life or property, or trees harboring insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city located on the private
property within the city. If the owner or person in possession fails to remove any such tree, the city may serve notice on the property owner
requiring the property owner to do so within thirty (30) days. If the property owner fails to remove any such tree within that time, the city may
perform the required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
B. Removal Of Stumps: All stumps of park trees and trees in the parking shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump
does not project above the surface of the ground, except trees in the Greenbelt Park. (Ord. 962, 4-19-2012)
7-5-8: LANDSCAPE PLAN:
A. Submission Of Plan; Required Information: In connection with the submission of a site plan, site plan amendment or preliminary plat for approval by
the planning and zoning commission and the council, the applicant shall submit a landscape plan, which must contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
1. The location of all existing trees four inches (4") in diameter or larger, when measured at the dbh, on public or private property, specifying the
size, species and condition of such existing trees (any such existing trees to be removed shall be noted);
2. The location of all new plant material to be planted on the property, shown by size and species; and
3. A landscape plan filed in connection with a preliminary plat need only show the outline of existing trees and foliage, clarifying the drip line area of
trees with the use of "clouded" areas of individual or clumping of trees.
B. Preliminary Plat Evaluation; Considerations: In evaluating any preliminary plat or site plan for approval, the commission and the council shall
consider the following issues addressed by the landscape plan:
1. Whether an excessive or unnecessary number of existing trees are to be removed, taking into consideration the city's goal of preserving existing
trees and any reasonable alternatives available to the developer;
2. All site plans in zoning districts shall be planted with a variety of trees and shrubs which are substantial in size and number, and are in
accordance with the city's policy on recommended trees;
3. Whether the applicant has provided for the replacement of existing trees to be removed, at other locations on the property;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 181/439
4. Whether the landscaping provides a visual buffer, where necessary, from the surrounding property including headlight screening for streets; and
5. Whether the streets, sidewalks and lots are laid out in a manner to preserve existing trees, where feasible, and whether the applicant has
provided for fencing off or protecting trees during construction, to the extent feasible.
C. Protection Of Existing Trees Not Being Removed: Any and all existing trees which are not to be removed pursuant to the landscape plan shall be
clearly identified and, prior to the issuance of a grading permit, shall be protected at the construction site by fencing located around the drip line of
the tree, where feasible, maximizing the protection of the root zone area of the tree. The foregoing fencing requirements may be waived or modified
by the city if the trees to be saved are not located in an area where construction is occurring.
D. Council Approval Before Permit Issuance: Prior to the issuance of any grading permit or demolition permit for the development of any property that
will require site plan or plat approval, the applicant shall disclose to the city whether any existing tree, four inches (4") in diameter or larger, when
measured at the dbh, are to be removed. If any such trees are to be removed, the city shall not issue a grading permit or demolition permit until a
site plan or preliminary plat has been approved by the council. This is not to include occupied single-family dwellings, duplexes or townhouses.
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a new residential unit shall have, at a minimum, two (2) trees not less than one inch (1") in
diameter.
E. Illegal Tree Removal; Remedial Action: If any trees are removed in violation of an approved site plan or plat, the owner or developer shall plant
three (3) times such number of trees, of equal caliper, on such plat or site plan. If it is impractical to replace such a tree with an equal caliper tree,
then several trees of a smaller caliper, totaling, in aggregate, the caliper of the improperly removed tree, shall be required. The specific number and
size of such trees shall be determined by the city. For purposes of example only, if one 8-inch caliper tree is improperly removed, the city may
require: 1) that three (3) 8-inch caliper trees be planted; 2) that six (6) 4-inch caliper trees be planted; or 3) that twelve (12) 2-inch caliper trees be
planted. If it is impractical to place all of such trees on that particular plat or site plan, the city may require that some of the trees be planted on
public property, such as in a park.
F. Diseased Or Damaged Plantings; Replacement: If any trees, vegetation or other landscape materials shown on an approved landscape plan shall
become diseased or substantially damaged at any time after the landscape plan is approved, the owner of the property shall promptly replace such
trees, vegetation or landscape material to bring the property in compliance with the landscape plan. (Ord. 962, 4-19-2012)
7-5-9: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 962, 4-19-2012)
Chapter 6
PUBLIC PARKS
7-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use
of park facilities. (2000 Code § 47.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used herein shall be given their common and ordinary meanings. The term "motor vehicle" includes every vehicle which is self-propelled, but
not operated upon railroad tracks. (2000 Code § 47.02)
7-6-3: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC:
A. Motor Vehicle Use Restrictions: No person shall operate a motor vehicle within any city park except upon designated access roads for the purpose
of traveling to and from designated parking areas, and no person shall introduce, place or cause to be introduced or placed, any motor vehicle or
any vehicle capable of self-propulsion within any city park except upon designated access roads or designated parking areas. Exception: The
provisions of this subsection do not apply to motorized wheelchairs being used to transport persons with disabilities. (2000 Code § 47.04)
B. Speed Limit: Any person driving a motor vehicle within a city park shall drive same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than or less than is
reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, pedestrians present, and of any other conditions then existing. No person shall drive a
motor vehicle within a city park at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour. (2000 Code § 47.05)
C. Parking: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer, any place other than a designated parking area. (2000 Code § 47.03)
7-6-4: FIRES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 182/439
No fires shall be built within a city park, except in a place provided therefor, and such fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to
be immediately used by some other party. The council may from time to time prohibit all fires within a city park and post signs stating same which shall
cause the building of any fire to be unlawful. (2000 Code § 47.06)
7-6-5: LITTERING:
No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose.
(2000 Code § 47.07)
7-6-6: CAMPING AREAS:
No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portions prescribed or designated by the council. (2000 Code § 47.08)
7-6-7: DESTRUCTION OF NATURAL ENVIRONMENT:
No person shall, in any manner, deface, injure, destroy, cut or remove any tree, shrub, plant, soil, turf, grass, wood, rock, sand or gravel standing or
growing in any city park; or pick or destroy any fruit or flowers or seeds growing therein unless authorized to do so by the council. (2000 Code § 47.09)
7-6-8: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
The following activities are specifically prohibited in a city park:
A. Disposing Of Materials: The placing or dumping of any organic or inorganic materials including raked leaves, grass clippings, construction material,
firewood, paint or any other similar materials.
B. Private Improvements: Gardening and other private improvements such as fences, play equipment and similar encroachments.
C. Disposing Of Refuse: Dumping of trash, debris, junk or similar disposition of refuse. (2000 Code § 47.10)
7-6-9: BUILDINGS AND ANIMALS:
No person shall deface, injure, disturb or interfere with any building or improvement of any kind made or being made in or about any park, or injure,
remove, disturb or interfere with birds or animals found or kept therein, except for bow hunting of deer in the designated urban deer management zone
as authorized in this code1. (Ord. 984, 2-6-2014)
7-6-10: SIGNS AND NOTICES:
A. Posting Of Signs: Except for notices and signs authorized by the council, no person shall post, fasten, paint or affix any placards, signs, notices or
bills within a city park. (2000 Code § 47.12)
B. Official Signs And Notices: No person shall, in any manner, deface, injure, destroy or remove any signs or notices posted in a city park by the city.
(2000 Code § 47.13)
C. Posted Notices: No person shall enter upon portions of any city park or engage in any activities in disregard of official signs forbidding same. (2000
Code § 47.14)
7-6-11: PARENT OR GUARDIAN RESPONSIBILITY:
No parent, guardian or custodian of a minor shall permit or allow such minor to do any act prohibited by any provision of this chapter. (2000 Code
§ 47.15)
7-6-12: CURFEW:
A curfew is in effect from ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. until five thirty o'clock (5:30) A.M. each day in all city parks, and it is unlawful for any person to
be present within a city park during such times unless specifically authorized to be present by the council or unless performing duties as an agent,
employee or official of the city. (2000 Code § 47.16)
7-6-13: FACILITY RESERVATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 183/439
A. Advance Reservation For Use: The parks and recreation director shall establish and maintain a system providing for exclusive use of city park
facilities by advance reservation. (2000 Code § 47.17)
B. Reservation Fee: A reservation fee will be required pursuant to established policies. (Ord. 995, 12-4-2014)
C. Serving Keg Beer; Conditions: Keg beer may not be served, except by a nonprofit organization that: 1) possesses a valid liquor control license or
beer permit, 2) provides proof of insurance to the city, and 3) obtains council approval for the event.
D. Special Event Or Festival Permit:
1. If the parks and recreation department grants a special event or festival permit for use of city park facilities, all persons responsible for organizing
and administering the event must comply with the requirements in the approved permit.
2. If the operation of the festival or event does not comply with the requirements in the approved permit, the city may close or cancel the special
event or festival, and the city may assess fines and fees as provided under the city ordinances and policies. (2000 Code § 47.17)
7-6-14: SHELTER HOUSE OCCUPANCY:
It is unlawful to occupy a city park shelter house during a time when a reservation issued pursuant to section 7-6-13 of this chapter is in effect, except
at the invitation of the reservation holder. (2000 Code § 47.18)
7-6-15: CITY MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, the city may control or manage plants, animals, birds or insects pursuant to
established policies that have been approved by the council, and the city may operate vehicles and maintenance equipment and perform maintenance
activities as needed, pursuant to established policies. (2000 Code § 47.19)
7-6-16: BICYCLE AND RECREATIONAL TRAILS:
A. Definitions:
BICYCLE/RECREATIONAL TRAIL: A PCC, blacktop or gravel bicycle/recreational route developed for outdoor recreational purposes. A pedestrian
route developed primarily to connect elements, spaces, or facilities within an area is not a trail.
SHARED USE PATH: See chapter 2, "Sidewalk/Shared Use Path Regulations", of this title.
TRAILHEAD: An outdoor system developed to serve as an access point to a bicycle/recreational trail. The junction of two (2) or more trails, where
no other access point is provided to the trails, is not a trailhead.
B. Use Restrictions: For the purposes of this chapter, a bicycle/recreational trail is subject to all the regulations governing city parks, whether such trail
is owned by the city or held pursuant to an easement. In city parks where recreational trails are provided, bicycles must be ridden on designated
recreational trails or roadways only. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this chapter, however, the curfew for bicycle/recreational trails
shall be in effect from ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. until five thirty o'clock (5:30) A.M. the following day.
C. Maintenance And Liability: The city shall have the sole obligation to maintain and keep in good repair any city bicycle/recreational trails, whether
such trails are located on land owned by the city or held pursuant to an easement. The owner of the land on which a city bicycle/recreational trail is
located who has granted the city an easement for a recreational trail (the "owner") shall have no maintenance obligations with respect to any such
trail. Except as may be caused by the negligent acts or omissions of the owner, the owner shall not be liable for injury or property damage arising
from the use of the city bicycle/recreational trail. Except as to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the owner, the city shall indemnify
and hold the owner harmless against any loss, damage, injury or claim for injury or property damage arising from the negligent or intentional acts or
omissions of the users of the city bicycle/recreational trail. (Ord. 982, 10-17-2013)
7-6-17: TEMPORARY FENCE FOR CONSTRUCTION ON ADJOINING PROPERTY:
Any property owner whose property adjoins a city park must erect a temporary fence to protect park property during any substantial construction or
development on the adjoining property. (2000 Code § 47.22)
7-6-18: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (2000 Code § 47.23)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 184/439
Chapter 7
PUBLIC PROPERTY SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS
7-7-1: APPLICABILITY:
The following regulations shall apply to special event permit applications submitted to the city. (Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
7-7-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The public right of way in possession of the city is primarily for the use of the public. These regulations prescribe the condition through which special
events of limited duration may be permitted to occur within the city that involve a request from an individual or organization to use city property or right
of way in the conduct or promotion of the event, thereby creating an anticipated significant impact to the city property or right of way, such as increased
vehicle or pedestrian traffic or the closure of a public street, and it is advisable or necessary to include city staff in the preparation, planning,
coordination, and approval of the requested special event to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and of the event participants
or attendees. (Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
7-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
CITY: The city of Clive in the county of Polk and the county of Dallas, in the state of Iowa.
CITY PROPERTY: The land owned and maintained by the city.
PERSON: Any natural person, his or her heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of them.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any organized and advertised gathering for the purpose of entertainment, recreation, competition, public rally, parade or public
march, or festival purposes that will impact city services or public right of way.
STREET: That portion of the public right of way normally used for vehicular traffic and including the abutting sidewalk. (Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
7-7-4: APPLICATION AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
A special event permit shall be required for all events that relate to the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. A special event permit must be timely
applied for and issued by the city prior to the commencement of the event. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to engage, sponsor, or
participate in any event described herein without having first applied for and obtained a permit in accordance with this chapter. Receiving approval of a
special event permit from the city shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent, or waive the applicant's responsibility to obtain any additional permits,
licenses, and approvals for other applicable local, state and federal regulations. The city reserves the right to impose special guidelines and
restrictions for any special event based upon the nature of the proposed event, the proposed location of the event, and the anticipated attendance of
the event. The city also reserves the right to temporarily suspend other city code requirements for any special event based upon the particular event
details. (Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
7-7-5: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
For any special event defined or described within this chapter, the following information, at a minimum, shall be submitted with the application to the
city:
A. A written application for a special event permit shall be submitted to the city on a form provided by the city. The application must set forth the
following information regarding the proposed special event:
1. The name, address, phone number, and e-mail address of the applicant(s) and sponsor(s) of the event and contact person(s).
2. If the proposed special event would be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and phone number of the
headquarters of the organization and the authorized responsible heads of such organization.
3. The date(s) and duration of time for the proposed special event, specifically identifying the date(s) and duration of time for which the requested
use of the city property or right of way would occur.
4. An accurate description of that portion of the city property or right of way proposed to be used, including a detailed map. The map should depict
the requested location of any activities, structures, tents, barricades, parking, traffic control devices and personnel, signage, trash collection, and
portable restroom facilities necessary for the proposed event.
5. The estimated number of participants or attendees.
6. The proposed type of special event, described in detail, including a description of the planned activities and the proposed location.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 185/439
7. Whether the applicant has obtained or will obtain required permits for any of the following: the sale of alcoholic beverages, tents or inflatables,
amplified sound, fireworks, temporary signs, and any applicable building permits.
B. After the initial filing of the application, city staff may request additional information from the applicant to determine whether a special event permit
should be issued, including, but not limited to, a crowd control plan.
C. All other applications must be submitted not less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the proposed start date of the special event, unless the city
decides to waive the deadline. The city reserves the right to reject any applications that have not been timely submitted to the city.
D. Before the city decides to approve the special event permit, the city may require the applicant to provide notice of the proposed event to all affected
neighboring property owners and known tenants. The city may also require the applicant to petition or canvass affected neighboring property
owners and known tenants to ascertain whether there is sufficient support for the proposed event. Alternatively, the city may elect to provide the
notification to the affected neighboring property owners and known tenants itself and the applicant shall then be responsible for reimbursing the city
for the incurred costs. (Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
7-7-6: PERMIT REVIEW PROCESS:
A. A team of city staff that consists of representatives from the following departments: fire/EMS, public works, city clerk, community development,
leisure services, and police shall review special event applications, identify potential issues and concerns, and work with the applicant to propose
possible solutions to resolve those identified issues and concerns. Additional city staff from other departments may assist with the review
depending upon the details of the proposed event.
B. The leisure services department shall review special event permit applications for events held exclusively within a city park or greenway in
accordance with city park policies, rules and regulations that do not require city staff from multiple departments as part of the planning or execution
of the event and do not cause anticipated significant impact to nearby public streets or other city property.
C. City staff shall consider, at a minimum, the following criteria in reviewing the special event permit application. City staff reserves the right to consider
additional criteria in its review as deemed necessary.
1. Whether the applicant provided all the necessary information.
2. Whether the applicant obtained necessary permits or provided information necessary to apply for required permits involving the sale of alcoholic
beverages, tents or inflatables, amplified sound, fireworks, temporary signs, and any applicable building permits.
3. Whether the applicant previously held events of similar size and scope within the city, and if they have held previous events were they conducted
in a manner that the city would be willing to allow the event to be held again. Have all fees associated with the previous event been paid in full
and in a timely manner.
4. Whether the date, time, size, or location of the event would substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic in the vicinity of the event's location.
5. Whether the event would unduly interfere with proper access for fire and police protection and other emergency services.
6. Whether the estimated number of participants, attendees or the size or type of event or equipment is sufficiently large enough to require the
closing of a public street, or if there is an alternative available to closing a public street.
7. Whether another special event permit has already been granted for substantially the same date, time, or location within the city.
8. Whether the size or time of the event would require so great a diversion of the city police department as to prevent normal police protection
throughout the city or at another previously scheduled event in the city.
9. Whether city personnel necessary to regulate and monitor the event can reasonably be made available.
10. Whether the event is reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property and if there is adequate planning for crowd control of participants
or attendees.
11. Whether adequate sanitation or other health facilities will be available at the event.
12. Whether there is a sufficient number of parking places within a reasonable distance to accommodate the number of vehicles expected.
13. Whether the time, size or nature of the event is compatible with the normal activity at that location.
14. Whether the proposed use or event will likely have a significant adverse environmental impact.
15. Whether negative police reports or other reports of past activities held or sponsored by the applicant or in the same location merit a
recommendation of denial.
16. If required, whether the applicant has obtained the necessary approval of neighboring residents or businesses.
17. Whether sufficient negative impact from the event on neighboring properties or individuals warrant denial of the application.
18. Whether the applicant, including its employees, agents and volunteers have violated city code provisions or city policies at past events.
19. Whether the applicant has timely paid the city all fees due and owed under any city code provision or city policy.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 186/439
D. The approval or denial of a completed application by the city review team shall be made to the applicant as soon as reasonably practicable.
E. Where the applicant seeks or where the city staff recommends lane closure(s) of arterial or collector streets within the city, as those streets have
been classified by the DOT, such permit may be issued only by the city council. City staff shall be responsible for the issuance of all other special
event permits unless otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
7-7-7: FEES REQUIRED:
A. The applicant for a special event permit shall pay the applicable nonrefundable application fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees the city
council has adopted by resolution. The application fee must be paid at the time of submittal of the application.
B. If the permitted event will require the use of any city equipment, facilities, or services, the applicant shall pay the estimated costs for the use of the
city equipment, facilities, or services in advance of the event if the city requests advanced payment be made, or the city may direct the applicant to
pay the actual costs for the use of the city equipment, facilities, or services following the event within thirty (30) calendar days of billing by the city.
C. Where the applicant requests or city staff recommends city sponsorship/cosponsorship of an event which would include full or partial waiver of
application and related fees, the proposed fee waiver must receive city council approval. All other applications may be approved through city staff
review, unless otherwise provided in this code. (Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
7-7-8: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
A. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining insurance coverage for the special event, in types and amounts as determined by the city. The
applicant shall also provide the city with a certificate of insurance, naming the city as an additional insured, sufficiently in advance of the scheduled
event.
B. The applicant must also sign a hold harmless and indemnification agreement with the city in which the applicant holds the city harmless and
indemnifies the city of any negligent, reckless, or intentional act attributable to the applicant or the applicant's officials, employees, agents, or
volunteers. (Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
7-7-9: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. City staff's decision to approve or deny a special event permit or deny city sponsorship of an event may be appealed to the city council by making a
written request to the city clerk. The appeal will be placed on the agenda for the next available council meeting.
B. After receiving the appeal and considering any submitted comments, the city council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of city staff. The
decision of the city council shall be the final determination as to whether or not the city approves the special event permit. (Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
7-7-10: PERMIT REVOCATION:
A special event permit for any event in progress may be revoked and the event terminated by the chief of police, fire chief, city manager, or their
respective designees, if the safety of the public is imminently endangered by activities generated during the event or weather conditions at the time of
the event, the participants or attendees engage in violent or destructive behavior causing injury to person or damage to property, or if there is a major
violation of the conditions of the permit such that the standards of issuance have not been satisfied. (Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
7-7-11: VIOLATIONS:
No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, and specifically shall not commit any of the following unlawful acts:
A. No person shall hold, sponsor, or be in charge of any activity for which a special event permit is required without possessing a valid special event
permit.
B. No person shall violate any condition placed upon a special event permit.
C. No person shall provide false or inaccurate information on a written application for a special event permit. (Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
7-7-12: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor or a municipal
infraction punishable by a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the initial offense and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each repeat
offense. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter after having previously been found guilty of violating the same provision of this chapter at
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 187/439
the same location, shall be guilty of a repeat offense. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this section does not preclude the city from seeking
alternative relief, including, but not limited to, any order for abatement or injunctive relief from the court in the same action or as a separate action.
(Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
7-7-13: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring a special event permit for the following:
1. Funeral processions.
2. Events conducted entirely on the property of a church, educational institution, college or university campus. However, this type of event may
require a temporary site plan that would need to be approved through the community development department with the city.
3. Events conducted on city owned property subject to a contract, lease, or agreement. However, this type of event may require a temporary site
plan that would need to be approved through the community development department with the city.
4. Events conducted entirely on property containing an occupied private residence. (Ord. 996, 1-22-2015)
Title 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter 1
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are defined for use in this chapter pertaining to the water service system:
CUSTOMER: In addition to any person receiving water service from the city, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties, the
duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
SUPERINTENDENT: The city director of public works.
WATER MAIN: A water supply pipe provided for public or community use.
WATER SERVICE PIPE: The pipe from the water main to the building served.
WATER SYSTEM OR WATERWORKS: All public facilities for securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating and distributing water. (2000 Code
§ 90.01)
8-1-2: SUPERINTENDENT'S DUTIES:
The superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining
to water services in the city in accordance with this chapter. This chapter shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to
new ones. The superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of
the water system, subject to the approval of the council. In the event of an emergency, the superintendent may make temporary rules for the protection
of the system until due consideration by the council may be had. (2000 Code § 90.02)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
8-1-3: MANDATORY CONNECTIONS:
All residences and business establishments within the city limits intended or used for human habitation, occupancy or use shall be connected to the
public water system, if it is reasonably available and if the building is not furnished with pure and wholesome water from some other source. Following
installation and availability of a new water main, property owners shall have one calendar year in which to make the connection to the new water main.
(2000 Code § 90.03)
8-1-4: COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE:
The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural or enforcement provisions, of division 4, plumbing rules and regulations, of the state building code. (2000 Code § 90.04)
8-1-5: PLUMBER REQUIRED:
All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system shall be made by a licensed plumber approved by the city. (2000 Code
§ 90.05)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 188/439
8-1-6: EXCAVATIONS:
All trench work, excavation and backfilling required in making a connection shall be performed in accordance with applicable excavation provisions as
provided for installation of building sewers and/or the provisions of title 7, chapter 1 and title 10, chapter 11 of this code. (2000 Code § 90.06)
8-1-7: WATER SERVICE PIPES:
A. Responsibility For Costs: All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the water service pipe from the main to
the building served shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation or maintenance of said water service pipe. (2000 Code § 90.07)
B. Failure To Maintain: When any portion of the water service pipe which is the responsibility of the property owner becomes defective or creates a
nuisance and the owner fails to correct such nuisance, the city may do so and assess the costs thereof to the property. (2000 Code § 90.08)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
8-1-8: SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY:
After giving reasonable prior written notice and an opportunity for hearing, all in accordance with the procedure for discontinuing water service under
article B of this chapter, the water service personnel may shut off the supply of water to any customer because of any substantial violation of this
chapter, or valid regulation under section 8-1-2 of this chapter that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not be turned on again until all
violations have been corrected. (2000 Code § 90.09)
8-1-9: HYDRANTS:
A. Unlawfully Drawing Water From Hydrants: No person, unless specifically authorized by the city, shall open or attempt to draw water from any fire
hydrant for any purpose whatsoever. (2000 Code § 90.10)
B. Obstruction Of Hydrants:
1. Nothing shall be erected or planted which interferes with the use of a fire hydrant. Sufficient clearance shall be maintained around the hydrant to
permit easy connection of hoses and full circle operation of the hydrant using regular hydrant wrenches and hose spinners.
2. Shrubs, trees, flowers or weeds shall not be planted nor permitted to grow so as to prevent full view of a fire hydrant from the street. (2008 Code)
8-1-10: UNAUTHORIZED USE:
Unauthorized uses of water, such as not using a meter, hooking onto hydrants, or putting a straight pipe where the meter is, are absolutely forbidden.
The first occasion of a violation of this section will result in a surcharge of one hundred dollars ($100.00); the second occasion, a two hundred dollar
($200.00) surcharge; and after the third occasion, a meeting with the council will be required to see if water should ever be restored. (2000 Code
§ 90.11)
8-1-11: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The use of the water service system shall further be subject to the Clive water department rules and regulations, which may be adopted from time to
time by the council. (2000 Code § 90.12)
8-1-12: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter, for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter,
or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 90.13)
ARTICLE A. WATER METERS
8-1A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to encourage the conservation of water and facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers. (2000 Code § 91.01)
8-1A-2: WATER USE METERED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 189/439
All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished by the city and installed by the city. (2000 Code § 91.02)
8-1A-3: FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; EXCEPTION:
Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection without meters under the direct supervision of the building official. No
open connection can be incorporated in the system, and there shall be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which
must be sealed open. (2000 Code § 91.03; amd. 2008 Code)
8-1A-4: LIABILITY:
Remote reading devices shall be installed only by the water division. The city shall not be liable for the defacement or damage of any property caused
by necessary holes, fastenings or other work required for the installation of remote reading devices, nor shall the city be liable for any damage to
service pipes or water system valves and equipment. (2000 Code § 91.04; amd. 2008 Code)
8-1A-5: PROPERTY OF CITY:
All meters, fittings and remote reading devices (touch pad) to be used for billing purposes must be provided by the city. The city reserves the right to
read, inspect or test the meter at any reasonable time or with such frequency as deemed necessary. The property owner pays for the initial cost of the
meter and remote reading device (touch pad), but they remain the property of the city. Fees shall be established by the council. (2000 Code § 91.05)
8-1A-6: METER REPAIRS:
Whenever a water meter or remote reading device (touch pad) owned by the city is found to be inoperative, the superintendent shall have it repaired. If
it is found that damage to the meter or remote reading device has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property owner,
or the meter is not owned by the city, then the property owner shall be liable for the cost of repairs. Fees shall be established by the council. (2000
Code § 91.06)
8-1A-7: METER INSTALLATION FEE:
There shall be a fee charged to the property owner for each new installation of a water meter and remote reading device (touch pad) in accordance
with the fee schedule established by the council. (2000 Code § 91.07)
8-1A-8: MAINTENANCE AND TESTING FOR ACCURACY:
A. Maintenance Test: Meters may be removed for accuracy testing at the discretion of the water division after a period of ten (10) years. Any meter
found to be inaccurate beyond a tolerance of two percent (2%) shall be replaced with a new or rebuilt meter. (2000 Code § 91.08; amd. 2008 Code)
B. Request For Accuracy Test: The superintendent shall make a test of the accuracy of any water meter at any time when requested in writing. A
refundable deposit shall accompany such request. Deposit fee is established by the council. If the meter is found to overrun to the extent of two
percent (2%) or more, the cost of the test shall be paid by the city and a refund of the meter test deposit shall be made to the customer. If the meter
is found to be accurate or less than two percent (2%) fast, the customer deposit shall be forfeited. The customer may be liable for any deficiency.
(2000 Code § 91.09)
C. Nonregistering Meter: When a metering system fails to accurately register the quantity of water supplied, the quantity and charge shall be
determined based upon the average quantity used during a like period of time prior to meter system failure as determined by the city. (2000 Code
§ 91.10)
D. Maintenance Shut Off: The city reserves the right to shut off the supply of water to any customer at any time for the purpose of repair or
maintenance of the water system or its components, or for any other necessary purpose. (2000 Code § 91.11)
8-1A-9: DISCLAIMER:
The city does not warrant or guarantee a constant supply of water to any customer and shall not be liable for any damage due to a failure to supply
water for any reason. (2000 Code § 91.12)
8-1A-10: IRRIGATION METERS:
The installation of water meters and remote reading devices subject to the applicable provisions of this article and the water division rules and
regulations for the purpose of measuring water used for irrigation, swimming pools, yard and garden watering, or other uses where the water so used
does not enter the sanitary sewer system is permitted, and no sewer service charge shall be made for water so used. (2000 Code § 91.13; amd. 2008
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 190/439
8-1A-11: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL1:
No person shall connect any equipment or mechanism to a water supply line or use any water treating chemical or substance which could cause
pollution of the water supply unless an approved backflow prevention device is installed and maintained. (2000 Code § 91.14; amd. 2008 Code)
8-1A-12: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The installation and maintenance of water meters and remote reading devices shall further be subject to the city water division rules and regulations,
which may be updated from time to time by the council. (2000 Code § 91.15; amd. 2008 Code)
8-1A-13: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this article or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 91.16)
Footnote 1: See article C of this chapter.
ARTICLE B. WATER RATES
8-1B-1: SERVICE CHARGES:
Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon use of water as determined by meters provided for in article A of this
chapter. Each location, building, premises or connection shall be considered a separate and distinct customer whether owned or controlled by the
same person or not. (2000 Code § 92.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1070 - WATER RATES. Go to new ordinance.
8-1B-2: RATES FOR SERVICE:
Effective May 15, 2018, water service shall be furnished at the following rates within the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
A. General Rate: Except as otherwise provided herein, water use shall be billed at the following general rate: Seven dollars thirty one cents ($7.31) per
one thousand (1,000) gallons used, billed monthly.
B. Irrigation Meter Rate: For water use registered by an irrigation meter, for which no sewer service charge is made, the following rate applies and not
the general rate:
1. Residential customers:
$7.31 per 1,000 gallons. All such sums shall be billed monthly.
2. Commercial customers:
$8.72 per 1,000 gallon. All such sums shall be billed monthly. (Ord. 1054, 4-12-2018)
8-1B-3: BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE:
Billing and payment for water service shall be in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
A. Meters Read: Water meters shall be read on a monthly basis.
B. Bills Issued: The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for water service on or before the first day of the month following each monthly billing period.
C. Bills Payable: Bills for water service shall be due and payable at the Office of the Clerk by the fifteenth of the month following the end of each
monthly billing period.
D. Late Payment Penalty: Bills not paid when due shall be considered delinquent. A onetime late payment penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount
due shall be added to each delinquent bill. The City Manager is authorized to waive the penalty in instances where circumstances seem to justify
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 191/439
such waiver.
E. Returned Checks: A fee, as set forth in the fee schedule established by City Council of the City of Clive, shall be charged for all checks not honored
by the bank. (2000 Code § 92.03)
8-1B-4: SERVICE DISCONTINUED:
Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
A. Notice: Within five (5) days following the date that bills for water service are due and payable (i.e., the fifteenth day of the month), the clerk shall
send a written notice to each delinquent customer that water service will be discontinued if payment, including late payment charges, is not
received within ten (10) days from the date the notice is mailed. The notice shall afford the customer the opportunity to request a hearing before the
city clerk prior to the discontinuation of service. Such written notice shall be sent by first class mail. If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or
landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the written notice sent to the customer shall also be given to the owner or landlord.
B. Service Discontinued: If payment is not received within ten (10) days following the date the written notice is sent to the customer and payment
arrangements have not been made pursuant to a hearing before the city clerk, the public works department shall leave a notification card of shutoff
of the supply of water on the premises of any customer who, not having requested a hearing, has failed to make payment by the date specified in
the notice of delinquency. Twenty four (24) hours following the delivery of the notification card to the customer, the public works department shall
shut off the supply of water. (2000 Code § 92.04)
C. Fees: The customer shall pay a fee set forth in the fee schedule established by the Clive city council for the issuance of a notification card to a
delinquent customer regarding the shutoff of the water supply. A turn on fee, in the amount set forth in the fee schedule established by the Clive city
council, shall be required to be paid before service is restored to a delinquent customer during regular business hours. If service is restored to a
delinquent customer after regular business hours, the customer shall pay the fees set forth in the fee schedule established by the Clive city council
for restoration of service after regular business hours. (Ord. 971, 11-15-2012)
8-1B-5: CUSTOMER DEPOSITS:
There shall be required from every customer or prospective customer a deposit intended to guarantee the payment of bills for service, as follows:
A. Residential: For residential users:
Owner $ 50.00
Renter 100.00
(2000 Code § 92.05)
B. Commercial:
1. For commercial users:
3/4 to 1 inch $ 50.00
11/2 inch 60.00
2 inch 90.00
3 inch 150.00
4 inch 190.00
6 inch 310.00
(Ord. 910, 2-19-2009)
2. For any commercial and industrial properties where the previous experience of that building use shows a water bill to be substantially higher
than the deposit shown for that size meter, then the deposit should be equivalent to one billing period.
C. Hydrant Meters: A deposit shall be made for hydrant meters, with the amount of the hydrant meter deposit determined in accordance with an
established fee schedule, which fee schedule may be modified from time to time with the approval of the city council. (2000 Code § 92.05)
8-1B-6: LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 192/439
A. Owner And Tenant Responsible: The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for water
service charges to the premises. Water service charges in excess of the amount of the customer deposit remaining unpaid and delinquent shall
constitute a lien upon the premises served and may be certified by the clerk to the county treasurer for collection in the same manner as property
taxes. (2000 Code § 92.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
B. Lien Exemption: The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to a residential rental property where water service is separately metered and the rates or
charges for the water service are paid directly to the city by the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the city that the property is residential
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The city may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of ninety (90) days
of water service be paid to the city. The landlord's written notice shall contain the name of the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the
rental property and the date of occupancy. A change in tenant shall require a new written notice to be given to the city within ten (10) business days
of the change in tenant. When the tenant moves from the rental property, the city shall refund the deposit if the water service charges are paid in
full. A change in the ownership of the residential rental property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the city within ten (10)
business days of the completion of the change of ownership. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs to a water
service. (2000 Code § 92.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
C. Lien Notice: A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the county treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a
lien is given to the customer. If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the
notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than thirty (30)
days prior to certification of the lien to the county treasurer. (2000 Code § 92.08)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
8-1B-7: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this article or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2000 Code § 92.09)
ARTICLE C. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND CONTAINMENT
8-1C-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are defined for use in this article pertaining to cross connection control and containment:
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY FOR CONTAINMENT: A backflow prevention assembly listed by the University of Southern
California - Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research as having met the requirements of ANSI-AWWA standard C510-89,
double check valve backflow prevention assemblies or ANSI-AWWA standard C511-89, reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies,
all as amended, for containment. The listing shall include the limitations of use based on the degree of hazard. The backflow prevention assembly
must also be listed by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY FOR CONTAINMENT IN A FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM: A backflow prevention assembly to
be used in a fire protection system which meets the requirements of "Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM)" and "Underwriters Laboratories
(UL)", in addition to the requirements of "approved backflow prevention assembly for containment" as defined herein.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water provider of public water such as, but
not limited to, a private well, pond or river.
CONTAINMENT: A method of backflow prevention which requires the installation of a backflow prevention assembly at the water service entrance.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any connection or arrangement between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or tank, receptacle,
equipment or device, through which it may be possible for nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water or other substance to enter
into any part of such potable water system under any condition.
CUSTOMER: The owner, operator or occupant of a building or a property or of a private water system, which has a water service from a public water
system.
DEGREE OF HAZARD: The rating of a cross connection or water service, which indicates the potential to cause contamination or pollution.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: A backflow prevention device consisting of two (2) independently acting, internally
loaded check valves, four (4) properly located test plugs and two (2) isolation valves. (Backflow prevention assembly used for low hazard.)
HIGH HAZARD CROSS CONNECTION: A cross connection which may impair the quality of the potable water by creating an actual hazard to public
health through poisoning or through contamination with sewage, industrial fluids or waste.
ISOLATION: A method of backflow prevention in which a backflow prevention assembly is located at the cross connection rather than at the water
service entrance.
LOW HAZARD CROSS CONNECTION: A cross connection which may impair the quality of potable water to a degree which does not create a hazard
to public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable water for domestic use.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: A backflow prevention device consisting of two (2) independently
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 193/439
acting, internally loaded check valves, a differential pressure relief valve, four (4) properly located test plugs and two (2) isolation valves. (Backflow
prevention assembly used for high hazard.)
REGISTERED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TECHNICIAN: A person registered with the Iowa state health department or its successor
agency to test or repair backflow prevention assemblies and to report on the condition of those assemblies.
THERMAL EXPANSION: Volumetric increase of water due to heating resulting in increased pressure in a closed system.
WATER SERVICE: Depending on the context, "water service" is the physical connection between a public water system and a customer's building,
property or private water system or the act of providing potable water to a customer. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
8-1C-2: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY:
A. For the purposes of this section only, the authority having jurisdiction is the Clive city council acting through the city public works department or any
other authorized city official ("administrative authority").
B. The administrative authority shall have the right to enter any property to inspect for possible cross connection, upon consent of the customer or
upon a search warrant issued by a court of appropriate jurisdiction.
C. The administrative authority may collect fees for the administration of this program. Fees shall be established by resolution of the city council.
D. The administrative authority shall maintain records of cross connection hazard surveys and of the installation, testing and repair of all backflow
prevention assemblies installed in this city. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
8-1C-3: NEW WATER SERVICES:
New water services shall comply with the following:
A. Plans shall be submitted to the administrative authority for review on all new water services in order to determine the degree of hazard.
B. The administrative authority shall determine the type of backflow prevention assembly required for containment based on the degree of hazard.
C. The administrative authority shall require the installation of the appropriate backflow prevention assembly for containment before the initiation of
water service.
D. All underground lawn irrigation systems shall contain an approved reduced pressure principle backflow assembly to prevent backflow or back
siphoning to the city water distribution system.
E. A permit shall be obtained from administrative authority for the installation of all underground lawn irrigation systems. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
8-1C-4: EXISTING WATER SERVICES:
Existing water services shall comply with the following:
A. Upgrades of existing water services shall be treated as new water services for the purpose of this section.
B. The administrative authority shall, on the basis of information received from customers or gathered through on premises investigations or surveys,
determine the type of backflow prevention assembly required for containment based on the degree of hazard.
C. All underground lawn irrigation systems shall contain an approved reduced pressure principle backflow assembly to prevent backflow or back
siphoning to the city water distribution system.
D. A permit shall be obtained from administrative authority for the installation of all underground lawn irrigation systems.
E. Within the time frame specified in writing by the administrative authority, the customer shall install a backflow prevention assembly for containment
required by city.
1. For existing water services, the administrative authority may inspect the premises to determine the degree of hazard. When high hazard cross
connections are found, administrative authority shall, at its sole discretion:
a. Develop a schedule of compliance which the customer shall follow; or
b. Terminate the water service until a backflow prevention assembly of containment required by the city has been installed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 194/439
2. Failure of administrative authority to notify a customer that the customer is believed to have a high hazard cross connection and that the
customer shall install backflow prevention assemblies for containment in no way relieves a customer of the responsibility to comply with all
requirements of this section. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
8-1C-5: CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITIES:
Responsibilities of the customer shall be as follows:
A. The customer shall prevent pollutants and contaminants from entering his/her potable water supply and/or the city's water distribution system and
shall be responsible for ensuring that no cross connections exist without approved backflow protection within his or her premises starting at the
point of service from the city's public potable water system.
B. The customer shall, at his or her own expense, cause installation, operation, testing and maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies.
C. The customer shall ensure that copies of records of the installation and of all tests and repairs made to the backflow prevention assembly are
delivered to the administrative authority on the approved form within fifteen (15) days after testing and/or repairs are completed.
D. If a backflow incident occurs, the customer shall immediately notify administrative authority of the incident and take steps to confine the
contamination or pollution. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
8-1C-6: REQUIRED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES FOR CONTAINMENT:
A. Water Services:
1. An air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly is required for a water service having one or more cross
connections which the administrative authority has classified as high hazard.
2. An approved double check valve assembly is required for water services having no high hazard cross connections but having one or more cross
connections which the administrative authority has classified as low hazard.
B. Fire Protection Systems:
1. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on all new and existing fire protection systems, which the
administrative authority has determined to have any of the following:
a. Direct connections from public water mains with an auxiliary water supply on or available to the premises for pumper connection.
b. Interconnections with auxiliary supplies such as reservoirs, rivers, ponds, wells, mills, or other industrial water systems.
c. Use of antifreezes or other additives in the fire protection system.
d. Combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied from the public water mains only, with or without gravity storage or pump suction
tanks.
e. Any other facility, connection, or condition, which may cause contamination.
2. A double check valve assembly will be required for all other fire protection systems. The double check valve assembly shall be required on all
new systems at the time of installation and on existing systems at the time they are upgraded.
3. Submittal of proposed backflow prevention devices to the administrative authority does not relieve the designer or the sprinkler contractor of the
responsibility of submitting plans, including backflow prevention devices to the fire marshal for approval. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
8-1C-7: INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW ASSEMBLIES:
A. The required backflow prevention assemblies for containment shall be installed in the horizontal plumbing immediately following the meter or as
close to that location as deemed practical by the administrative authority. In any case, it shall be located upstream from any branch piping.
Installation at this point does not eliminate the responsibility of the customer to protect the water supply system from contamination or pollution
between the backflow prevention assembly and the water main.
B. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so as to be protected from flooding.
C. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall not be installed in underground vaults or pits.
D. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be protected from freezing. Those devices used for seasonal water services may be removed in lieu of
being protected from freezing; however, the devices must be reinstalled and tested by a registered backflow prevention technician prior to service
being reactivated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 195/439
E. If hot water is used within the water system, thermal expansion shall be provided for when installing a backflow prevention assembly for
containment.
F. Provisions shall be made to convey the discharge of water from reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies to a suitable drain.
G. The backflow prevention assemblies shall not be installed in a place where it would create a safety hazard, such as, but not limited to, over an
electrical panel, or above ceiling level.
H. If interruption of water service during testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies for containment is unacceptable, another backflow
prevention assembly, sized to handle the temporary water flow need during the time of test or repair, should be installed in parallel piping.
I. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so that they are accessible for testing as stated in approved plumbing code.
J. All shutoff valves shall conform with the current edition of the "Manual Of Cross Connection Control" (University of Southern California) requirements
for either ball or resilient seat gate valves at the time of installation. Ball valves shall be used on assemblies installed in piping two inches (2") and
smaller and resilient seat gate valves on assemblies installed in piping larger than two inches (2").
K. The administrative authority, prior to installation, shall approve location and protection of the containment assembly. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
8-1C-8: BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TECHNICIANS:
A. A backflow prevention assembly technician registered by the state of Iowa shall include his or her registration number on all correspondence and
forms required by or associated with this article.
B. Noncompliance with any of the following by a registered technician shall be grounds for reporting such individual to the state department of public
health:
1. Improper testing or repair of backflow prevention assemblies.
2. Improper reporting of the results of testing or of repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies.
3. Failure to meet registration requirements.
4. Related unethical practices and/or deliberate falsification of documentation. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
8-1C-9: TESTING OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES:
Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested as follows: (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
A. A registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall perform testing of backflow prevention assemblies. The costs of the testing and
reporting required in this subsection and subsections B through H of this section shall be borne by the customer. (Ord. 959, 3-15-2012)
B. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation and tested and inspected at least annually.
C. Backflow prevention assemblies, which are in place, but have been out of operation for more than three (3) months, shall be tested before being put
back into operation. Backflow prevention assemblies used in seasonal applications shall be tested before operation resumes each season.
D. Any backflow prevention assembly which fails a periodic test shall be repaired or replaced. When water service has been terminated for
noncompliance, the backflow prevention assembly shall be repaired or replaced prior to the resumption of water service. A registered backflow
prevention assembly technician shall retest backflow prevention assemblies immediately after repair or replacement.
E. Any backflow prevention assembly, which fails a periodic test that has been installed as part of an underground lawn irrigation system shall be
replaced with approved reduced pressure principle backflow assembly to prevent backflow or back siphoning.
F. Administrative authority may require backflow prevention assemblies to be tested at any time in addition to the annual testing requirement. (Ord.
888, 1-17-2008)
G. The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall report the successful test of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer and to
the city or its authorized designee, as directed by city, within fifteen (15) days of the test. The report shall be in the form and format prescribed by
the city, which may include the submission of the report in an electronic form. (Ord. 959, 3-15-2012)
H. Administrative authority may require, at the owner's expense, additional tests of individual backflow prevention assemblies as it shall deem
necessary to verify test procedures and results. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 196/439
8-1C-10: REPAIR OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES:
Backflow prevention assemblies shall be repaired in accordance with the following:
A. Registered backflow prevention assembly technicians shall perform all repairs to backflow prevention assemblies.
B. Any backflow prevention assembly, which fails a periodic test that has been installed as part of an underground lawn irrigation system that is not
already an approved reduced pressure principle shall be replaced with approved reduced pressure principle backflow assembly to prevent
backflow or back siphoning.
C. The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall not change the design, material, or operational characteristics of a backflow
prevention assembly during repair or maintenance, and shall use only original manufacturer replacement parts.
D. The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall report the repair of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer and to
administrative authority on the form provided by administrative authority within fifteen (15) days of the repair. The report shall include the list of
materials or replacement parts used.
E. Anytime fire services are discontinued for a period of time longer than necessary to test the device, the tester is required to notify the fire marshal's
office that the fire services are shut off for repair. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
8-1C-11: CUSTOMER NONCOMPLIANCE:
The water service may be discontinued in the case of noncompliance with this article. Noncompliance includes, but is not limited to, the following:
A. Refusal to allow administrative authority access to the property for the purpose of performing inspections required by this article.
B. Removal of a backflow prevention assembly, which has been required by the administrative authority.
C. Bypassing of a backflow prevention assembly, which has been required by the administrative authority.
D. Providing inadequate backflow prevention when cross connections exist.
E. Failure to install, test and/or properly repair a backflow prevention assembly, which has been required by the administrative authority.
F. Deliberate falsification of documentation concerning the backflow prevention assemblies or possible cross connections.
G. Failure to comply with the requirements of this article. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
8-1C-12: SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY:
A. The administrative authority may deny or discontinue, after written notice to the customer thereof, the water service to any premises wherein:
1. Any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not installed or maintained as outlined in this article.
2. It is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed.
3. An unprotected cross connection exists on the premises.
4. The administrative authority is denied entry to determine compliance with these regulations.
B. The administrative authority may immediately deny or discontinue, without notice to the customer thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein a severe cross connection exists which constitutes an immediate threat to the safety of the public water system. The administrative
authority shall notify the customer within twenty four (24) hours of said denial or discontinuation of service.
C. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the customer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with
these regulations, and to the satisfaction of the administrative authority.
D. The customer shall pay a fee as set forth in the fee schedule established by the Clive city council for the turning off and turning on a water service
for noncompliance of this article. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
8-1C-13: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 197/439
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article for any particular provision or section, any person(s) violating any provision of this article or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 888, 1-17-2008)
Chapter 2
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
8-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter pertaining to sanitary sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage
within the city in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (2000 Code § 95.01)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms are defined:
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter or parts per million.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of the building
wall.
BUILDING SEWER: That part of the horizontal piping from the building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment portion of
an on site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the drainage of one building site.
CUSTOMER: Any person responsible for the production of domestic, commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into the
public sewer system.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INSPECTOR: The person duly authorized by the council to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public
sewer system, and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water.
ON SITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM: All equipment and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage,
treatment, and disposal of wastewater from four (4) or fewer dwelling units or other facilities serving the equivalent of fifteen (15) persons (1,500 gpd)
or less.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWAGE: Sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories and/or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and industrial waste.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS OR SEWAGE SYSTEM: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES: Any and all charges, rates or fees levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said
customers by said sewer system.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period
of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN OR STORM SEWER: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 198/439
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (2000 Code § 95.02)
8-2-3: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The director of public works has the following powers and duties related to the city sewage system:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
A. Operation And Maintenance: Operate and maintain the city sewage system.
B. Inspection And Tests: Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Records: Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage connections and manholes constructed showing the location and grades
thereof.
D. Policies: Recommend to the council policies to be adopted and enforced to implement the provisions of this chapter regarding the sewage system.
(2000 Code § 95.03)
8-2-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
A. Damage Sewer System: Maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
B. Surface Runoff Or Ground Water: Connect a roof downspout, sump pump, exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface
runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
C. Manholes: Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by authority of the director of public works.
D. Objectionable Wastes: Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
E. Septic Tanks: Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except
as provided in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
F. Untreated Discharge: Discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. (2000 Code
§ 95.04)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
8-2-5: SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED:
The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and
abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are
hereby required to install, at such owner's expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of this chapter such compliance to be completed within sixty (60)
days after date of official notice from the city to do so, provided that said public sewer is located within one hundred feet (100') of the property line of
such owner and is of such design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to it. (2000 Code § 95.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
8-2-6: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the city so situated that it may be served by the city sewer system may apply to the council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions stipulated by resolution of the council. (2000 Code § 95.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
8-2-7: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 199/439
The director of public works and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
director of public works or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for
waste treatment. (2000 Code § 95.07)
8-2-8: USE OF EASEMENTS:
The director of public works and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(2000 Code § 95.08)
8-2-9: SPECIAL PENALTIES:
The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of this chapter:
A. Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except subsections 8-2-4A, C and D of this chapter, shall be
served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Continuing Violations: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection A of this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, and each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Liability Imposed: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the city by reason of such violation. (2000 Code § 95.09)
ARTICLE A. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
8-2A-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city in accordance with the following:
A. Application: Any person desiring to make a connection with the sewer system shall first file with the city an application therefor, on blanks furnished
by the city, setting forth the location and description of the property to be connected with the sewer system and for what purpose the sewer is to be
used.
B. Plans And Specifications: The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in
the judgment of the community development director or other duly authorized employee of the city.
C. Classes Of Permits: There are three (3) classes of building sewer permits.
1. For residential and commercial service.
2. For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
3. For a connection to an existing building sewer already connected to the public sewer.
D. Permit Fee: The person who makes the application shall pay the following fee to the city to cover the cost of issuing the permit and supervising,
regulating and inspecting the work:
1. One-family: Seventy five dollars ($75.00) plus ten dollar ($10.00) inspection fee;
2. Duplex: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) (one sewer allowable) plus ten dollar ($10.00) inspection fee;
3. Apartments: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the first two (2) units, and twenty dollars ($20.00) for each unit thereafter, plus ten dollar
($10.00) inspection fee;
4. All other connections: Seventy five dollars ($75.00) plus ten dollar ($10.00) inspection fee;
5. Unusual service connection fees will be determined by the council when unusually high water use is anticipated, plus the ten dollar ($10.00)
inspection fee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 200/439
E. Limited Responsibility For Permit Revocation: All sewer connection permits shall be given upon the express condition that the council may at any
time before the work is completed revoke and annul the same and no party interested shall have a right to claim damages in consequence of any
such permits being revoked or annulled.
F. Bond Required: The person performing the connection shall provide a surety bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) secured by a
responsible surety bonding company authorized to operate within the state, conditioned to indemnify and hold the city harmless against all losses
or damages that may arise from or be occasioned by the making of connections with the public sewers or excavations therefor or by carelessness,
negligence or unskillfulness in making the same. Such bond shall remain in force and must be executed for a period of one year, except that on
such expiration it shall remain in force as to all penalties, claims and demands that may have accrued thereunder prior to such expiration.
G. Connection Charge: All applications filed to provide connection to properties subject to a connection charge as required by section 8-2D-13 of this
chapter shall be accompanied by the fee required thereunder. (2000 Code § 96.01)
8-2A-2: PLUMBER REQUIRED:
All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer shall be made by a plumber approved by the city. The director of public works
or the community development director shall have the power to suspend the approval of any plumber for violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter; a suspension, unless revoked, shall continue until the next regular meeting of the council. The director of public works or community
development director shall notify the plumber immediately by personal written notice of the suspension, the reasons for the suspension, and the time
and place of the council meeting at which the plumber will be granted a hearing. At this council meeting, the director of public works or the community
development director shall make a written report to the council stating the reasons for the suspension, and the council, after fair hearing, shall affirm or
revoke the suspension or take any further action that is necessary and proper. (2000 Code § 96.02)
8-2A-3: EXCAVATIONS:
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be made in accordance with the following (see also title 7, chapter 1 and title 10, chapter 11 of this
code):
A. Barricades And Lighting: Adequate barricades and warning lights shall be so placed as to protect the public from hazard.
B. Public Convenience: Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the
uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
C. Construction Methods: All excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
city. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with OSHA for municipal construction, except that no backfill shall be placed until the
work has been inspected.
D. Restoration Of Public Property: Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a
manner satisfactory to the city, at the expense of the property owner or those responsible for disturbing property.
E. Completion By City: Should any excavation in any street be left open or unfinished for a period of twenty four (24) hours or should the work be
improperly done, the director of public works shall have the right to finish or correct such work and the expense shall be charged to the responsible
party. (2000 Code § 96.03)
8-2A-4: CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct supervision of the inspector and in accordance with the following:
A. Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
conducted by the owner and observed by the inspector, to meet all requirements of this article.
B. Separate Building Sewers: A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every occupied building; except where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining
alley, court, yard, or driveway.
C. Installation: The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building code and plumbing code.
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
D. Water Lines: When possible, building sewers should be laid at least ten feet (10') horizontally from a water service. The horizontal separation may
be less, provided the water service line is located at one side and at least twelve inches (12") above the top of the building sewer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 201/439
E. Materials And Methods: The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing
of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building code and plumbing code.
F. Depth: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above
the sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
G. Sewage Lifts: In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain
shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.
H. Bearing Walls: No building sewer shall be laid parallel to, or within five feet (5') of, any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened.
I. Preparation Of Basement Or Crawl Space: No connection for any residence, business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made
unless the basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab or crawl space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area
adjacent to the foundation of such building cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill shall be well compacted and graded so that the drainage is
away from the foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is poured, or the first floor is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall
be plugged and the plug shall be sealed. Any accumulation of water in any excavation or basement during construction and prior to connection to
the sanitary sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into the sanitary sewer. (2000 Code § 96.04)
8-2A-5: INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED:
Grease, oil, sludge and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and service stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, and other facilities
when, in the opinion of the inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When required,
such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the following: (2000 Code § 96.05)
A. Design And Location: All interceptors shall conform to section 8-3A-6, "Installation Of Grease Interceptors And Grease Traps", of this title to be
approved by the inspector, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (2000 Code § 96.05; amd.
2008 Code)
B. Construction Standards: The interceptors shall be constructed of impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
C. Maintenance: All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operation at
all times. (2000 Code § 96.05)
8-2A-6: SEWER TAP:
Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly
located "Y" branch is available, a tapping saddle shall be installed at the location specified by the director of public works. The public sewer shall be
tapped with a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be glued and attached with stainless steel clamps to the
sewer. At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless special written permission is received from the director of
public works and in accordance with the direction of the director of public works if such connection is approved. (2000 Code § 96.06)
8-2A-7: INSPECTION REQUIRED:
All connections with the sanitary sewer system, before being covered, shall be inspected and approved by the inspector. As soon as all pipe work from
the public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and before any backfilling is done, the inspector shall inspect and test the work as to
workmanship and material; no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered or trenches filled until after the sewer has been so inspected and
approved. If the inspector or other duly authorized representative refuses to approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to
correct the work. (2000 Code § 96.07)
8-2A-8: PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer from the public sewer to the building, including
interior piping, shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer. (2000 Code § 96.08)
8-2A-9: ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS:
Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines, whether located upon the private property of any owner or in the public right of way, which
construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this article, shall be corrected, at the owner's expense, within thirty (30) days
after date of official notice from the building department of such violation. If not made within such time, the director of public works shall, in addition to
the other penalties herein provided, have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to the property owner. Such assessment
shall be collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes. (2000 Code § 96.09)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 202/439
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
ARTICLE B. PUBLIC SEWER USE
8-2B-1: STORMWATER:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the director of public works. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the director of public works, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. (2000 Code § 97.01;
amd. 2008 Code)
8-2B-2: SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION:
Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may be issued by the council upon recommendation of the director of public
works where such discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any
time when deemed to the best interests of the sewer system. (2000 Code § 97.02)
8-2B-3: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
A. Flammable Or Explosive Material: Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
B. Toxic Or Poisonous Materials: Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two
milligrams per liter (2 mg/l) as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
C. Corrosive Wastes: Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
D. Solid Or Viscous Substances: Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
E. Excessive BOD, Solids Or Flow: Any waters or wastes having: 1) a five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred (300) parts
per million by weight; or 2) containing more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 3) having an average
daily flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review of the director of public works. Where
necessary in the opinion of the director of public works, the owner shall provide, at the owner's expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to: 1) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred (300) parts per million by weight; or 2) reduce the suspended solids to
three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight; or 3) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans,
specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
director of public works and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. (2000 Code § 97.03)
8-2B-4: RESTRICTED DISCHARGES:
A. Substances Restricted: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it
appears likely in the opinion of the director of public works that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment,
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion
as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director of public works will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
1. High Temperature: Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
2. Fat, Oil, Grease: Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or six hundred milligrams per liter (600 mg/l) of dispersed or other soluble matter.
3. Viscous Substances: Water or wastes containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two (32) and
one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0 and 65oC).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 203/439
4. Garbage: Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
5. Acids: Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
6. Toxic Or Objectionable Wastes: Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the director of public works for such materials.
7. Odor Or Taste: Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the director of public works as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of
state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
8. Radioactive Wastes: Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director of
public works in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
9. Excess Alkalinity: Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
10. Unusual Wastes: Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
c. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works.
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
11. Noxious Or Malodorous Gases: Any noxious or malodorous gas or other substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is
capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair.
12. Damaging Substances: Any waters, wastes, materials or substances which react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious
gases, develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable concentration or create any other condition deleterious to
structures and treatment processes.
13. Untreatable Wastes: Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment
processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements
of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. (2000 Code § 97.04)
B. Powers Of Director: If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection A of this section and which in the judgment of the director of public works may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the director of public works may:
1. Rejection: Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public sewage system;
2. Pretreatment: Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
3. Controls Imposed: Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
4. Special Charges: Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges
under the provisions of article D of this chapter. (2000 Code § 97.05)
8-2B-5: SPECIAL FACILITIES:
If the director of public works permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the director of public works and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where
preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at the owner's expense. (2000 Code § 97.06)
8-2B-6: CONTROL MANHOLES:
When required by the director of public works, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the director of public works. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense, and shall be maintained by the owner
so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (2000 Code § 97.07)
8-2B-7: TESTING OF WASTES:
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 204/439
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at
which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24 hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24 hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.) (2000 Code
§ 97.08)
ARTICLE C. ON SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
8-2C-1: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
A. System Prohibited: Except as otherwise provided in this article, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any on site wastewater treatment and disposal
system or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (2000 Code § 98.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
B. System Required: When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 8-2-5 of this chapter, every building wherein
persons reside, congregate or are employed shall be provided with an approved on site wastewater treatment and disposal system complying with
the provisions of this article. (2000 Code § 98.02)
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
C. Maintenance Of System: The owner of an on site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall operate and maintain the system in a sanitary
manner at all times and at no expense to the city. (2000 Code § 98.06)
8-2C-2: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
The type, capacity, location and layout of a private on site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa administrative code 567, chapter 69, and with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of
the county board of health. (2000 Code § 98.03)
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 and 4])
8-2C-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall install or alter an on site wastewater treatment and disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the county board of health.
(2000 Code § 98.04)
8-2C-4: DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on site wastewater treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch,
stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the ground. (2000 Code § 98.05)
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
8-2C-5: SYSTEMS ABANDONED:
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an on site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in section
8-2-5 of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter and the on site wastewater treatment and
disposal system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. (2000 Code § 98.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
8-2C-6: DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE:
No person shall dispose of septage from an on site treatment system at any location except an approved disposal site. (2000 Code § 98.08)
ARTICLE D. SERVICE RATES AND CONNECTION CHARGES
8-2D-1: SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED:
Every customer whose premises is served by a connection with the sanitary sewer system of the City, either directly or indirectly, shall pay to the City
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 205/439
sewer service charges as hereinafter established and specified for the purpose of contributing toward the costs of construction, maintenance and
operation of a sewage treatment plant and system. (2000 Code § 99.01)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1071 - SEWER SERVICE RATES. Go to new ordinance.
8-2D-2: BASIC RATE:
A. Except as hereinafter noted, effective May 15, 2018, each customer whose property lies within the corporate limits of the City shall pay to the City,
through its collection agent, the Clive Water Department, at the same time payment for City water service is made, the following charges:
1. A flat sewer availability charge at the rate of seven dollars forty seven cents ($7.47) per month, regardless of the amount of the consumption by
such customer; and
2. A sewage consumption charge computed on water consumption at the rate of five dollars sixty nine cents ($5.69) per one thousand (1,000)
gallons of water. (Ord. 1055, 4-12-2018)
B. The foregoing consumption rate shall apply if the sewage meets the standard for domestic and commercial sewage, which is as follows:
Suspended solids Not to exceed 400 ppm
Biochemical oxygen demand Not to exceed 400 ppm
C. If sewage is contributed which does not meet the above standards, there will be a surcharge where suspended solids or biochemical oxygen
demand are in excess of four hundred (400) parts per million. The surcharge shall be computed at the rate of $0.105 per one thousand (1,000)
gallons of such sewage contributed. (Ord. 892, 6-5-2008)
8-2D-3: MINIMUM CHARGE:
In no case shall the total minimum charge be less than twenty nine dollars twenty nine cents ($29.29) per quarter, which amount shall include both the
flat sewer availability charge and the sewage consumption charge. Such amount is necessary to retire the indebtedness, operation and maintenance,
and reserve necessary for maintaining the sanitary sewer facility. (Ord. 965, 6-21-2012)
8-2D-4: SPECIAL RATES:
Where, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works and the Council, special conditions exist to the extent that the application of the sewer service
charges provided in section 8-2D-2 of this article would be inequitable or unfair to either the City or the customer, a special rate shall be proposed by
the Director of Public Works and submitted to the Council for approval by resolution. (2000 Code § 99.06)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
8-2D-5: PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS:
Customers whose premises are served by a private water system shall pay sewer service charges based upon the water used as determined by the
Director of Public works either by an estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering the water system at the customer's expense. Any negotiated
or agreed upon sales or charges shall be subject to approval of the council. (2000 Code § 99.07)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
8-2D-6: PAYMENT OF BILLS:
All sewer service charges shall be due and payable under the same terms and conditions provided for payment for water service as contained in
section 8-1B-3 of this title, and the provisions contained in subsection 8-1B-6C of this title relating to notices of delinquency and lien notices shall also
apply in the event of a delinquent sewer charge. (2000 Code § 99.08)
8-2D-7: LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises.
Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and may be certified by the clerk to the
county treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes. (2000 Code § 99.09)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[1])
8-2D-8: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 206/439
After giving reasonable notice, the director of public works may discontinue water service to any customer who has failed to pay the amounts due and
owing under this article and who has not contested the payment therefor in good faith. All rates or charges due and owing under this article, if not paid
as provided in this article, shall constitute a lien upon the premises served by any of the services mentioned herein and may be certified to the county
treasurer and collected in the same manner as taxes. (2000 Code § 99.10)
8-2D-9: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED:
No statement in this article shall be construed as preventing a special agreement, arrangement or contract between the council and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted subject to special conditions, rates and costs as established by
the council; provided further, that such rates and agreement shall not be in violation of any law, or any outside contract between the city and other
corporate entity. (2000 Code § 99.11)
8-2D-10: ANNUAL REVISION OF RATES:
The city will review the sewer service charges at least yearly and revise the sewer user charges as necessary to ensure that such charges as herein
established and specified generate adequate revenues to pay the costs of maintenance and operation (including replacement and debt service) of a
sewage treatment plant and system and that the sewer user charge system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of maintenance and
operation costs (including replacement costs and debt service) for a sewage treatment plant and system among the users and user classes. The
liability of a sanitary sewer user to pay for charges as provided in this article shall not be contingent, however, upon any such review or revision. (2000
Code § 99.12)
8-2D-11: USER NOTIFICATION:
The city will notify each sanitary sewer user at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill for charges for sanitary sewer service as provided in this
article, of the rate being charged for operation and maintenance (including replacement and debt service) of the sewage treatment plant and system.
The liability of the sanitary sewer user to pay for such charges as set forth in this article shall not be contingent, however, upon such notification. (2000
Code § 99.13)
8-2D-12: INCONSISTENT AGREEMENTS OR CONTRACTS:
The provisions of this article shall take precedence over the terms or conditions of any agreements or contracts which are inconsistent with the
requirements of section 204(b)(1)(A) of the federal water pollution control act and section 35.2140 of 40 CFR part 35, dated May 12, 1982. (2000 Code
§ 99.14)
8-2D-13: SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish reasonable and equitable sewer connection charges to equalize the cost of sewer facilities
among all areas of the city, which charge shall be the difference between assessed amounts charged on separate parcels of land. (2000 Code
§ 100.01)
B. Connection Charges Required: Every person whose premises is located within the following described areas within the city, when filing an
application for a sewer connection permit for said person's premises to be connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city or any sewer
connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city, shall pay a sewer connection charge of ninety seven dollars twenty cents ($97.20) for each acre
of said premises to be so served by said connection. In the event the premises to be served is less than one acre in size, then the sewer
connection charge shall be the same percentage of ninety seven dollars twenty cents ($97.20) as the premises to be served is of one acre. Said
sewer connection charges shall be paid to the clerk. Areas subject to this connection charge include the following described areas of the city: (Ord.
914, 6-18-2009)
1. The East Seven (7) acres of the North Fourteen (14) acres, Northeast Quarter (1/4) Northeast Quarter (1/4), less 0.63 acre road of Section 34,
Township 79 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M.
2. Except the South 564 feet of the West 15.35 acres of the North Thirty (30) acres of the East Half (1/2) of the Northeast Quarter (1/4), less 0.5
acre road of Section 34, Township 79 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M.
3. Commencing at the Northeast corner of the West Half (1/2) of the Northeast Quarter (1/4) of Section 34, Township 79 North, Range 25 West of
the 5th P.M.; thence south 38.1 feet to the point of beginning; thence continuing south 439.8 feet .; thence west 833.38 feet .; thence north
456.85 feet . to a point 32.9 feet south of the north line of Section 34; thence east 826.63 feet . to the point of beginning.
4. Sunny Hills Subdivision.
5. Summit Heights Plat One.
6. Summit Heights Plat Two.
7. Primrose Park Plat One Replat.
8. Primrose Park Plat Two.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 207/439
9. Primrose Park Plat Three.
10. Primrose Park Plat Four.
11. The North Ten (10) acres of the South 591/4 rods of the East 54 rods, less 1 acre road of the Southeast Quarter (1/4) of the Northeast Quarter
(1/4) of Section 34, Township 79 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M.
12. The North 132 feet of the East 330 feet of the South 295/8 rods of the East 54 rods of the Northeast Quarter (1/4) of Section 34, Township 79
North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., less 0.1 acre road.
13. The South 295/8 rods of the East 54 rods of the Northeast Quarter (1/4) of Section 34, Township 79 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., less
0.20 acre road and EXCEPT the North 132 feet of the East 330 feet.
14. Kasson's Addition.
15. The south 502.4 feet of the Southeast Quarter (1/4) of the Southeast Quarter (1/4) of Section 34, Township 79 North, Range 25 West of the 5th
P.M., less 0.64 acre road containing 14.11 acres, more or less. (2000 Code § 100.02)
C. Permit: No sewer connection permit shall be issued for any premises located in the above described area until the sewer connection charge as
provided for herein shall have been paid. (2000 Code § 100.03)
D. Other Fees: The sewer connection charge shall be in addition to the other permit fees provided for in this code and in addition to the assessment
heretofore levied. (2000 Code § 100.04)
E. Disposition Of Charges Collected: All such sewer connection fees collected under this section shall be remitted to the treasurer, who shall keep
such funds in a separate and distinct part of the sanitation fund to be known as the "sewer fund" and shall only be disbursed and used for
authorized purposes. (2000 Code § 100.05)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
Chapter 3
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT OR CLEAN WATER ACT: The 1972 federal water pollution control act, the 1977 clean water act, and the 1987 water quality act, as amended.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The Iowa department of natural resources.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE: A. An executive officer of a corporation.
B. A general partner of a partnership.
C. The proprietor of a proprietorship.
D. The conservator, trustee, attorney in fact, receiver or other person or agent authorized in law and in fact to act on behalf of users which are not
corporations, partnerships, or proprietorships or on behalf of other entities which must legally act through an agent.
E. Any other authorized representative of subsection A, B, C or D of this definition, if the authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager or a
position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the written authorization is
submitted to the director.
F. Any other person authorized by law to act on behalf of any entity.
BASELINE MONITORING REPORT: The report required by 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1-7).
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The analysis of BOD as described in environmental protection agency methods.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes
inside the wall of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three feet (3') outside the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER OR LATERAL SEWER: The sewer extending from the building drain to the connection with the POTW.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 208/439
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's pretreatment facility.
CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (CBOD): The analysis of BOD as described in environmental protection agency methods
while inhibiting the nitrogenous oxygen demand.
CATEGORICAL USER: A user subject to national categorical pretreatment standards.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD): The measurement of the susceptibility of a sample to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant expressed in
mg/l and using environmental protection agency methods.
CITY: The political subdivision known as the city of Clive, Iowa, and also means the territory within the corporate boundaries of the city of Clive.
CITY SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM OR SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM: The local outfall sewers, trunk sewers, pumping stations, force mains, and
wastewater equalization basins, and all other structures, devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, which are used for collecting, conveying or
storing wastewater and which serve and are owned, operated and maintained by the city or by a sanitary district serving the city.
COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA: The formula as found in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: A representative sample using a minimum of three (3) grab sample aliquots obtained over a period of time and mixed using
either a flow proportional or time proportional method.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT: BOD, COD, O&G, suspended solids, pH, ammonia nitrogen, total Kjeldahl nitrogen and fecal coliform bacteria.
COUNTY: The political subdivision known as Dallas or Polk County, and also means the territory within the corporate boundaries of Dallas or Polk
County.
COUNTY SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM OR SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM: The local outfall sewers, trunk sewers, pumping stations, force mains, and
wastewater equalization basins, and all other structures, devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, which are used for collecting, conveying or
storing wastewater and which serve and are owned, operated and maintained by the county or by a sanitary district serving the county.
DISCHARGE OR INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The introduction of treated or untreated wastewater into the POTW.
DISSOLVED SOLIDS: The concentration of residue left in an evaporation dish after evaporation and drying at defined temperatures using
environmental protection agency methods or standard methods.
DOMESTIC USER: A person discharging only domestic wastewater to the POTW, which wastewater is discharged from any building or parts of a
building designed for or occupied by one or more persons as a single housekeeping unit, including such units within multi-family dwellings and
apartment buildings, which building or premises is a source of wastewater discharge into a POTW.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: All household type waste discharged from places of human habitation including toilet, bath, kitchen and laundry
wastewater. "Domestic wastewater" is further defined as waste which does not exceed daily maximum limits of 300 mg/l COD, 200 mg/l BOD, 250 mg/l
suspended solids, 100 mg/l oil and grease, 30 mg/l TKN, and 15 mg/l NH3-N at a discharge rate of 100 gallons per capita per day. This loading is
equal to 0.25 pound of COD, 0.17 pound of BOD, 0.20 pound of suspended solids, 0.083 pound of oil and grease, 0.025 pound of TKN and 0.013
pound of NH3-N per capita per day.
E. COLI OR ESCHERICHIA COLI: Bacteria that are a member of the fecal coliform group and whose presence indicates fecal contamination in water.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY METHODS: Standard procedures for wastewater analysis approved by the U.S. environmental protection
agency and prescribed in 40 CFR 136, and includes alternate methods approved by the approval authority.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA: The U.S. environmental protection agency.
FAT, OIL, AND GREASE OR OIL AND GREASE OR FOG: Those substances which are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures
established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases".
FECAL COLIFORM: Bacteria common to the intestinal tracts of humans and animals whose presence in water is an indication of pollution.
GARBAGE: Solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage
and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE: A single aliquot sample collected either directly or by means of a mechanical device.
HEADWORKS: The main wet well at the WRF prior to any treatment process.
INDUSTRIAL USER: A person whose property, building or premises is a source of wastewater discharge into the POTW, other than a domestic user.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: The liquid waste from industrial users as distinct from domestic sewage.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, which both:
A. Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
B. Causes a violation of any requirement of the WRA's national pollutant discharge elimination system permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any federal, state or local regulations or
permits.
LIMIT: The maximum allowable discharge of a given pollutant as in the following definitions:
Daily Maximum Limit Or Daily Instantaneous Maximum Limit: The maximum allowable discharge of pollutant as measured at any time during a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 209/439
calendar day, expressed as either a concentration limit or a daily mass limit. It is a violation if the concentration limit on any single sample taken
exceeds the discharge limits in the discharge permit for the user, or the discharge limits set forth in section 8-3-11 of this chapter.
Monthly Average Limit: The maximum allowable value for the average of all measurements of a pollutant obtained during one calendar month.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS (NCPS) OR CATEGORICAL STANDARDS: Any limitations on pollutant discharges to
POTW promulgated by the U.S. environmental protection agency that apply to specified process wastewater of particular industrial categories.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A permit issued pursuant to the act.
NEW SOURCE: As defined by 40 CFR 403.3(k).
NH3-N: The ammonia nitrogen concentration in mg/l as determined using environmental protection agency methods.
NONCONVENTIONAL POLLUTANTS: All pollutants which are not included in the definition of conventional pollutants.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the publicly owned treatment works which is designed to provide treatment, including recycling and
reclamation, of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into water of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the WRA's national pollutant discharge elimination system permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or other permit issued to the WRA by the Iowa department of natural resources or the
U.S. environmental protection agency.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, association, joint stock company, society, corporation trust, estate, municipality,
governmental entity, group, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTION: The alteration of chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water as a result of human activity or enterprise.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction, elimination, or alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
PRETREATMENT FACILITY: The equipment used to accomplish pretreatment.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment standards, imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, the prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in section 8-3-10 of this chapter, the
specific limitations on discharge as set forth in section 8-3-11 of this chapter, the state pretreatment standards or the national categorical pretreatment
standards, whichever standard is most stringent.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that
all particles are carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the POTW, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any
dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW: Means and includes POTW treatment works as defined by section 212 of the clean water act,
and which is owned by the Des Moines metropolitan wastewater reclamation authority or any of participating communities that make up the WRA. This
definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant.
SAMPLING CHAMBER OR SAMPLING MAINTENANCE HOLE: A device or structure suitable and appropriate to permit sampling and flow
measurement of a wastewater stream to determine compliance with this chapter.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to a pretreatment facility causing it to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. "Severe property
damage" does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
SEWAGE: Means and includes "wastewater" as herein defined.
SEWAGE SYSTEM: Sewers, intercepting sewers, pipes or conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and all other constructions, devices and
appliances appurtenant thereto used for collecting or conducting sewage to a point of treatment or ultimate disposal.
SIGNIFICANT USER: A. All categorical users.
B. All industrial users that:
1. Discharge twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excludes sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
2. Contribute a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of
the WRF; or
3. Contribute a discharge that has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the director, to adversely affect the POTW treatment plant by
causing interference or pass through.
SLUDGE: The solids separated from the liquids during the wastewater treatment process.
SLUG OR SLUG LOAD: Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any pollutant, measured using a grab or composite sample,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 210/439
is more than five (5) times the allowable concentration as set forth in sections 8-3-10 and 8-3-11 of this chapter or in a user's most recent wastewater
discharge permit or which exceeds a slug concentration level specified in a wastewater discharge permit. A discharge with pH outside the allowable
range by more than one standard unit (SU) or a flow rate in excess of two (2) times the maximum flow limit established in a wastewater discharge
permit shall also be a "slug".
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC): A classification pursuant to the standard industrial classification manual issued by the executive
office of the president, office of management and budget, most recent edition.
STANDARD METHODS: The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest USEPA approved edition of standard methods for the examination of
wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water
Environment Federation.
STORM SEWER: A sewer which carries stormwater, surface water and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial waste other than unpolluted
cooling water.
T: When used as a portion of a chemical name, shall designate "total" such as in "cyanide-T" where "T" means "total" cyanide.
TKN: The total Kjeldahl nitrogen concentration expressed in mg/l as determined using environmental protection agency methods or standard methods.
TOTAL METALS: The sum total of the suspended and dissolved concentrations of a metal specified in a wastewater discharge permit or as specified
in section 8-3-11 of this chapter.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): The portion of total solids retained by a filter using environmental protection agency methods or standard
methods.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS (TTO): The summation of all quantified values greater than 0.01 milligram per liter for the toxic organics as specified in the
applicable regulation.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed in 40 CFR 403, appendix B.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water containing none of the following: free or emulsified oil and grease; substances that may impart taste, odor or color
characteristics; volatile, explosive, toxic or poisonous substances in suspension or solution; explosive, odorous or otherwise obnoxious gases. Such
water shall not contain more than twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l) of suspended solids, and not more than twenty five milligrams per liter
(25 mg/l) of BOD.
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
pretreatment facilities, inadequate pretreatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER: A person discharging anything other than domestic wastewater into the POTW, and includes categorical users as herein defined.
WRA AGREEMENT: The amended and restated agreement for the Des Moines metropolitan wastewater reclamation authority, approved and
executed by the WRA and its participating communities and effective as of July 1, 2004.
WRA DIRECTOR OR DIRECTOR: The person appointed by the WRA board, or by the WRA operating contractor upon consultation with the board, as
provided in section 2.63 of the WRA operating contract, who is charged with the administration and management of the WRA system and of the
provision of all services outlined in the operating contract. Unless otherwise indicated in the text, the director shall mean and include the person acting
as the director's authorized designee in the director's absence in carrying out the director's duties under this chapter.
WRA OPERATING CONTRACTOR OR OPERATING CONTRACTOR: The city of Des Moines, pursuant to the initial operating contractor executed by
the city of Des Moines and the WRA board on and as of July 1, 2004, or such successor operating contractor as the WRA shall contract with to
provide operation and management services to the WRA.
WRA OR WASTEWATER RECLAMATION AUTHORITY: The Des Moines metropolitan wastewater reclamation authority, an entity organized and
existing under chapters 28E and 28F of the Iowa Code, and established pursuant to the WRA agreement. The term "WRA" means and includes the
representatives of the participating communities on the WRA board, and the officers and employees of the WRA.
WRA PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY OR WRA PARTICIPATING COMMUNITIES: Individually or collectively, depending on context, the cities of
Altoona, Ankeny, Bondurant, Clive, Cumming, Des Moines, Johnston, Norwalk, Pleasant Hill and West Des Moines, and Polk County, Warren County,
the Urbandale sanitary sewer district, the Urbandale-Windsor Heights sanitary district and the Greenfield Plaza/Hills of Coventry sanitary district,
together with any other cities, counties, or sanitary districts that become participating communities under the provisions of the WRA agreement.
WRA SYSTEM: Means and includes the WRF, the WCCS, satellite wastewater and CSO treatment facilities hereafter constructed, all real and
personal property of every nature hereinafter owned by the WRA and comprising part of or used as a part of the WRA system, and all appurtenances,
contracts, leases, franchises and other intangibles of the WRA.
WRA WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND CONVEYANCE SYSTEM OR WCCS: The WRA sanitary sewer interceptors and extensions to same,
detention basins, equalization basins, storage facilities, pumping stations, force mains and all related property and improvements.
WRA WASTEWATER RECLAMATION FACILITY OR WRF: The wastewater treatment plant located generally at 3000 Vandalia Road, Des Moines,
Iowa, as the same may be expanded or improved in the future, and any other wastewater treatment plants hereafter acquired or constructed and
operated by the WRA.
WASTE HAULER: A private contractor licensed by the WRA to deliver wastewater to the WRF or other locations approved by the WRA director, and
includes all persons required to have a license under section 8-3-22 of this chapter.
WASTEWATER: Means and includes "sewage" as defined in federal law and regulation, or a combination of the liquid and water carried waste from
residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground water, surface water, and stormwater as may
be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 211/439
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: The document issued to a user by the WRA in accordance with the terms of this chapter which permits such
user to discharge wastewater to the POTW.
WATER OF THE STATE: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems,
drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. (2000 Code § 101.01)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-2: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter shall have the designated meanings:
BETX Benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylene
BMR Baseline monitoring report
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
C Celsius
CFR Code of federal regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental protection agency
F Fahrenheit
GPD Gallons per day
IDNR Iowa department of natural resources
lb/day Pounds per day
mgd Million gallons per day
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NCPS National categorical pretreatment standards or categorical standards
NH3-N Ammonia nitrogen
NPDES National pollution discharge elimination system
O&G Oil and grease
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource conservation and recovery act
SCP Spill control plan
SIC Standard industrial classification
SNC Significant noncompliance
TCLP Toxicity characteristic leaching procedure
TFE Trichlorotrifluoroethane
TKN Total Kjeldahl nitrogen
TOH Total organic hydrocarbons
TPH Total purgeable hydrocarbons
TRC Technical review criteria
TSS Total suspended solids
TTO Total toxic organics
USC United States Code
U.S. EPA United States environmental protection agency
(2000 Code § 101.02)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-3: GENERAL ADOPTION:
The provisions of this chapter are enacted to aid in the enforcement of the pretreatment regulations set forth in this chapter. The city of Clive by
enacting this chapter designates the WRA and its operating contractor as the enforcement agency under this chapter. Employees, agents and officers
of the WRA and of its operating contractor, while acting to enforce this chapter for the WRA, are empowered to make such inspections, issue such
orders or permits and take such actions within the corporate boundaries of the city as are authorized by this chapter. The WRA or its operating
contractor is also authorized to impose and collect all fees or penalties authorized by this chapter, and is authorized to directly bill and collect from
contributors penalties, fees, charges and surcharges from all users within the city. A user's failure to pay any fee, charge, penalty or surcharge is a
municipal infraction and shall also be grounds to discontinue sewer service to the user, all as hereafter more particularly provided. The enforcement of
this chapter in the city is not dependent upon passage of this chapter or a similar ordinance by other WRA participating communities. (2000 Code
§ 101.03)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 212/439
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-4: INTENT AND CONSTRUCTION:
This chapter seeks to implement provisions of the act, the general pretreatment regulations found at 40 CFR, parts 403, and the Iowa administrative
code, chapter 567, sections 62.4 and 62.8. This chapter is to be construed and applied in accordance with the clean water act amendments, the
general pretreatment regulations, the Iowa administrative code and the purpose and policy provision set forth in section 8-3-3 of this chapter. (2000
Code § 101.04)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-5: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter regulates the use of sanitary sewers; private wastewater disposal; the installation and connection of building sewers; and the discharge of
wastewater or waste into the POTW. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for discharges into the POTW, and the deposit of wastewater and
waste hauled to the WRF or to other locations approved by the WRA director for disposal and treatment. The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that may interfere with the operation of the system or interfere with sludge management and
disposal.
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that may pass through the system inadequately treated and ultimately into receiving water,
the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the system.
C. To protect workers' safety and health and protect against damage to the POTW.
D. To provide for equitable distribution of treatment and industrial pretreatment costs resulting from pollutants introduced into the POTW. (2000 Code
§ 101.05)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-6: JURISDICTION:
The sections of this chapter are applicable in their entirety to all users who contribute wastewater, directly or indirectly, into the POTW without regard to
whether the physical facilities of such users are situated within or outside the corporate limits of the city. (2000 Code § 101.06)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any particular person or particular circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect
other provisions or application of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. To this end, the provisions of this
chapter are severable. (2000 Code § 101.07)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-8: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter shall be construed and interpreted to conform with 40 CFR I, and it is the intent of this chapter that it comply with the federal regulations.
(2000 Code § 101.08)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-9: USER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Specific Requirements: The following requirements shall apply to all users of the POTW:
1. All users shall promptly notify the WRA director in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 213/439
2. New or increased contributions of pollutants or changes in the nature of pollutants discharged to the POTW shall require prior approval by the
WRA director.
3. Industrial users shall notify the WRA director, the environmental protection agency regional waste management division director, and state
hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR 261. The notification shall comply with the requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(p).
4. Discharge of any pollutants without the notice and approval required by this section is prohibited. Upon the receipt of notice required by this
section, the WRA director shall, within one hundred eighty (180) days or less, approve the discharge if he or she finds the proposed discharge
meets applicable pretreatment standards and requirements and would not cause the WRA to violate its national pollutant discharge elimination
system permit. The WRA director shall deny permission for the discharge if he or she finds applicable pretreatment standards and requirements
are not met or the discharge would cause a violation of the national pollutant discharge elimination system permit for the WRF. In lieu of denial of
permission for discharge, the WRA director may allow such discharge or contribution upon conditions which would not violate applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements and would not cause a violation of the national pollutant discharge elimination system permit for the
WRF.
5. Food service establishments shall initially be regulated under article A of this chapter but may be required to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit and be subject to the requirements of this chapter if the WRA director determines that additional pretreatment is required in order to
comply with fat, oil, and grease discharge limits.
B. Permit: Any part of this section notwithstanding, upon receipt of the notice required by this section, the WRA director may require, in addition to the
requirements of this section, that an industrial user obtain a permit under this chapter. Users who are determined to be industrial users as herein
defined and who refuse to apply for or obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall be subject to termination of sewer services as provided in section
8-3-38 of this chapter. (2000 Code § 101.09)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-10: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
The following general prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW unless the user is subject to a more restrictive national categorical pretreatment
standards, the Iowa department of natural resources, or wastewater discharge permit limit. The following substances are prohibited from discharge to
the POTW:
A. Pollutants creating a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one
hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using test methods referenced in 40 CFR 261.21. Waste streams shall not be ignitable at ambient
temperatures. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on a meter capable of reading LEL (lower explosive limit) at the nearest accessible
point to the POTW, at the point of discharge into the POTW or at any point in the POTW, be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading
greater than ten percent (10%).
B. Any substance which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 12.0.
C. Solid or viscous pollutants which will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference. Such pollutants include, but are not limited
to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension, animal tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings,
rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass
grinding or polishing waste, or tumbling and deburring stones, and wastewater containing fat, wax, O&G, or other substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0 and 65 degrees Celsius).
D. Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference or pass-through at the WRF or which constitutes a slug load as defined in this chapter.
E. Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater or vapor having a temperature
higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65oC) at the point of introduction into the POTW, and in no case wastewater or vapor
which alone or in concert with other discharges produces a temperature at the WRF greater than one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F)
(40oC).
F. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
G. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems or a public nuisance.
H. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the WRA.
I. Radioactive wastes unless they comply with atomic energy commission act of 1954 (68 Stat. 919 as amended and part 20, subpart D, "Waste
Disposal", section 20.303 of the regulations issued by the atomic energy commission, or amendments thereto).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 214/439
J. Any wastewater containing concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of
dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate, which exceed three thousand milligrams per liter (3,000 mg/l)
nonvolatile or three thousand milligrams per liter (3,000 mg/l) total dissolved solids unless approved by the WRA director.
K. Pollutants causing excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye waste and vegetable tanning solutions. (2000 Code § 101.10)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-11: LOCAL LIMITS FOR SPECIFIC POLLUTANTS:
A. Generally: Local limits for specific pollutants discharged pursuant to this chapter shall be as follows:
1. Dilution: Dilution of the discharge from a pretreatment facility or from a regulated process is prohibited as a method for treatment of wastes in
order to meet the limits set forth in this chapter.
2. Sample Location: Measurement of pollutant concentrations to determine compliance shall be made at the point immediately following the
pretreatment facility and before mixture with other waters, unless another point is designated by the WRA director. If necessary, the
concentrations so measured shall be recomputed to exclude the effect of any dilution that is improper using the combined waste stream formula.
B. Headworks Limits; Average Mass: The average composite loading of all industrial users contributing the following specific pollutants to the POTW
shall not exceed the allowable total pounds. The allocation of pollutants between industrial and nonindustrial sources may be adjusted by the
director, provided that allowable total loading for any pollutant at the headworks of the WRF is not exceeded.
Pollutant
30 Day Average Allowable Pounds/Day
Total Industrial
BOD 195,600 135,153
TSS 300,400 208,463
NH3 13,000 6,959
TKN 27.760 16,950
Arsenic - T 4.24 3.87
Cadmium - T 2.71 2.54
Chromium - T 170.12 159.92
Copper - T 83.03 60.85
Cyanide - T 20.80 18.77
Lead - T 15.74 13.59
Mercury - T 0.63 0.59
Nickel - T 48.47 45.80
Silver - T 32.51 30.38
Zinc - T 201.54 158.34
C. Discharge Concentration Limits And Review Criteria: Discharge concentration limits and review criteria shall be as follows:
1. Review Of Discharges: The discharge into the POTW of any materials, water or waste having a pollutant concentration greater than the limits in
subsections C3, C4, and C5 of this section or containing pollutants not listed herein shall be subject to the review and approval of the WRA
director. After review of the proposed discharges, the WRA director may:
a. Reject the waste for reasons consistent with section 8-3-5 of this chapter.
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable pollutant concentration for discharge to the POTW.
c. Require control of the quantities and rates of discharge of the water or waste.
d. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treatment of water and waste or any combination thereof.
e. Reduce the maximum or average mass loading of present and prospective individual users on any reasonable prorated basis to meet
headworks loading limits at the WRF.
f. Require the user to obtain a wastewater discharge permit and be subject to any of the rules and regulations contained therein.
g. Require the user to meet local limits when local limits are more restrictive than national categorical pretreatment standards, provided that
headworks loading limits are met.
h. Initiate enforcement action in response to any noncompliance with this chapter using the enforcement procedures outlined in this chapter.
i. Take any combination of the steps in subsections C1a through C1g of this section, as appropriate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 215/439
2. Industrial Users: Users discharging wastewater to the POTW whose pollutant concentrations or flows greater than the following shall be
considered industrial users for purposes of sewer charges and may be regulated or permitted by the WRA director as appropriate:
Pollutant Daily Maximum (mg/l)
BOD 200
TSS 250
COD 300
O&G - T 100
TKN 30
NH3-N 15
An average daily flow greater than 5,000 gallons or having an unusual concentration of flow constituting a slug load as defined in this chapter.
3. Pollutant Limits: Average and maximum concentration limits for users without national categorical pretreatment standards for these pollutants
shall be as follows:
Pollutant Daily Maximum (mg/l) Monthly Average (mg/l)
Arsenic - T 0.39 0.26
Cadmium - T 0.15 0.10
Chromium - T 13.33 8.89
Copper - T 3.44 2.29
Cyanide - T 1.25 0.83
Lead - T 0.61 0.41
Mercury - T 0.03 0.02
Nickel - T 4.20 2.80
O&G - T 400.0 ---
O&G - Mineral 100.0 ---
Silver - T 3.04 2.03
TPH 10.0 ---
Zinc - T 5.99 3.99
pH range - not lower than 5.0 or greater than 12.0
Temperature (liquids or vapors) - not greater than 150°F at point of entry into POTW
4. Daily Maximum Pollutant Limits For Waste Haulers: Wastes delivered to the WRF by truck or rail shall not exceed the following maximum
concentrations in any load:
Pollutant (mg/l)
COD 100,000
O&G - T 50,000
Arsenic - T 0.04
Cadmium - T 2.70
Chromium - T 72.0
Copper - T 69.0
Cyanide - T 0.75
Lead - T 19.5
Mercury - T 0.35
Nickel - T 10.8
Zinc - T 255.0
TPH 10.0
pH range - Not lower than 5.0 or greater than 12.0
5. Daily Maximum Limit For Gasoline Cleanup Projects: Discharge of wastewater from sites where gasoline is being removed from the soil or
ground water shall meet the following limits prior to discharge to the POTW:
Pollutant (mg/l)
Benzene 0.050
BETX 0.750
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 216/439
D. Compliance With Designated Standards: No subsection of this section shall be construed to provide lesser discharge standards than are or than
may be imposed and required by U.S. environmental protection agency or the Iowa department of natural resources, nor to allow the average
allowable total loading for any pollutant at the headworks of the WRF to be exceeded. (2000 Code § 101.11)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-12: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
Users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards (NCPS) as contained in 40 CFR I, subchapter N, part 405-471 shall comply with the
standards and applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. New sources of categorical discharge shall meet national categorical
pretreatment standards in the shortest feasible time, but in no case longer than ninety (90) days from the commencement of discharge. Failure to
comply shall be a violation of this chapter and subject the user to enforcement action. The WRA shall notify all known affected categorical users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. Failure of the WRA to notify the user shall not relieve the user of the duty, if any, to comply
with national categorical pretreatment standards. (2000 Code § 101.12)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-13: STATE REQUIREMENTS:
State of Iowa requirements and limitations on discharges pursuant to this chapter shall apply when they are more stringent than U.S. environmental
protection agency or WRA requirements and limitations unless allowed by the Iowa department of natural resources. (2000 Code § 101.13)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-14: CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION:
The city, acting at the direction of the WRA, reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW than
those contained in this chapter if deemed necessary to comply with the purpose and policy objectives presented in section 8-3-5 of this chapter. (2000
Code § 101.14)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-15: PRETREATMENT:
A. Facilities' Requirements: A user discharging or with potential to discharge any waste into the POTW as set forth in sections 8-3-10, 8-3-11 and 8-3-
12 of this chapter shall be required by the WRA director to construct, install and operate, at the user's sole expense, such pretreatment facilities as
may be required in order to:
1. Reduce the objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in sections 8-3-10, 8-3-11 and 8-3-12 of this
chapter.
2. Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such wastewater.
3. Reduce the pollutants to such concentration and flows as may be contained in the user's wastewater discharge permit.
4. Prevent the discharge of liquid waste containing FOG, sand in excessive amounts, any flammable waste, or other harmful pollutants. All traps or
similar devices shall be of a type and capacity needed to perform effectively and shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. All traps or devices shall be provided and maintained in efficient operating condition at all times. Materials removed from traps shall
be considered unacceptable for disposal at the WRF unless specifically approved by the WRA director.
B. Review And Approval Of Plans: All plans, specifications, technical operating data and other information pertinent to the proposed operation and
maintenance of pretreatment facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the WRA director prior to construction. Design and installation of such
facilities shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, chapters and laws, including local zoning regulations. The review and approval
of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the WRA director under this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operations shall be
reported to and be acceptable to the WRA director prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
C. Maintenance Of Facilities: Users shall continuously maintain all pretreatment facilities required by this chapter in satisfactory and effective operating
condition at the sole expense of such user.
D. Special Agreements: No section contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit a separate or special agreement between the
WRA and any user whereby wastewater containing waste of unusual strength, character or composition may be accepted for treatment, subject to
additional payment by such user; provided, however, such agreement shall have the prior approval of the WRA board, shall not conflict with the
Iowa department of natural resources and U.S. environmental protection agency requirements, and shall be consistent with subsection 8-3-11B
and sections 8-3-12 and 8-3-13 of this chapter, and subsection F of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 217/439
E. Rejection Of Waste: The WRA director may reject any waste which, in the opinion of the director, may cause interference or pass-through.
F. Waste Discharge Approval Required: Users shall obtain the specific approval of the WRA director prior to discharging any waste resulting from a
pretreatment facility to the POTW. The WRA director may develop a documentation system to track the transportation and final disposition of any
pretreatment waste. Pretreatment waste regulated by this subsection shall include waste generated as a result of pretreatment processes used to
comply with national pollutant discharge elimination system permits, air pollution permits, wastewater discharge permits, soil/ground water
reclamation processes, and pollutants resulting from a spill of any liquid or solid material or the cleanup of any such spill. Pretreatment waste is
prohibited from disposal to the waters of the state except as specifically permitted by the Iowa department of natural resources. (2000 Code
§ 101.15)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-16: DILUTION PROHIBITED:
Users shall not increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or with any other pollutant
specific limitation developed by the WRA or its operating contractor. (2000 Code § 101.16)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-17: SPILL CONTAINMENT:
A. Prevention Of Accidental Discharge: Users having the ability to cause interference or pass-through or to discharge a slug shall provide protection
from accidental discharge to the POTW of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be at the user's cost and expense.
B. Containment Plan: Users meeting the criteria in subsection A of this section shall develop a spill containment plan. The plan shall require the
approval of the WRA director and shall contain the following:
1. A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges.
2. A description of stored chemicals.
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the WRA of slug discharges, including any that would violate the discharge prohibitions in section 8-3-10 of
this chapter. Notification procedures shall comply with subsections C and D of this section.
4. A description of procedures and structures necessary to prevent adverse impacts upon the POTW from accidental spills including inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants including solvents, and/or measures and
equipment for emergency response.
5. A schedule for the completion or implementation of necessary procedures and structures. Complete implementation and installation of any
procedures or structures shall be according to the shortest possible schedule, but in no case longer than one year. Review and approval of such
plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify and operate its facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
C. Notify WRA Of Illegal Discharge: Users shall immediately telephone and notify the WRA of any accidental or deliberate discharge of pollutants
which violates section 8-3-10 of this chapter or which is a slug load. Any discharge into the POTW of a substance which is a listed or characteristic
waste under section 3001 of RCRA must be immediately reported to the U.S. environmental protection agency regional director, the Iowa
department of natural resources, and the WRA. Notifications required in this subsection shall include the name of caller, location and time of
discharge, pollutant concentration, volume and the corrective actions taken.
D. Report Required: Users shall submit a written report to the WRA director within five (5) days following such an accidental or deliberate discharge
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Users shall submit follow up
reports as may be required by the WRA director. Such report shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such report relieve the user of any
fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or otherwise. Failure to report accidental or deliberate discharges may,
in addition to any other remedies available to the city, result in the revocation of the discharger's wastewater discharge permit.
E. Users To Control Production: Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable
regulations upon reduction, loss, or failure of its pretreatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of pretreatment is
provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power to the user's pretreatment facility is
reduced, lost or fails.
F. Posting Emergency Notification Procedures: Users required to have a spill containment plan must permanently post a notice in English and the
language of common use on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call if a prohibited discharge occurs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 218/439
Users shall ensure that all employees who are in a position to cause, discover or observe such an accidental discharge are advised of the
emergency notification procedures. (2000 Code § 101.17)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-18: TREATMENT UPSETS:
Users shall inform the WRA director within one hour of becoming aware of an upset in operations that places it in a temporary state of noncompliance
with the pollutant limits in this chapter. Users shall provide a follow up written report to the WRA director within five (5) days. The report must
demonstrate that the pretreatment facility was being operated in a prudent and appropriate manner and shall contain:
A. A description of the upset, its cause, and impact on the user's compliance status.
B. The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and, if the noncompliance is continuing, the time by which
compliance is reasonably expected to be restored.
C. All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of such an upset. (2000 Code § 101.18)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-19: TREATMENT BYPASS:
A. Bypass Prohibited; Exceptions: Under this chapter, bypass is prohibited unless it is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe
property damage or no feasible alternatives exist such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime.
B. Maintenance: The user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause a violation of pretreatment standards, but only if it is for essential
maintenance to ensure efficient operation.
C. Notification Procedure: Notification of bypass shall be submitted in accordance with the following:
1. Anticipated Bypass: If the user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice, at least ten (10) days before the
date of the bypass, to the WRA director.
2. Unanticipated Bypass: The user shall immediately notify the WRA director and submit a written report to the WRA within five (5) days. This
report shall specify the following:
a. A description of the bypass, its cause, and the duration.
b. Whether the bypass has been corrected.
c. The steps being taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent a reoccurrence of the bypass.
D. Liability Of User: Proper notification shall not relieve the user of liability for treatment costs and fees or other remedies as provided for in section 8-
3-15 of this chapter. (2000 Code § 101.19)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-20: FEES:
To provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW and for the implementation of the pretreatment program established by this chapter, the
following fees shall be applicable to discharges by all users:
A. Fees And Charges Enumerated: All users shall be subject to the following fees and charges:
1. The wastewater discharge permit application fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a class A permit, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a
class B permit, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a soil/ground water remediation permit.
2. The annual fee for a class A wastewater discharge permit shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
3. The annual fee for a class B wastewater discharge permit shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00).
4. The fee paid by each industrial user when an accidental discharge or slug load occurs shall be up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The fee
shall reimburse the WRA for any costs incurred as a result of the discharge.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 219/439
5. The fee for sampling a user's discharge shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per day when using a twenty four (24) hour automatic sampler. The fee for
subsequent consecutive days and for collecting grab samples shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day. When a sampling event must be
rescheduled due to failure of the user's sampling equipment or due to a sampler seal (used to detect sample tampering) being broken, a trip
charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and a rescheduling fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed. The trip charge fee may be waived if the
user informs the WRA of sampling equipment failure prior to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of a scheduled sampling day.
6. Laboratory analysis fees for those analyses performed by the WRA shall be as follows:
LABORATORY ANALYSIS FEES
Test Cost/Sample
BOD $20.00
COD 20.00
Total organic carbon (TOC) 20.00
TSS 10.00
pH 5.00
Oil and grease, total 35.00
Mineral/nonmineral 35.00
Nitrogen, ammonia 15.00
Nitrogen, nitrate 15.00
TKN 30.00
Phosphorous, total 25.00
Potassium 12.00
Calcium carbonate equivalent 15.00
Soil analysis - each pollutant 20.00
Phenols 28.00
Cyanide 30.00
Metals:
Arsenic 20.00
Selenium 20.00
Mercury 25.00
Other metals (per parameter) 15.00
BETX (OA-1) 40.00
TPH (OA-1) 40.00
BETX and TPH (OA-1) 45.00
USEPA Tests:
608 Organochlorine pesticides and PCBs 70.00
624 Volatile organic compounds 140.00
625 Base/neutral organic compounds 290.00
625 Acid/organic compounds 290.00
7. Fees for analysis performed by laboratories other than the WRA laboratory shall be the full cost of each analysis.
8. Fees for annual or biannual inspections of permitted users shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for those holding a class A permit and fifty
dollars ($50.00) for those holding a class B permit.
9. Fees for copying and mailing documents shall be one dollar ($1.00) for the initial page and twenty five cents ($0.25) for each additional page. No
charges shall be assessed for requests for copies received from individuals or agencies served by the WRA, provided the number of pages
requested does not exceed ten (10).
10. Fees for past due reminders sent each thirty (30) days that a balance remains unpaid shall be five dollars ($5.00).
11. Prohibitive waste charges for each pollutant discharged in excess of permit or ordinance limits shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day for
class B permit holders and fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for class A permit holders. High strength charges shall double if discharges are slug
loads. Payment of fees does not preclude other enforcement action and may not be paid in lieu of compliance with discharge limitations.
12. Fees for inspection of a food service establishment grease trap or interceptor shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per visit.
B. Surcharges:
1. All users contributing wastewater in excess of the following concentrations shall be assessed a surcharge, which shall be in addition to the rates
and charges ordinarily billed to such users for sewer use:
Pollutant Surcharge (Per Pound)
Suspended solids in excess of 250 mg/l $0.16/lb
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 220/439
BOD or CBOD in excess of 200 mg/l 0.11/lb
TKN in excess of 30 mg/l 0.61/lb
Oil and grease in excess of 100 mg/l 0.06/lb
2. Chemical oxygen demand (COD) in excess of three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) may be used at the discretion of the WRA director in
lieu of CBOD. In such case, the excess COD concentration shall be multiplied by the known CBOD/COD ratio or by a ratio of two-thirds (2/3) to
establish an equivalent CBOD concentration. Ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N) in excess of fifteen milligrams per liter (15 mg/l) may be used at the
discretion of the WRA director in lieu of TKN by multiplying the excess NH3-N concentration times two (2) to establish an equivalent TKN
concentration.
C. Effective Date: The establishment and imposition of new or different fees or charges, in addition or in substitution for those provided above in this
section, shall be by ordinance amending this chapter. The amounts of the fees and charges established in this section shall be and remain in effect
until such time as the WRA board shall by resolution revise said fee amounts. Said revised fees and charges shall take effect after the board
causes said resolution to be sent to the city council and thereafter causes same to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in each
county in which participating communities are located. (2000 Code § 101.20)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-21: CLASSES OF PERMITS:
Discharge permit classifications shall be as follows:
A. Class A permit issued to a user discharging twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excludes sanitary,
noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown).
B. Class B permit issued to a user discharging less than twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of process wastewater. (2000 Code § 101.21)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-22: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
A. All new industrial users shall notify the WRA director of the nature and characteristics of their proposed discharge one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to commencing discharge. A notification form prescribed by the WRA shall be used for this purpose.
B. Significant users shall discharge wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the POTW only after obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the
WRA director. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a user of the obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state or
local law.
C. Other users, including waste haulers, shall obtain permits as required by the WRA director. (2000 Code § 101.22)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-23: PERMIT APPLICATIONS; BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS:
Users applying for a wastewater discharge permit or submitting a baseline monitoring report shall submit the following information as required by 40
CFR 403.12 or by the WRA director:
A. Requirements: Users applying for a wastewater discharge permit must submit an application form prescribed by the WRA and accompanied by the
application fee. All new significant users must submit such application one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date of any wastewater
discharge. Existing users subject to new national categorical pretreatment standards must, within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective
date of the standard, submit such an application. The following information is required:
1. Name, address, and location of the facility, if different from the mailing address.
2. The name of a person or agent authorized to accept legal service of process.
3. Standard industrial classification (SIC) code of both the industry as a whole and any processes for which national categorical pretreatment
standards have been promulgated and a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
4. Wastewater constituents and characteristics including any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any federal, state or local standards
with sampling and analysis performed in accordance with environmental protection agency approved methods, and meeting the following
requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 221/439
a. The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process if the user is a categorical user.
b. All samples shall be representative of daily operations.
c. A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics. For all other
pollutants, twenty four (24) hour composite samples must be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques where
feasible. The WRA director may waive flow proportional composite sampling for any user who demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is
not feasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time proportional techniques or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples
where the user demonstrates that such sampling will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
d. Where the flow of the stream being sampled is less than or equal to two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) gallons per day, the user must
analyze three (3) samples within a two (2) week period. Where the flow of the stream being sampled is greater than two hundred fifty thousand
(250,000) gallons per day, the user must analyze six (6) samples within a two (2) week period.
e. Samples must be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated
process if no pretreatment exists and prior to mixing with other waste. If nonregulated wastewater is mixed with regulated wastewater prior to
pretreatment, the user must measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR
403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the WRA director. Users not subject to
categorical standards shall submit analysis of wastewater representative of the effluent discharged to the POTW.
f. The WRA director may allow the submission of an application which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for pretreatment.
g. A statement indicating the time, date and place of sampling, methods of analysis, and certifying that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW shall accompany each application/baseline monitoring
report unless such sampling and analysis were performed by the city.
5. Time and duration of all discharges.
6. Daily maximum, daily average, and monthly average wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any.
7. Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes at the site, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at the facility which are
or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the POTW.
8. The site plans, floor plans and mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation. The plans shall include a schematic process diagram which indicates all points of discharge to the POTW. All plans must be
certified for accuracy by a professional engineer registered in the state.
9. Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production.
10. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day).
11. Number and type of employees and hours of operation and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment facility.
12. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the user, and certified to by a professional engineer registered in the state, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not whether additional operation and maintenance or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet pretreatment standards and requirements.
13. If additional pretreatment or O&M will be required to meet pretreatment standards or requirements, the user shall supply a compliance schedule
indicating the shortest time schedule necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of such additional pretreatment or O&M. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions
apply to this schedule:
a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. Such schedule shall
include, where applicable, but shall not be limited to, dates for the hiring of an engineer, completing preliminary plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing construction, beginning operation, and conducting routine operations.
b. No increment referred to in subsection A13a of this section shall exceed nine (9) months, nor shall the total compliance period exceed
eighteen (18) months.
c. No later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report
to the WRA director, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse
between such progress reports to the WRA director.
14. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the limits on discharge into the POTW set forth in sections
8-3-10, 8-3-11 and 8-3-12 of this chapter, or any other limits set by the WRA director, a plan shall be provided by the user giving the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide the needed equipment, operation, or maintenance changes and additions to meet such limits. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the national categorical pretreatment standards. For
a compliance schedule for meeting national categorical pretreatment standards, the following conditions shall apply:
a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required to meet the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards. Such
schedule shall include, where applicable, but not be limited to, dates for the hiring of an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing
final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction and completing construction.
b. No time increment in the schedule may exceed nine (9) months.
c. No later than fourteen (14) days after each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to
the WRA director stating whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 222/439
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return to the schedule
established. In no case shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the WRA.
15. Any additional information required by the WRA director to evaluate a permit application.
B. Certification: All applications and reports must contain the certification statement and be signed in accordance with section 8-3-27 of this chapter.
(2000 Code § 101.23)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-24: REPORT ON COMPLIANCE BY CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIES:
Users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards shall submit a report to the WRA director containing the information described in
subsections 8-3-23A3, A4, A5 and A11 of this chapter, within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable national
categorical pretreatment standards or, if a new source, following commencement of discharge. Users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits shall provide a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production or other measure of operation, this report shall include the user's
actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All reports must contain the certification statement and be signed in accordance with section
8-3-27 of this chapter. (2000 Code § 101.51)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-25: PERMIT CONDITIONS, RESTRICTIONS, MODIFICATIONS:
A. Permit Contents: Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the WRA director to prevent
pass-through or interference; protect the quality of the water body receiving effluent from the POTW; protect worker health and safety; facilitate the
WRA's sludge management and disposal program; protect ambient air quality; and protect against damage to the POTW. The WRA director may
include the following items in the permit and such additional items as the director determines necessary or prudent:
1. Limits on the average or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
2. Limits on the average or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater constituents or properties.
3. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce,
eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW.
4. Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including additional management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or prohibited discharges.
5. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
6. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection, sampling, and flow monitoring facilities and equipment for each separate discharge
into the POTW.
7. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests,
and reporting schedules.
8. Compliance schedules.
9. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports and which may include production data.
10. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the WRA director and affording the
director or the director's representatives access thereto.
11. Requirements for the notification of any substantial change in the manufacturing processes, pretreatment processes, quantity or quality of
waste discharged to the POTW ninety (90) days prior to such change. The WRA director shall approve, deny or condition a changed discharge
prior to a change occurring in accordance with subsection 8-3-9A4 of this chapter.
12. Requirements for notification of excessive, accidental, or slug discharges.
13. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the WRA director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
14. A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal
pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the permit. (2000 Code § 101.52)
B. Permit Duration And Renewal: Permits required under this chapter shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. Permit
fees shall be due annually to the WRA regardless of the term of the permit. Permitted users shall apply for a new permit by submitting a completed
permit application a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. (2000 Code § 101.53)
C. Continuation Of Expired Permits: Expired permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall remain effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued
unless the user is notified of permit termination by the WRA director. (2000 Code § 101.54)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 223/439
D. Permit Modifications:
1. The WRA director may modify the permit issued pursuant to this chapter for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following:
a. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standard or requirement. After becoming aware of more stringent
standards or requirements, the WRA will, as necessary, update permits within ninety (90) days;
b. To make material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's operation processes, or discharge volume or character which were
not considered in drafting the effective permit;
c. To make a change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or
elimination of the authorized discharge;
d. Upon receipt of information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, to city, WRA or operating contractor
personnel, or to the receiving water;
e. Upon occurrence of a violation of any terms or conditions of the permit;
f. Misrepresentation of, or grant of variance from, such categorical standards pursuant to 40 CFR 4.3.13;
g. To correct typographical or other errors in the permit;
h. To reflect transfer of ownership or operation of the permitted facility to a new owner or operator; or
i. Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and
regulations.
2. The filing of a request by the permittee for permit modification, revocation and reissuance, termination, or a notification of planned changes or
anticipated noncompliance shall not have the effect of staying or delaying the implementation or effective date of any permit condition. (2000
Code § 101.55)
E. Permit Transfer: An industrial wastewater discharge permit is not transferable to any other person or entity. A new owner or operator must apply for
a new wastewater discharge permit sixty (60) days prior to taking ownership or undertaking operation of a permitted facility. (2000 Code § 101.56)
F. Denial Of Permit: The WRA director may deny a wastewater discharge permit to any user whose discharge of material to the POTW, whether shown
upon application, including test results submitted by the applicant, or determined after inspection or testing conducted by the WRA or its operating
contractor, is not in conformity with this chapter or whose application is incomplete or does not comply with the requirements of section 8-3-23 of
this chapter. (2000 Code § 101.57)
G. Permit Violations: Any violation of the terms, conditions, or limits of a user's wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter
and shall subject the user to all enforcement procedures outlined in this chapter. (2000 Code § 101.58)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-26: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS:
Under this chapter, periodic compliance reports are required as follows:
A. Significant users shall submit to the WRA director, during the months of January and July, a report indicating the nature, concentration, and flow of
pollutants in the effluent which are limited by permit or pretreatment standards for the preceding six (6) month period. This report shall include a
record of the monthly average flows and the daily flow for each analysis date during the reporting period. At the discretion of the WRA director and
in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the WRA director may agree to alter the months during
which the reports are to be submitted. More frequent reports may be required by the WRA director.
B. The WRA director may impose mass limitations on users. In such cases, the report required by subsection A of this section shall indicate the mass
of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. All analyses shall be performed using environmental protection agency
approved methods using sampling techniques approved by the Iowa department of natural resources.
C. Users shall meet the certification and signatory requirements in section 8-3-27 of this chapter for each report submitted under this section. Where
the WRA itself collects all the information required for the report, including flow data, the industrial user will not be required to submit a periodic
compliance report.
D. A user must notify the WRA director of all violations identified as a result of self-monitoring to the POTW by telephone, during normal business
hours, within twenty four (24) hours of the time the user becomes aware of such violation. The user must also submit the results of repeat analyses
to the WRA within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation, together with a complete report on all steps taken to resolve the violation.
The user need not repeat the analyses if:
1. The WRA performs sampling of the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 224/439
2. The WRA performs sampling of the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the
results of this sampling.
E. A user who monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the WRA or who self-monitors in addition to WRA monitoring, using
environmental protection agency methods or standard methods, shall report the monitoring results to the WRA director in accordance with
subsections A, C and D of this section. (2000 Code § 101.59)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-27: CERTIFICATION AND SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS:
A. All applications or reports submitted by a user pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
B. All applications and reports shall be signed by an authorized representative of the "user" as defined herein. A user shall maintain a current and
accurate authorization on file with the WRA director. (2000 Code § 101.60)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-28: MONITORING FACILITIES:
A. Facilities Required: When required by the WRA director pursuant to this chapter, each permitted user shall at its expense provide and operate
monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems. The WRA director may
require the placement of such monitoring facilities at the end of each process where pollutants are used, produced, or treated. The monitoring
facility should normally be situated on the user's premises and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
B. Sampling Requirements: When required by the wastewater discharge permit and within ninety (90) days of written notification, a user shall install a
sampling chamber for each separate discharge of the building sewer in accordance with plans and specification approved by the WRA director. A
user shall provide ample room in or near such sampling chamber to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. Each user
shall at its expense maintain all sampling and measuring equipment in a safe and proper operating condition at all times, which equipment shall be
safely, easily and independently accessible to authorized representatives of the WRA. Users shall certify all flow measuring devices to be in proper
working condition at a frequency specified in the permit or in writing by the WRA director, using a qualified technician acceptable to the WRA
director. Sampling shall be in accordance with the following:
1. Each sampling chamber shall contain a flume unless another device is approved by the WRA director, with a recording and totalizing device for
measurement of the liquid quantity.
2. At the discretion of the WRA director, metered water supply to a user may be used as the volume quantity where it is substantiated that the
metered water supply and waste quantities are approximately the same, or where a measurable adjustment agreed to by the director is made in
the metered water supply to determine the liquid waste quantity. Separate meters may be used to subtract water which is not discharged to the
POTW or is discharged to a sewer other than the sampled location.
3. Samples shall be taken at a frequency and volume determined by the WRA director and shall be properly refrigerated and preserved in
accordance with environmental protection agency approved methods. The sample shall be composited in proportion to the flow for a
representative twenty four (24) hour sample. A time proportioned twenty four (24) hour sample may be used if flow proportioned sampling is
determined by the WRA director to be impractical. Grab samples shall be used where appropriate.
C. Breaking Sampler Seal; Notify Director: A user must inform the WRA director prior to breaking a sampler seal, used by the WRA to detect sample
tampering, unless necessary to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. A user must not place additional seals or locks
upon a sampler which may be used by the WRA without first obtaining approval from the WRA director. (2000 Code § 101.61)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-29: INSPECTION, SAMPLING AND RECORD KEEPING AUTHORITY:
Under this chapter, users shall give the following authorities to the WRA and its operating contractor:
A. Right Of Entry: Users shall permit authorized representatives or agents of the WRA to enter upon all properties and all parts of the premises, or
upon properties of users with wastewater discharge permits for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, records copying, or the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 225/439
performance of any of their duties. This shall include the right to set up, on the user's property, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring, or metering operations as may be required in pursuance of the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
B. Security Measures: Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements in the security measures so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, WRA or
operating contractor personnel will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
C. Records Retention: All users subject to any of the reporting requirements of this chapter shall maintain copies of reports and records of all
information as required in 40 CFR 403.12(o) resulting from any monitoring activities required by this chapter for a minimum of three (3) years and
shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the WRA and its operating contractor. This period of retention shall be extended
until the completion of any unresolved negotiation, hearing or litigation involving a purported violation. (2000 Code § 101.62)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-30: CONFIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS, DATA AND INFORMATION:
A. Except as provided in this section, documents, data and information obtained from user reports, questionnaires, permit applications and inspections
pursuant to this chapter shall be made available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction. If the user specifically requests
and is able to demonstrate that the release of such information would divulge information concerning processes or methods of production entitled
to protection under law as trade secrets of the user or would give advantage to competitors and serve no public purpose, the WRA director may
determine that such information should be kept confidential and not made available for public examination, but such information shall be available
to the U.S. environmental protection agency or the Iowa department of natural resources.
B. Decisions by the WRA director to deny confidential status for information may be appealed using the procedures in section 8-3-31 of this chapter. In
determining whether information is confidential, the provisions of chapter 22 of the code of Iowa shall prevail.
C. Effluent data and enforcement actions by the WRA or its operating contractor will not be considered confidential records or information. (2000 Code
§ 101.63)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-31: APPEAL OF DENIAL OF CONFIDENTIAL STATUS:
A. Any person aggrieved by the WRA director's decision to release information or data obtained as provided in subsection 8-3-30A of this chapter and
who can demonstrate a direct and substantial interest in the information or data sought to be kept confidential may appeal the WRA director's
decision. A request for appeal shall be filed in writing with the WRA director not less than five (5) days after the WRA director's decision to deny
confidential status to such information or data. The appeal request shall include a statement of the basis upon which the request for confidential
status is made, as well as the appealing party's interest in the information or data sought to be kept confidential. The WRA director may request
additional information from the appealing party.
B. Based upon the information provided by the appealing party, the WRA director shall make a determination with respect to the confidentiality of the
information or data at issue. The WRA director shall notify the parties, in writing, of the WRA director's decision within seven (7) days after receipt
of the appeal.
C. If still aggrieved by the WRA director's determination on appeal, a party may file an action in Polk County district court seeking a declaratory ruling
with respect to the confidentiality of such documents, data and information, or seeking an injunction to prevent the disclosure of same.
D. During the pendency of an appeal to the WRA director, the documents, data or information at issue shall be kept confidential. However, if during the
pendency of such appeal, a request for examination or copying of such documents, data or information is made of the WRA or its operating
contractor pursuant to chapter 22 of the code of Iowa, the WRA or its operating contractor will notify the appealing party of such request for
disclosure and will keep confidential the requested documents, data or information, pending action by the appealing party to defend its
confidentiality request. In that notification, the appealing party requesting confidentiality will be given not more than five (5) calendar days within
which to file suit in Polk County district court seeking the entry of a declaratory order and/or injunction to protect and keep confidential such
documents, data or information. If the appealing party fails to initiate suit within the time requested, the WRA director shall release the documents,
data or informational issue for public examination.
E. If during the pendency of such appeal, a lawsuit is initiated pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 22 seeking the release of such documents, data or
information, the appealing party shall take action to defend its confidentiality request in said lawsuit. If the appealing party fails to defend its
confidentiality request in said suit, the WRA director shall release the documents, data or information at issue for public examination. (2000 Code
§ 101.64)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 226/439
8-3-32: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The WRA shall annually publish, in the largest daily newspaper published in the WRA community, a list of users who at any time during the previous
twelve (12) months were in significant noncompliance as defined in section 8-3-33 of this chapter. (2000 Code § 101.90)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-33: SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
A. Instances Of Noncompliance: Any violation of pretreatment requirements under this chapter (i.e., including, but not limited to, those relating to limits,
sampling, analyses, reporting, meeting compliance schedules, and regulatory deadlines) is an instance of noncompliance for which the user is
liable for enforcement, including penalties and injunctive relief. Instances of significant noncompliance are user violations which meet one or more
of the following criteria:
1. Violations of wastewater discharge limits as follows:
a. Chronic Violations: Sixty six percent (66%) or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in a
six (6) month period (any magnitude of exceedance).
b. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) Violations: Thirty three percent (33%) or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit
or the same average limit by more than the TRC in a six (6) month period (e.g., limit x TRC = the point at which a violation becomes a TRC
violation). There are two (2) groups of TRCs as follow:
Group I for conventional pollutants (BOD, TSS, FOG) TRC = 1.4
Group II for all other pollutants TRC = 1.2
c. Other Violations: Any other violation of a wastewater discharge permit limit (average or daily maximum) that the WRA director believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference, including slug loads, or pass-through or which endangers the health of
city, WRA or operating contractor personnel or the public.
d. Pollutant Causing Danger To Humans Or Environment: Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human
health/welfare or to the environment and has resulted in the WRA's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
2. Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order, for starting construction,
completing construction, and attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule date.
3. Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring data, or any other report required by the WRA within forty five (45) days from
the due date.
4. Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
5. Any other violations or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices that the WRA director considers to be
significant.
B. Duties Of Director: When a user is in significant noncompliance, the WRA director is directed to:
1. Report the information to the Iowa department of natural resources as part of the annual pretreatment performance summary of permitted user
noncompliance.
2. Include the user in the annual public notification according to section 8-3-32 of this chapter.
3. Address significant noncompliance through appropriate enforcement actions or document in a timely manner the reasons for withholding
enforcement. (2000 Code § 101.91)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-34: ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS:
A. Notice Of Violation: The WRA director may issue a written notice to the user giving the specific nature of violations which shall include the
frequency, magnitude and impact of the violation upon the POTW. The notice may also include the following:
1. An order requiring a plan of action for preventing reoccurrence of the violation.
2. An order requiring specific action for accomplishing remediation.
3. An order requiring the user to respond in writing within thirty (30) days.
B. Corrective Action: The WRA director is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the user responsible for any noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to
correct noncompliance within a time period specified by the order.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 227/439
C. Compliance Schedule: The WRA director may issue enforceable orders or schedules to require compliance with pretreatment standards including
appropriate interim limits. Such orders and schedules may be incorporated as a revision to an existing wastewater discharge permit and shall not
require the consent of the user. (2000 Code § 101.92)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-35: ACTIONS AUTHORIZED:
A. Where there has been noncompliance with any section of this chapter, the WRA director may request the WRA operating contractor's attorney, or
the attorney retained by the WRA for that purpose, to bring an action in equity or at law to seek the issuance of a preliminary or permanent
injunction, or both, or such other relief as may be appropriate, to compel the user's compliance with this chapter.
B. In addition to other remedies provided under this section or other sections of this chapter, in any action brought at the request of the WRA director
to enforce this chapter, the WRA operating contractor's attorney or the attorney retained by the WRA is authorized to seek to recover all actual
damages suffered by the city or the WRA, including all actual damages and losses related to costs of repair and remediation of the POTW, costs of
investigation and administration reasonably related to any particular violation and attorney fees. (2000 Code § 101.93)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-36: CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. Each violation of any section of this chapter or of a permit issued under this chapter is declared to be a municipal infraction. Each day that a
violation of a section of this chapter continues and each day that a violation of a permit issued under this chapter continues shall be considered a
separate municipal infraction.
B. Any person who knowingly makes a false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or
required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or a wastewater discharge permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this chapter commits a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty as hereafter provided in
subsection D of this section.
C. Any person who fails to perform an act required by the provisions of this chapter or who commits an act prohibited by the provisions of this chapter
commits an environmental violation and shall be guilty of a municipal infraction, punishable by a civil penalty as hereafter provided in subsection D
of this section. Violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40 CFR 403.8 is an environmental violation punishable by a civil
penalty as hereafter provided in subsection D of this section.
D. Whenever in this chapter, any act is prohibited and is declared to be a municipal infraction or whenever in this chapter the doing of any act is
required and the failure to do that act is declared to be a municipal infraction, the violation of any such provision shall be punishable by a civil
penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation or, if the infraction is a repeat offense, by a civil penalty of not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each repeat offense. However, a municipal infraction which is classified as an environmental violation or
which arises from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 CFR 403.8, by an industrial user may be
punishable by a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or continues. Each day a violation of
a provision of this chapter continues shall be considered a separate municipal infraction. (2000 Code § 101.94)
(State law reference(s) - Authority for
enhanced penalties in pretreatment violations,
Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1]).
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-37: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The WRA director may decline to reissue a permit to any user who has failed to comply with this chapter or any order or previous permit issued under
this chapter unless such user first files a satisfactory bond payable to the WRA in a sum not to exceed the value determined by the WRA director to be
necessary to achieve compliance giving due consideration to the number and magnitude of previous violations, potential need for remediation and
stating the reasons which support the amount of bond in a written order directed to the user, but in no case shall the bond be required to be greater
than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). The user shall use a bond form prescribed by the WRA. (2000 Code § 101.95)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-38: REVOCATION OF DISCHARGE PERMIT; TERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 228/439
A. Grounds For Revocation Of Discharge Permit And/Or For Termination Of Sewer Service: Any user who violates this chapter, any condition of its
wastewater discharge permit, or any of the following is subject to having its discharge permit revoked and/or its sewer service terminated in
accordance with the procedures of this section:
1. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge.
2. Failure of the user to report substantial changes in process activity or in volume or character of pollutants being introduced into the POTW at
least ninety (90) days prior to such change.
3. Tampering with monitoring equipment.
4. Refusal to allow reasonable access by the WRA or operating contractor personnel to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection,
monitoring, or sampling.
5. Violation of permit conditions.
6. Failure to report an upset, failure, or bypass of the user's pretreatment facilities.
7. Failure to pay fines, fees, or sewer user charges.
8. Failure to follow enforcement orders or compliance schedules.
9. Failure to correct a condition that impedes or alters the WRA's ability to monitor the user's discharge or has the potential to cause interference or
pass-through.
10. Failure to obtain a wastewater discharge permit as required by this chapter after notification by the WRA director that such permit is required.
B. Procedures For Revocation Of Discharge Permit And For Termination Of Sewer Service: The procedure for revocation of a discharge permit shall
be as follows:
1. Any permit issued to a user pursuant to this chapter may be revoked, and sewer service terminated, by written order of the WRA director,
specifying the grounds for such revocation and termination as outlined in subsection A of this section, which order shall not take effect until
hearing thereon as hereafter provided. Upon determining that grounds exist for an order to revoke a user's discharge permit and terminate sewer
service, the WRA director shall cause a notice of hearing to be prepared, specifying the violations of subsection A of this section which are
deemed to have occurred, and the time, date and place that such hearing will be held. The notice shall be sent to the user by regular mail
addressed to the user's address listed on the wastewater discharge permit a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, and shall
be deemed delivered when placed in the mail.
2. Sewer service may be terminated by written order of the WRA director, specifying the grounds for such revocation and termination as outlined in
subsection A of this section, which order shall not take effect until hearing thereon as hereafter provided. Upon determining that grounds exist for
an order to terminate sewer service, the WRA director shall cause a notice of hearing to be prepared, specifying the violation of subsection A of
this section which is deemed to have occurred, and the time, date and place that such hearing will be held. The notice shall be sent to the user
by regular mail addressed to the user's address a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, and shall be deemed delivered
when placed in the mail.
3. If, after such a hearing, the WRA director makes a finding based on substantial evidence that violations under subsection A of this section have
occurred as alleged, the director may issue an order immediately revoking the permit, if a permit had previously been issued, and terminating
sewer service to the user's premises. The determination to revoke such permit and terminate service shall be in the discretion of WRA director
and shall be dependent upon the circumstances surrounding the user's violations of subsection A of this section and the severity of those
violations. If the user does not appear for the hearing, the WRA director shall issue the order revoking the discharge permit and/or terminating
sewer service, which shall take effect immediately.
4. The decision and order of the WRA director to revoke the permit of a user may be appealed to the WRA appeal committee. Such appeal request
shall be in writing, shall include the grounds for appeal including any factual findings which are disputed, and shall be delivered to WRA not less
than ten (10) days after the director's entry of the order of revocation of permit and/or termination of sewer service. Such appeal request shall be
considered delivered when placed in the mail, return receipt requested, addressed to:
WRA Appeal Committee
c/o Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, IA 50326
5. The chair of the appeal committee shall schedule the appeal and shall cause notice of the time, date and place of the hearing to be mailed to the
appealing user. Such appeal shall be decided by majority vote of the appeal committee. If the appeal committee affirms the order of the WRA
director revoking the permit and/or terminating sewer service, the appeal committee shall so state and order in its written decision.
6. A user whose permit has been revoked shall not be eligible for another permit until thirty (30) days after the violating conditions have been
corrected to the satisfaction of the WRA director.
7. Upon determination by the WRA director that the user's sewer service connection to the POTW be terminated, the director's written order shall
be sent to the city public works department who shall cause the user's connection to the sewer to be severed or plugged. The city public works
department shall determine the manner of severance and procedure for disconnection. Upon completion of the disconnection, the city public
works department shall certify to the WRA director the city's cost to disconnect the user's sewer service. Upon receipt of such certification of
costs, the WRA director shall forward to the user whose service was disconnected by registered mail return receipt requested, certified mail, or
personal service a bill for the cost of making the disconnection, including all costs for labor and materials, and a service charge of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for WRA supervision.
8. Any building at which sewer service is disconnected as herein provided shall be inspected by the city building official and if appropriate shall be
red tagged as unfit for human occupancy. (2000 Code § 101.96)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 229/439
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-39: REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE:
If service is severed pursuant to this chapter, the service may be reinstated in the following manner:
A. Upon payment to the WRA of any delinquency in full, supervision fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and an inspection by the WRA director to
determine whether the original cause for termination has been corrected, the WRA will issue a permit for reconnection of the building service line to
the POTW. Such reconnection costs, plus inspection fees for the city in accordance with this code, shall be at the sole expense of the user.
B. Upon reconnection and payment of all costs described in subsection A of this section, the city, through its agents, shall remove the red tag from the
building, and the building shall, so far as the city is concerned, be fit for human occupancy. (2000 Code § 101.98)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-40: EMERGENCY DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE:
A. Conditions For Immediate Disconnection Of Service: The WRA director may, after informal notice, suspend the wastewater treatment discharge
permit of and sewer service to a user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or
causing an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW, or the environment.
B. Procedures For Immediate Disconnection: The procedures for immediate disconnection shall be as follows:
1. When the WRA director determines that a discharge as described in subsection A of this section exists, an oral order shall be issued, followed
immediately by a written order, to the user stating the problem and requiring immediate cessation of the discharge. A user orally notified of a
suspension of its wastewater permit or sewer service shall immediately stop or eliminate all discharges. If a user fails to immediately and
voluntarily comply with the suspension order, the WRA director shall take immediate action to eliminate the discharge, including disconnection
from the POTW. Methods of informal notice to a user shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following: personal conversations between
user and personnel or the WRA or its operating contractor, telephone calls, letters, hand delivered messages or notices posted at the user's
premises or point of discharge.
2. A user responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment shall submit to the WRA director, prior to the hearing described in subsection
8-3-38B of this chapter, a detailed written report describing the causes of the endangerment and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence. (2000 Code § 101.99)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-41: ELIMINATION OF DISCHARGE; REINSTATEMENT OF PERMIT:
A user notified by the WRA director of revocation of its discharge permit and/or disconnection of its sewer service under section 8-3-38 or 8-3-40 of
this chapter shall immediately cease discharging wastewater to the POTW. If the user fails to comply voluntarily with the revocation and/or
disconnection order, the city shall take such steps as are deemed necessary by the WRA, including immediate severance of the sewer connection.
The WRA director shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit or the sewer service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge.
(2000 Code § 101.100)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-42: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
A. In addition to remedies available to the WRA set forth elsewhere in this chapter, if the WRA is fined by the Iowa department of natural resources or
the U.S. environmental protection agency for violations of the national pollutant discharge elimination system permit for the WRF or for violations of
water quality standards as the result of a discharge of pollutants by an identifiable user, the fine, including all legal, sampling, analytical testing
costs and any other related costs, shall be charged to the responsible user. Such charge shall be in addition to any other remedies the WRA may
have under this chapter at law or in equity.
B. If the discharge from any user results in a deposit, obstruction, damage or other impairment to the POTW, the user shall become liable to the city
and/or the WRA for any expense, loss, or damage caused by the violations or discharge. The WRA may add to the user's charges and fees the
costs incurred by the WRA and by the city for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violations or discharge.
C. The remedies provided in this chapter shall not be exclusive, and the WRA may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by statute, at law or
in equity against any persons violating this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 230/439
D. In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, the city and/or the WRA may initiate an action, either in law or in equity, to obtain an
injunction against further violations of this chapter and for judgment for all costs incurred by the city and/or the WRA occasioned by the user's
violation of any requirements of this chapter. (2000 Code § 101.101)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1069 - INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE. Go
to new ordinance.
8-3-43: NOTICES TO WRA; WRA BOARD, DIRECTOR OR STEERING COMMITTEE:
Notices which are required to be given, or which may be given to the WRA, the WRA board, the WRA director or the WRA appeal committee, as
provided in sections 8-3-9 through this section of this chapter, shall be mailed to such entity, body or person at the following address:
c/o Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
Des Moines Wastewater Reclamation Facility
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, IA 50317
(2000 Code § 101.102)
ARTICLE A. FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS, GREASE INTERCEPTORS
8-3A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article shall be to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contribution and accumulation of fat, oil,
and grease (FOG) into the POTW. Such discharges from commercial kitchens, restaurants, food processing facilities and all other establishments,
where fat, oil and grease (FOG) of vegetable or animal origin are discharged directly or indirectly into the POTW, can contribute to line blockages
and/or spills in violation of title 40, code of federal regulations (40 CFR), part 403. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
8-3A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions found in section 8-3-1 of this chapter shall apply to the provisions of this article; provided, however, that the following words, terms and
phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPs: Means and includes schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and
other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the state. For purposes of this article, best management practices include
procedures and practices that reduce the discharge of fat, oil and grease (FOG) to the building sewer, to the city sanitary sewer system and to the
POTW.
DESIGN LIQUID DEPTH: The maximum depth of liquid when the tank is filled with water.
EFFECTIVE DATE: The date set forth in section 8-3A-3 of this article upon which the regulatory provisions of this article take effect.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT OR FSE: An operation or enterprise that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food
for human consumption. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, those that process meat or other food ingredients as an intermediate step or
for final human consumption, food service operations in a summer camp, residential substance abuse treatment facility, halfway house, correctional
facility, bars, restaurant, commercial kitchen, caterer, church, hotel, school, hospital, prison, care institution or similar facility.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR: A tank that serves one or more fixtures and is remotely located. Grease interceptors include, but are not limited to, tanks
that capture wastewater from dishwashers, garbage disposals, floor drains, pot and pan sinks and trenches as allowed by local plumbing codes. For
purposes of this article, a grease interceptor is a multicompartment tank located underground outside of a building that reduces the amount of FOG in
wastewater prior to its discharge into the POTW.
GREASE TRAP: A device designed to retain grease from one to a maximum of four (4) fixtures. Not all grease traps are approved by the manufacturer
for use on heated water (e.g., dishwasher) or in line to a waste disposal unit (e.g., garbage disposal and grinders). For purposes of this article, a
grease trap is a small device located within a building.
MINIMUM DESIGN CAPABILITY: The design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain
greases from grease laden wastewaters discharged to the POTW.
NONROUTINE INSPECTION: An impromptu, unscheduled inspection of an FSE made without prior notification or arrangement.
ROUTINE INSPECTION: An inspection of an FSE, which is scheduled in advance or according to a prearranged schedule.
USER: Has the same meaning as the definition in section 8-3-1 of this chapter, but also includes persons who discharge wastewater to the POTW
from mobile sources, such as mobile food vendors. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
8-3A-3: EFFECTIVE DATE OF FOG REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this article shall be effective on and after January 1, 2006. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 231/439
8-3A-4: GREASE INTERCEPTOR INSTALLATION REQUIRED; EXEMPTION:
A. Required: The owner of a building or facility in which an FSE is located, and the owner/operator of an FSE shall be required to install an approved
grease interceptor, and to thereafter operate and maintain same as provided in this article.
B. Exemption: The requirements of subsection A of this section shall not apply to that portion of a building or facility within which an FSE is in
existence on the effective date if:
1. The FSE has an existing grease interceptor or grease trap in place as of the effective date, and provided that: a) the owner or occupant of the
FSE continues to use the interceptor or trap; b) the interceptor or trap is of sufficient capacity and design; and c) the interceptor or trap is
operated and maintained so as to comply with FOG discharge limits; and
2. Any repair, remodeling or renovation of the wastewater plumbing system in the existing FSE involves only: a) the repair of leaks or the clearing
of stoppages in drains, soil, waste or vent piping; or b) the removal and reinstallation of a sink, toilet or hot water heater; provided that such work
does not involve replacement, rearrangement or moving of wastewater pipes, floor sinks, drainage fixtures or grease traps;
3. None of the following conditions are present:
a. A building or facility exists on the effective date and is thereafter expanded or renovated, or a portion thereof, to include an FSE where such
FSE did not previously exist; or
b. An FSE exists on the effective date within a building or facility, or portion of a building or facility, and application is thereafter made for a
building permit(s) for such building or facility with valuation of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more within a twelve (12) month period; or
c. A building or facility, or portion thereof, that contained an FSE on the effective date but in which an FSE ceases to operate for one year or
more, as determined by Iowa department of inspections and appeals, food and consumer safety bureau records. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
8-3A-5: COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES:
A. Certificate Of Compliance Or Occupancy: After the effective date, any permitted construction under subsection 8-3A-4A of this article shall be
deemed compliant upon issuance of a certificate of compliance or certificate of occupancy for such construction by the city building official or
designee.
B. Inadequate Grease Interceptor: An FSE shall be deemed compliant, unless the WRA director or local building official or designee determines that
an existing grease trap or grease interceptor is incapable of adequately retaining FOG. In such cases, the director may order the FSE to install an
adequate grease interceptor within a specified time period, if:
1. The FSE is found to contribute FOG in quantities above FOG discharge limits; or
2. The FSE discharges necessitate increased maintenance on the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) in order to keep stoppages from
occurring therein; or
3. The FSE's discharge to the POTW is at any time determined to exceed four hundred milligrams per liter (400 mg/l) total FOG.
C. Order To Install: An order directing an existing FSE or owner or operator of the FSE or the owner of the building or facility in which the FSE is
located to install a grease interceptor shall be in writing from the WRA director in the form of a notice of violation including a corrective action order,
as provided in section 8-3A-11 of this article.
D. Exceptional Physical Constraints Or Economic Hardship: FSEs or owners of the buildings of the facilities within which an FSE is located which are
unable to install or replace a grease interceptor due to exceptional physical constraints or economic hardship may appeal to the WRA director for
approval of an alternative grease control technology by requesting a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such requests shall
be submitted in writing and shall include detailed descriptions of the FSE's physical or financial constraints and the alternative grease control
technology, which it proposes to install and utilize.
1. In order to demonstrate exceptional economic hardship, the owner or operator of the FSE shall submit to the WRA director balance sheets and
profit and loss statements for FSE for the preceding three (3) years. A new FSE shall submit profit/loss projections or a detailed business plan
with projections for twenty four (24) months. Each request shall be evaluated on a case by case basis.
2. Notwithstanding approval of alternative grease control technology, when the WRA director determines that such alternative is not performing
adequately, the FSE or owner of the building or facility in which the FSE is located shall be required to take additional grease control measures,
which may include the installation of a grease interceptor.
3. In order to demonstrate exceptional physical site constraints preventing the installation of a grease interceptor, the owner or operator of the FSE
or owner of the building or facility in which the FSE is located shall submit to the WRA director documentation and plats showing the location of
sanitary sewer and any private easements in relation to the building sewer for the building housing the FSE, and showing available space inside
or outside the building and drawings of existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for all services at that site.
4. An FSE that is given an exemption from installing a properly sized grease interceptor is prohibited from installing or using a dishwasher or
garbage disposal without approval of the director and must comply with the conditions of such approval, if any. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
8-3A-6: INSTALLATION OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND GREASE TRAPS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 232/439
Grease interceptors and grease traps, when required, shall be installed as follows:
A. Grease interceptors and grease traps shall be installed at the expense of the owner or operator of the FSE or owner of the building or facility in
which the FSE is located which is contributing wastewater to the POTW.
B. All wastewater streams containing FOG or reasonably likely to contain FOG within FSEs or other FOG generating facilities operations shall be
directed into one or more appropriately sized grease interceptor before discharge to the POTW. Grease interceptors shall be either sized by adding
the peak design flow rates for all fixtures leading to the grease interceptor and allowing a minimum retention time of thirty (30) minutes or as
follows:
GREASE INTERCEPTOR SIZING
1. Peak meals per hour:
a. Seating capacity of FSE
b. Occupancy of FSE*
c. Seating or occupancy x Meal factor of 1.3 (45 minute meal) = Peak meals per hour
* Church: Include all area(s) used for meal service
* Assisted living/nursing facility: Equal to maximum number of residents (per state license)
2. Waste flow rate, gallons of flow:
a. Commercial, equipped kitchen with dishwasher and 1 garbage disposal* 7
b. Commercial, equipped kitchen with dishwasher, no garbage disposal 6
c. Commercial, equipped kitchen with no dishwasher, 1 garbage disposal* 6
d. Commercial, equipped kitchen with no dishwasher, no garbage disposal 5
e. Single service kitchen** 2
* Each additional garbage disposal, add 1 gallon.
** Single service kitchen - no garbage disposal, no dishwasher and all service is single use.
3. Retention time, hours:
a. Commercial kitchen 2.5
b. Single service kitchen 1.5
4. Storage factor:
a. Commercial kitchen up to 8 hours of operation 1
b. Commercial kitchen up to 16 hours of operation 2
c. Commercial kitchen up to 24 hours of operation 3
d. Single service kitchen 1.5
Peak meals per hour x Waste flow rate x Retention time x Storage factor = Calculated interceptor size
C. Concrete grease interceptors whether precast or poured in place, shall be designed, and manufactured in accordance with ASTM C 1613-08
standard specification for precast concrete grease interceptor tanks or IAPMO/ANSI Z1001 grease interceptors and shall be installed in
accordance with the codes adopted by the jurisdiction in which the FSE is located. Grease interceptors using materials other than concrete require
approval by the director, and shall comply with the conditions of such approval, if any.
D. The building official or other designated official of the governmental subdivision within which the FSE is located shall inspect each grease
interceptor installation made pursuant to this article, shall review all relevant information regarding the rated performance of the grease interceptor,
and the building plan and facility site plan for the building and site where the grease interceptor has been installed, and shall approve such grease
interceptor installation upon determination that the grease interceptor meets all applicable standards and requirements.
E. Grease interceptors shall have a minimum capacity of one thousand (1,000) gallons and shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons for a single
unit. Where a capacity greater than five thousand (5,000) gallons is required, several smaller units shall be installed in series, however the capacity
shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) gallons for any single series of interceptors without approval of the director.
F. Grease interceptors shall be installed outside the building housing the FSE and below surface grade, and shall have access manholes, with a
minimum diameter of twenty four inches (24"), over each chamber and sanitary tee. Access manholes shall extend from the grease interceptor to at
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 233/439
least the finished surface grade and be designed and maintained to prevent storm or surface water inflow and groundwater infiltration. The
manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection and grease removal.
G. Sewer lines which are not grease laden, which are not likely to contain FOG, or which contain sanitary wastes shall not be connected to a grease
interceptor.
H. Grease interceptors shall be equipped with an accessible discharge sampling port with a minimum six inch (6") diameter, which shall extend from
the grease interceptor to at least the finished surface grade.
I. Where grease interceptors are shared by more than one FSE, the building owner shall be the responsible party for recordkeeping and cleaning of
the interceptor. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
8-3A-7: OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND CLEANING OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS:
A. Wastewater Limitation: The owner or operator of an FSE which is required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor shall operate and
maintain the grease interceptor so that wastewater exiting the grease interceptor shall not exceed four hundred milligrams per liter (400 mg/l) of
FOG.
B. Cleaning Schedule: The owner or operator of the FSE shall cause the grease interceptor to be cleaned as hereinafter required when FOG and
solids reach twenty five percent (25%) of the design liquid level of the grease interceptor, or sooner if necessary to prevent carryover of grease
from the grease interceptor into the city sanitary sewer system. Interceptors shall be cleaned at three (3) month intervals or less. A longer cleaning
interval must be approved by the WRA director. If the owner or operator of the FSE, or an employee of the owner or operator, has obtained a waste
hauler's license and has completed to the satisfaction of the WRA director the course of training offered by the WRA in the cleaning of grease
interceptors, such person or persons may clean the grease interceptor. Alternatively, the owner or operator of an FSE may employ a waste hauler
licensed by the WRA to clean the grease interceptor, provided that the waste hauler personnel performing the grease interceptor cleaning has
satisfactorily completed a course of training on grease interceptor cleaning offered by the WRA.
C. Cleaning Requirements: Any person who cleans a grease interceptor shall do so in accordance with the following procedures and requirements.
The person cleaning the grease interceptor shall:
1. Completely empty and remove the contents (liquids and sludge) of all vaults of the grease interceptor, and remove the grease mat and scrapings
from the interior walls.
2. Not deposit waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor back into the grease interceptor from which the waste or wastewater was
removed or into any other grease interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume of waste and wastewater to be disposed of.
3. Not introduce enzymes, emulsifying chemicals, hot water or other agents into a grease interceptor to dissolve or emulsify grease or as a grease
abatement method. Introduction of bacteria as a grease degradation agent is permitted with prior written approval by the WRA director.
4. Dispose of waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor at the WRF or at a facility approved for disposal of such waste by the WRA
director. Waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor shall not be discharged to any private sanitary or storm sewer or to the city
sanitary or storm sewer system.
5. Not use an automatic grease removal system to clean a grease interceptor without prior written approval of the WRA director, and if the use of
an automatic grease removal system is approved, shall operate same in a manner that the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from
the system's outlet, is consistently achieved.
D. Verification Required: If grease interceptor cleaning is performed by a licensed waste hauler, the owner or operator of the FSE shall witness all
cleaning/maintenance activities to verify that the grease interceptor is being fully cleaned and properly maintained according to the requirements of
this section. The waste hauler shall provide a copy of the disposal receipt for all waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor to the
owner or operator of the FSE.
E. Maintenance Activities: As part of each cleaning of a grease interceptor, the owner or operator of the FSE, or the licensed waste hauler employed
by the owner or operator, shall perform the following maintenance activities:
1. Check that the sanitary "tees" on the inlet and outlet sides of the grease interceptor are not obstructed, loose, or missing.
2. Verify that the baffle is secure and in place.
3. Inspect the grease interceptor for any cracks or other defects.
4. Check that lids are securely and properly seated after completion of cleaning.
F. Allow Exceptions Or Alternatives: The WRA director may make exceptions to the above requirements, or may approve alternative operational
requirements or cleaning and maintenance methods, provided that such exceptions or approvals shall be made in writing by the WRA director.
(Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
8-3A-8: RECORDS AND RECORDKEEPING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 234/439
A. Required Records: The owner or operator of an FSE which is required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor or trap shall maintain a
written record of grease interceptor or trap maintenance, including a log showing the dates upon which the grease interceptor or trap was inspected
and the estimated amount of FOG present in the grease interceptor or trap at each inspection, the date upon which waste and wastewater was
removed from the grease interceptor or trap and disposed of, and the location and means of such disposal of waste and wastewater, and the name
and employer or the person or persons performing each of said tasks. The log shall further include a record of the placement of any approved or
unapproved additive into the grease interceptor, grease trap or building sewer on a constant, regular or scheduled basis, including the type and
amount of additive placed on each such occasion. Only additives approved by the WRA director pursuant to subsection 8-3A-7C of this article may
be used in a grease interceptor.
B. Recordkeeping: The log shall at all times be kept and maintained on a day to day basis, so as to show a record of waste and wastewater removal,
waste and wastewater disposal and approved additive placement for a continuous period of three (3) years. All such records shall be kept secure
at the premises of the FSE for a continuous period of three (3) years and shall be made available for nonroutine inspection by the city, the WRA
and its operating contractor, or the employees and agents of any of them at any time during normal business hours. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
8-3A-9: INSPECTION OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND RELATED SEWERS AND EQUIPMENT; FEES:
A. Owner Responsibilities: The owner or operator of an FSE shall:
1. Provide, operate and maintain, at its expense, safe and accessible monitoring facilities (such as a suitable manhole), and shall make such
monitoring facilities available for inspection, and for sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems. There
shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
2. Allow personnel authorized by the WRA director or by the city building official or designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, to enter
upon or into any building, facility or property housing an FSE at any reasonable time and without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, testing or record review, in accordance with this article.
3. Upon request by the WRA director's authorized representative, open any grease interceptor for the purpose of confirming that maintenance
frequency is appropriate, that all necessary parts of the installation are in place, including, but not limited to, baffles, influent and effluent tees,
and that all grease interceptors and related equipment and piping is maintained in efficient operating condition.
4. Accommodate compliance inspections and sampling events by the authorized representatives of the WRA director or of the city building official.
Staff may conduct routine inspections and sampling events of any food service establishment. Nonroutine inspection and sampling events shall
occur more frequently when there is a history of noncompliance with this article and when blockages occur in the city's sanitary sewer system
downstream of the FSE.
B. Inspection Fees: The fees for inspection of an FSE shall be as provided in section 8-3-20 of this chapter, and shall be paid within thirty (30) days of
the date of the invoice for such fees. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
8-3A-10: ENFORCEMENT:
The WRA director is authorized to enforce this article as hereinafter provided. The city building official or designee, or such other governmental official
hereafter designated by the WRA, is also authorized to enforce this article. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
8-3A-11: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES; CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDERED:
A. Notice; Corrective Actions: The director, or such other designated officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in section 8-3A-10 of
this article, are authorized to issue a notice of violation imposing an administrative penalty upon any person who fails to perform an act required by
this article or who commits an act prohibited by this article. Such notice may include a corrective action order requiring the user to take one or more
of the following corrective actions within thirty (30) days:
1. Conform to best management practices;
2. Submit copies of the grease interceptor maintenance log;
3. Develop, submit and implement an FOG compliance plan to be approved by the director or designated enforcement official; or
4. Install a compliant grease interceptor.
B. Administrative Penalty: The administrative penalty for such violations shall be as provided in the schedule of administrative penalties adopted by the
city council by resolution.
C. Service Of Violation Notice: Notice of violation, with the applicable penalty for such violation noted thereon, shall be issued to and served upon the
violator. Service of the notice may be by regular mail or by delivery in person.
D. Time Limit For Payment Of Penalty: Penalties assessed pursuant to notice of violation shall be paid by the violator in full as directed in the notice
within thirty (30) days of its issuance.
E. Penalty Imposed; Records Kept: The administrative penalties set out in the schedule of administrative penalties shall be charged in lieu of the fines
and penalties provided for in section 8-3A-12 of this article, unless the violator refuses to correct the violation and pay the scheduled administrative
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 235/439
penalty, or the WRA director determines that immediate enforcement action by misdemeanor or municipal infraction prosecution is, in view of the
particular circumstances of the case, necessary to achieve compliance with the requirements of this article. A record of all violations, administrative
penalties charged or other enforcement actions taken shall be maintained by the WRA for a period of three (3) years. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
8-3A-12: PENALTIES:
A. Violations: Any person who fails to perform an act required by this article or who commits an act prohibited by this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by fine or imprisonment or shall be guilty of a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty.
B. Noncompliance With Pretreatment Standards: Any person who fails to comply with a pretreatment standard applicable to an FSE shall be guilty of a
municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the violation exists or continues,
as provided by section 364.22 or 331.307 of the Iowa Code.
C. Remedial Actions: When enforcement is sought through a municipal infraction proceeding, the WRA director, or such other designated officers or
officials with enforcement authority as provided in section 8-3A-10 of this article, may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the order. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
8-3A-13: ORDER TO CEASE OPERATION OF FSE:
A. Authority To Issue Cease And Desist Order: Where a violation of this article has not been timely corrected, and results in or threatens "interference"
or "pass-through" as herein defined, the WRA director, or such other designated officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in
section 8-3A-10 of this article, shall have the authority to issue an order in writing to the owner or operator of the FSE, ordering such person or
persons to cease and desist from further operation of the FSE and from further discharge of wastewater to the sanitary sewer system. The order
shall be delivered by personal service unless the owner or operator cannot be found within the city, in which event notice shall be by ordinary mail
addressed to the owner's or operator's last known address and by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the
FSE.
B. Discontinuance Of Operation: Operation of the FSE shall cease on the date stated in the order and shall not recommence without the prior written
approval of the WRA director.
C. Request For Reconsideration And Hearing: The applicant may make a written request to the director for a reconsideration and hearing on the cease
and desist order within ten (10) days from the issuance of the order; provided, however, that operation of the FSE shall cease pending the outcome
of the hearing.
D. Contents Of Request For Hearing: The owner's or operator's request for hearing shall identify the appealing party, include the address of the person
requesting the hearing and to which all further notices shall be mailed or served, and shall state the basis for the appeal.
E. Schedule Of Hearing: The hearing shall be scheduled to be held as soon as practicable and no later than fourteen (14) days after the request for
hearing was filed with the WRA director. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified in writing or by telephone of the date and place of such
hearing at least three (3) days in advance thereof. At such hearing, the director and the person requesting the hearing may be represented by
counsel, examine witnesses, and present evidence as necessary.
F. Final Determination; Appeal: The determination by the director that the violation occurred shall be considered a final administrative decision, unless
appealed to the WRA. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
8-3A-14: APPEAL OF CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER OR CEASE AND DESIST ORDER:
A. Filing Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by a corrective action order or a cease and desist order issued by the WRA director, or by such other
designated officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in section 8-3A-10 of this article, may file an appeal and request a ruling that
such order be modified or rescinded.
B. Contents Of Request: Such appeal request shall be in writing, shall include the grounds for appeal including any factual findings which are disputed,
and shall be delivered to the WRA within ten (10) days after the WRA director's issuance of the order. Such appeal request shall be considered
delivered when placed in the mail, return receipt requested, addressed to:
WRA Appeal Committee
c/o Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, IA 50326
C. Scheduling Of Appeal; Committee Decision: The chair of the appeal committee shall schedule the appeal and shall cause notice of the time, date
and place of the hearing to be mailed to the appealing party. Such appeal shall be decided by majority vote of the appeal committee. The appeal
committee may affirm, modify or rescind the order of the director and shall so state and order in its written decision. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 236/439
8-3A-15: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
The WRA or the city is not precluded from seeking alternative relief from the court, including an order for abatement or injunctive relief or for recovery
of investigational or remedial costs resulting from a noncomplying discharge, in the event that the WRA or the city files a misdemeanor citation, notice
of administrative penalty, and/or files a municipal infraction for the same violation of this article. (Ord. 931, 7-1-2010)
ARTICLE B. HAULED WASTE
8-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions found in sections 8-3-1 and 8-3A-2 of this chapter shall apply to the provisions of this article; provided, however that the following
words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
VEHICLE: A device equipped with a tank and used to remove or transport waste.
WASTE: Human excreta, water, scum, sludge, septage, and food waste or grease solids removed from public and private wastewater disposal
systems, holding tanks, impervious vaults, portable or chemical toilets, or from devices used to trap grease resulting from food preparation. Waste also
means liquid wastes resulting from spill cleanup. (2000 Code § 101.171)
8-3B-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Required; Exceptions: No waste hauler shall remove waste from within the corporate limits of the city or shall dispose of waste, whether from a
source inside or outside the corporate limits, into the POTW without first obtaining a waste hauler license from the WRA, with the following
exceptions:
1. WRA participating communities that operate vehicles to remove waste from municipal sewer systems.
2. Waste haulers hired by WRA participating communities to remove waste from municipal sewer systems and which bring no other wastes to
the WRF.
3. Waste haulers utilized by industrial users issued a wastewater discharge permit by the WRA.
4. Waste haulers granted temporary authorization by the WRA director in order to deal with an emergency. (2000 Code § 101.172)
B. Issuance Of License; Requirements; Fee; Bond: The waste hauler's license shall be issued by the WRA director upon written application that shall
consist of the following minimum requirements:
1. Inspection: The WRA director, upon application, shall inspect the trucks, hoses, valves, and associated equipment of the applicant for a waste
hauler's license and determine if they meet the minimum of qualifications for complying with the conditions of this article.
2. License Fee And Bond: An application shall require the payment of a fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) for each vehicle used by the applicant and the
posting of a bond with reasonable surety in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the faithful compliance with this article,
including prompt payment of fees, fines and damages. WRA participating communities that contract with waste haulers in order to clean and
rehabilitate storm and sanitary sewers owned by the community or that own and operate waste hauling vehicles may provide proof of selfinsurance
or provide a letter guaranteeing payment of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in lieu of providing a surety bond.
3. Renewal: A waste hauler license shall expire on June 30 next after its issuance. The renewal application must be made in the same manner as
the initial application and must be received by the director thirty (30) days prior to expiration. Failure to apply thirty (30) days prior to expiration
may result in an interruption in the license and the privileges of such license.
4. Transferability: Waste hauler licenses are not transferable. (2000 Code § 101.173)
8-3B-3: STANDARDS FOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT:
As to all vehicles and equipment used by a waste hauler, the licensee shall:
A. Prevent waste and wastewater from leaking, spilling, or discharging onto roads or rights of way.
B. Ensure proper construction and repair of the equipment to allow cleaning.
C. Maintain vehicles and equipment in an essentially rust free and sanitary condition and appearance.
D. Display the business name as it appears on the waste hauler license in three inch (3") or larger letters on the left and right sides of the vehicle.
(2000 Code § 101.174)
8-3B-4: DISPOSAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 237/439
Hauled waste shall only be disposed at the WRF at the designated disposal station or as authorized by the Iowa department of natural resources for
land application. Waste haulers shall maintain the WRF designated disposal location in a clean and orderly condition to avoid noxious odors and
unsanitary conditions. Hours of operation at the WRF disposal station shall be set by the WRA director. In the event of emergency situations, special
arrangements between the waste hauler and the WRA director regarding disposal at an alternative disposal site shall be allowed to permit response to
such emergency. Any violation of an Iowa department of natural resources rule or regulation for land disposal of hauled wastes by a waste hauler shall
be grounds for rejection of a hauled waste load in section 8-3B-8 of this article by such waste hauler or shall be grounds for denial, suspension and
revocation of such waste hauler's license in section 8-3B-13 of this article. (2000 Code § 101.175)
8-3B-5: IDENTIFICATION OF SOURCE:
Waste haulers must document the nature and origin of wastes collected and the site and method of disposal for wastes that are removed from city
locations or are delivered to the WRF. Such information shall be provided on a manifest form provided by the WRA director. The manifest shall also
include: a) the name, address and phone number of the waste generator; b) the type of waste collected; c) the approximate volume of the load; d) any
other information consistent with identification and tracking of wastes. The WRA director or his or her designee shall have the right to verify all
information required by this section, including the right to measure, sample and analyze any waste regulated by this article. The waste hauler shall
obtain approval from the WRA director or his or her designee prior to loading wastes originating from an industrial/commercial source unless prior
approval is on record with the WRA. (2000 Code § 101.176)
8-3B-6: MIXING WASTES:
A. For the purposes of this article, wastes from residential and nonresidential sources shall not be mixed. Wastes from an industrial/commercial source
shall not be mixed with wastes of any type from another location. Portable toilet and FSE grease trap wastes may be mixed with similar wastes
from different locations. Residential wastes from several sources may be mixed as long as each source is identified.
B. Any tanks or equipment used for hauling waste to the WRF shall not be used for hauling hazardous wastes or hazardous substances, as defined in
Iowa Code section 567.1 et seq., chapter 131 of the Iowa administrative code and in 40 CFR 261, or other wastes detrimental to the WRF. (2000
Code § 101.177)
8-3B-7: STANDARDS OF DISPOSAL AT WRF:
Under this article, disposal of wastes at the WRF shall be carried out in accordance with pretreatment standards and requirements established by
federal, state, county and city governments including categorical standards developed for the waste generator's industrial category. The WRA director
may reject wastes from waste haulers who do not comply with this section or with any other section of this article. Waste haulers shall not deliver
wastes to the WRF, or to any other disposal location approved by the WRA director, which are:
A. Prohibited by section 8-3-10 of this chapter or exceed the limits found in subsection 8-3-11C4, sections 8-3-12 and 8-3-13 of this chapter.
B. Hazardous wastes or hazardous substances as defined in 40 CFR part 261 or 567 Iowa administrative code, chapter 131.
C. Originate from mineral oil and grease traps unless first treated to remove the oil and grease.
D. Not completely identified or are from industrial/commercial sources that are not approved by the director as required in section 8-3B-5 of this article.
E. Mixed in a manner prohibited in section 8-3B-5 of this article.
F. Wastes other than residential from outside the WRA, except through requests to the director. (2000 Code § 101.178)
8-3B-8: REJECTION OF WASTE LOADS:
A. The WRA director may reject any hauled waste load that violates or is suspected of violating the requirements of this article or that fails to meet any
other guidelines established by the WRA director to protect personnel, equipment, and the WRF. Waste haulers must:
1. Remove rejected waste from the WRF.
2. Immediately remove any additional wastes contaminated by the rejected waste while contained at the WRF prior to introduction into the sewer.
3. Properly dispose of all rejected wastes in accordance with state and federal law.
4. Provide the WRA director with a written statement, signed by the waste hauler license holder, stating the location, date, and time the rejected
load was disposed of. The statement is due within five (5) calendar days after the waste is rejected.
B. A vehicle used to haul rejected wastes shall not thereafter be allowed to dispose of additional wastes at the WRF until the statement required by
this section is delivered to the WRA director. (2000 Code § 101.179)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 238/439
8-3B-9: TREATMENT FEES FOR HAULED WASTE:
A. Treatment Through Headworks:
1. A treatment fee shall be charged per pound of hauled waste received at the WRF for all wastes originating within WRA participating communities
which are treated through the headworks at the WRF using all treatment processes at the WRF, which fee shall be equal to the cost of disposal
and treatment of an equivalent volume and mass of pollutants otherwise delivered into the POTW. The treatment fee shall include: a) the volume
charge component, b) a treatment surcharge component for each pollutant as found in section 8-3-20 of this chapter, and c) a program cost
component. The program cost component shall be calculated by dividing the annual administrative costs of the waste hauler program by the total
gallons of hauled waste treated in the previous calendar year. The surcharge component shall be calculated using the average concentration of
pollutants found in hauled wastes delivered to the wastewater reclamation facility. The treatment surcharge and program cost components shall
be reviewed and updated annually based on the most recent data collected by the operating agency.
2. The treatment fee for loads originating outside the corporate limits of the WRA participating communities shall be one and one-half (1.5) times
the fee for loads originating within the WRA participating communities.
B. Using Portion Of Treatment Processes:
1. A treatment fee shall be charged for hauled wastes originating within the corporate limits of the WRA participating communities which are treated
using only a portion of the treatment processes at the WRF, which fee shall be calculated to recover the cost of treatment. The cost of treatment
shall include electrical, chemical, personnel, and any capital costs associated with the treatment processes utilized, and a program cost
component which shall be calculated by dividing the annual administrative costs of the waste hauler program associated with partial process
treatment by the total gallons of hauled waste treated using only a portion of the treatment processes in the previous calendar year. Treatment
costs shall be reviewed and updated annually based on the most recent data collected by the operating agency.
2. The treatment fee for loads originating outside the corporate limits of the WRA participating communities shall be one and one-half (1.5) times
the fee for loads originating within the WRA participating communities.
C. Computation, Recording And Payment Of Fees: Fees shall be computed and recorded at the disposal station and shall be paid by the waste hauler
on the basis of monthly billings by the operating contractor. Limits of credit shall not exceed sixty (60) days. Abuse of such credit shall be grounds
for liability on the waste hauler's bond and for refusal of disposal services to any waste hauler under this article.
D. Testing Of Loads: Waste haulers may elect to have their loads tested for actual concentration at their expense as set out in section 8-3-20 of this
chapter. When a waste hauler has elected to have loads tested for actual concentration, the treatment fee will be based on the actual concentration
whether it be higher or lower than the average concentration treatment fee. Said testing will be done at least once a month or more often as
required by the WRA director. (2000 Code § 101.180)
8-3B-10: ENFORCEMENT:
The WRA director, the Clive public works director, or such other governmental official hereafter designated by the WRA, shall be authorized to enforce
this article as hereinafter provided. (2000 Code § 101.181)
8-3B-11: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES; CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER:
A. Notice Of Violation: The director, or such other designated officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in section 8-3B-10 of this
article, are authorized to issue a notice of violation imposing an administrative penalty upon any person who fails to perform an act required by this
article or who commits an act prohibited by this article.
B. Administrative Penalty: The administrative penalty for such violations shall be as provided in the schedule of administrative penalties adopted by the
city council by resolution.
C. Service Of Violation Notice: Notice of violation, with the applicable penalty for such violation noted thereon, shall be issued to and served upon the
violator. Service of the notice may be by regular mail or by delivery in person.
D. Time Limit For Payment Of Penalty: Penalties assessed pursuant to notice of violation shall be paid by the violator in full as directed in the notice
within thirty (30) days of its issuance.
E. Penalty Imposed; Records Kept: The administrative penalties set out in the schedule of administrative penalties shall be charged in lieu of the fines
and penalties provided for in section 8-3B-12 of this article, unless the violator refuses to correct the violation and pay the scheduled administrative
penalty, or the WRA director determines that immediate enforcement action by municipal infraction prosecution is, in view of the particular
circumstances of the case, necessary to achieve compliance with the requirements of this article. The WRA shall maintain a record of all violations,
administrative penalties charged or other enforcement actions taken. (2000 Code § 101.182)
8-3B-12: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who fails to perform an act required by this article or who commits an act prohibited by this article shall be guilty of a municipal infraction
punishable by a civil penalty.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 239/439
B. Any person who violates a discharge prohibition set forth in section 8-3-10 of this chapter, or discharges in excess of local limits as set forth in
section 8-3-11 of this chapter, shall be guilty of an environmental violation punishable as provided by section 364.22 of the Iowa Code. (2000 Code
§ 101.183)
8-3B-13: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Grounds For Denial, Suspension Or Revocation: The WRA director may deny, suspend or revoke the waste hauler license of any waste hauler who
violates any provision of this article or any condition of its license, or who commits any of the following violations, or who does not meet the
following requirements:
1. Violation of any term, condition or requirement of this article, the license, or applicable state of Iowa or federal laws or regulations.
2. Obtaining a license by misrepresentation.
3. Falsification of, failure to complete or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in a license application.
4. Failure to pay fees, administrative penalties or fines.
5. Failure to report a spill to the WRA.
6. Using wash down water or otherwise diluting the permitted waste for the purpose of meeting discharge limitations or requirements.
7. Falsification of, failure to complete or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in any report, manifest information or record required by the license
or this article.
8. Tampering with samples or sampling equipment intended to accurately reflect the contents of each hauled waste load.
9. Refusing to allow WRA personnel timely access to the waste hauler's facility premises, vehicles, or records.
10. Failure to perform as required under a corrective action order or compliance schedule issued by the WRA director.
11. Failure to correct any violation of this article within thirty (30) days after notice by the WRA director.
12. Failure to immediately correct any violation of this article if the condition constituting the violation is declared a threat to public health, safety or
welfare by the WRA director and the director orders immediate correction.
B. Procedure For Denial, Suspension Or Revocation: The procedure for denial, suspension or revocation of a waste hauler's license shall be as
follows:
1. Any license issued to a waste hauler pursuant to this article may be denied, suspended or revoked by written order of the WRA director
specifying the grounds for such action as outlined in subsection A of this section, which order shall not take effect until hearing thereon as
hereafter provided. Upon determining that grounds exist for an order to deny, suspend or revoke a waste hauler's license, the WRA director shall
cause a notice of hearing to be prepared, specifying the violations of subsection A of this section which are deemed to have occurred, and the
time, date and place that such hearing will be held. The notice shall be sent to the waste hauler by regular mail addressed to the waste hauler's
address listed on the waste hauler's license a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, and shall be deemed delivered when
placed in the mail.
2. If after such a hearing the WRA director makes a finding based on substantial evidence that one or more violations under subsection A of this
section have occurred as alleged, the director may deny issuance of the license, suspend the license for a fixed period, or may issue an order
immediately revoking the license and ordering the waste hauler to discontinue hauling waste to the WRF or any other disposal locations
approved by the director. The determination whether to deny issuance of a license, to suspend a license, or to revoke a license shall be in the
discretion of the director and shall be dependent upon the circumstances surrounding the violations of subsection A of this section and the
severity of those violations. If the waste hauler does not appear for the hearing, the director shall issue the order revoking the waste hauler's
license and ordering the cessation of delivery of hauled waste at the WRF or any other disposal locations approved by the director, which order
shall take effect immediately.
3. The decision and order of the WRA director to deny issuance, to suspend or to revoke the license of a waste hauler may be appealed to the
WRA appeal committee. Such appeal request shall be in writing, shall include the grounds for appeal including any factual findings which are
disputed, and shall be delivered to WRA not less than ten (10) days after the director's entry of the order of denial, suspension or revocation.
Such appeal request shall be considered delivered when placed in the mail, return receipt requested, addressed to:
WRA Appeal Committee
c/o Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, IA 50326
The chair of the appeal committee shall schedule the appeal and shall cause notice of the time, date and place of the hearing to be mailed to the
appealing waste hauler. Such appeal shall be decided by majority vote of the appeal committee. If the appeal committee affirms the order of the
WRA director denying issuance, suspending or revoking the license and ordering the cessation of waste deliveries at the WRF or other approved
locations, the appeal committee shall so state and order in its written decision.
4. A waste hauler whose license has been denied or revoked shall not be eligible for issuance or reinstatement of its license until thirty (30) days
after the violating conditions have been corrected to the satisfaction of the director. (2000 Code § 101.184)
8-3B-14: ALTERNATIVE RELIEF:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 240/439
Neither the WRA nor the city is precluded from seeking alternative relief from the court, including an order for abatement or injunctive relief, in the
event that the WRA or the city files a misdemeanor citation, notice of administrative penalty, and/or files a municipal infraction for the same violation of
this article, or in the event the WRA seeks to deny, suspend or revoke the waste hauler's license. (2000 Code § 101.185)
Chapter 4
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM AND FACILITIES
8-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a stormwater utility which shall be responsible for stormwater management within the corporate boundaries
of the city of Clive and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater management systems
and facilities. (2000 Code § 102.01)
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall mean:
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL: Any developed land whereon multiple-family dwellings, commercial retail and office, industrial and manufacturing
buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, public and private school buildings, churches, hospitals
and convalescent centers have been constructed.
CUSTOMERS OF THE STORMWATER UTILITY: Includes all persons, properties and entities served by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition,
management, maintenance, extension and improvement of the public stormwater management system and facilities.
DEVELOPED LAND: Land that has been altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than five hundred (500) square feet of
"impervious surface area" as defined in this section.
DUPLEX DWELLING: A building containing only two (2) dwelling units and designed for and occupied exclusively by not more than two (2) families
with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. In the application of stormwater service charge rates, duplex dwelling properties shall be
treated as two (2) single-family dwellings.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The median average impervious coverage of a detached dwelling unit property in the city of Clive as
determined by the city, and shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service charges. Three thousand six hundred sixty seven (3,667)
square feet of impervious surface area shall be one equivalent unit.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA: Those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it enters in natural conditions prior
to development. Common impervious surface areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, patios, parking lots, storage areas,
compacted gravel surfaces and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building or portion thereof containing more than three (3) dwelling units designed for or occupied by more than
three (3) families with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. In the application of stormwater service charge rates, multiple-family
dwelling properties shall be treated as commercial/industrial.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and
other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned
objects, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal
coliform bacteria and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; waste and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
SERVICE CHARGE: The periodic rate, fee or charge applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided
by the city of Clive stormwater utility. Service charges are based on measurable parameters which influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing
services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious surface area on each parcel of developed property. The service
charge shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building containing only one dwelling unit and designed for and occupied exclusively for residence purposes by only
one family.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES: The issue of drainage management (flooding) and environmental quality (pollution,
erosion and sedimentation) of receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes and ponds through improvements, maintenance, regulation and funding of
plants, structures and property used in the collection, retention, detention and treatment of stormwater or surface water drainage.
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION: Represents the date when the construction has been completed and the city of Clive has acknowledged that the
construction has been completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications through the issuance of a temporary certificate of
occupancy or permanent certificate of occupancy.
TOWNHOME DWELLING: A dwelling unit which is detached or attached horizontally, and not vertically to one or more other dwelling units, wherein
the land or lot beneath each dwelling may be individually owned in common by a townhome association. In the application of stormwater service
charge rates, each townhome dwelling shall be treated as one single-family dwelling.
UNDEVELOPED LAND: Land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response
comparable to land in an unaltered state shall be deemed undeveloped. "Undeveloped land" shall have less than five hundred (500) square feet of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 241/439
pavement, asphalt or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface area that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or
cause stormwater to collect, concentrate or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur when the land was in an unaltered natural
state. (2000 Code § 102.02)
8-4-3: SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR STORMWATER UTILITY:
The city of Clive stormwater utility consists of all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, ponds, drainageways, channels, ditches, swales, storm
sewer, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, dams, head walls and other structures, natural or manmade, within the corporate boundaries of the city of
Clive which control and/or convey stormwater through which the city intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and properties. The city
of Clive owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvement to those segments of this system which: a) are located
within public streets, rights of ways and easements; b) are subject to easement or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation,
maintenance and improvement of systems or facilities; or c) are located on public lands to which the city of Clive has adequate access for operation,
maintenance and improvement of systems or facilities. Operation, maintenance and improvement of stormwater systems and facilities which are
located on private property or public property not owned by the city of Clive and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems, and
facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, or its occupant. (2000 Code § 102.03)
8-4-4: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The director of public works has the following powers and duties related to the city of Clive stormwater utility:
A. Operations And Maintenance: Operation and maintenance of the stormwater management systems and facilities.
B. Inspection And Tests: Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Records: Maintain a complete and accurate record of all stormwater management systems and facilities.
D. Policies: Recommend to the city council policies to be adopted and enforced to implement the provisions of this chapter. (2000 Code § 102.04)
8-4-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
A. Damage Stormwater Management Systems And Facilitates: Maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper
with any structure, pipe, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the stormwater management systems or facilities.
B. Illicit Discharges: No person shall throw, drain or otherwise discharge or cause to throw, drain, run or allow to seep or otherwise be discharged into
the city of Clive stormwater management system and facilities, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other
than stormwater.
C. Manholes: Open or enter any manhole, structure or intake of the stormwater system, except by authority of the director of public works.
D. Connection: Connection of any private stormwater system to the city's stormwater management system and facilities, except by authority of the
director of public works. (2000 Code § 102.05)
8-4-6: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The director of public works and other authorized employees of the city of Clive bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all private properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing all private stormwater discharges directly or
indirectly entering into any public stormwater management system or facility in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (2000 Code § 102.06)
8-4-7: PENALTIES:
The following penalty provisions shall apply to violations this chapter:
A. Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter shall be served by the city of Clive with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently remedy all violations.
B. Continuing Violations: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection A of this section, shall be subject
to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code. Each day which said violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 242/439
C. Liability Imposed: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the city by reason of such violation. (2000 Code § 102.07)
ARTICLE A. STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES
8-4A-1: STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED:
Every customer whose premises is served by a connection with the stormwater management system and facilities of the City of Clive, either directly or
indirectly, shall pay to the City stormwater service charges hereinafter established and specified for the purpose of contributing toward the costs of
construction, maintenance and operation of the stormwater management system and facilities. (2000 Code § 103.01)
8-4A-2: EFFECTIVE DATE OF SERVICE CHARGES:
Stormwater service charges shall accrue beginning August 1, 2005, and shall be billed monthly thereafter to all customers. (2000 Code § 103.02)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1072 - STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES. Go to new ordinance.
8-4A-3: BASIC RATE:
A. Except as hereinafter noted, each customer whose property lies within the corporate limits of the City shall pay to the City, through its collection
agent, the Clive Water Department, at the same time payment for City water service is made, the following charges per equivalent residential unit
associated with the customer's property (an "ERU" means the median average impervious coverage of a detached dwelling unit property in the City
of Clive, which has been determined by the City to be 3,667 square feet of impervious surface area):
1. Undeveloped: A flat storm sewer availability charge at the rate of zero dollars ($0.00) per month, regardless of the amount of the consumption by
such customer; and
2. Residential: A storm sewer availability charge, regardless of the amount of the consumption by such customer, will be based on the following
schedule:
Effective May 15, 2018 for fiscal year 2018/2019 $7.12 per month
The monthly rate for each fiscal year beyond 2018/2019 will be determined by ordinance of the City Council prior to July 1 of each year.
3. Commercial/industrial: A storm sewer availability charge will be based on the following schedule:
Effective May 15, 2018 for fiscal year 2018/2019 $7.12 per ERU per month
The monthly rate for each fiscal year beyond 2018/2019 will be determined by ordinance of the City Council prior to July 1 of each year. (Ord. 1056, 4-
12-2018)
B. The number of equivalent residential units (ERUs) on each property shall be calculated by the Community Development Department based on the
most recent aerial photography available to the City of Clive and/or impervious surface data from an approved site plan for the property. (2000
Code § 103.03)
8-4A-4: RATE APPEALS:
Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner:
A. Filing Of Appeal: An appeal must be filed in writing with the City of Clive City Manager. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall
include a survey prepared by a registered Iowa land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the
impervious surface area and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events.
B. Technical Review: Using the information provided by the appellant, the City Manager shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the
property and respond to the appeal in writing within thirty (30) days.
C. Adjustment Of Charge: In response to an appeal, the City Manager may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in
conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 243/439
D. Appeal Of Adverse Decision: A decision of the City Manager which is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the City Council within
thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. Notice of the appeal shall be served on the City Council by the appellant, stating the
grounds for the appeal. The City Council shall schedule a public hearing within thirty (30) days. All decisions of the City Council shall be served on
the appellant by registered mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant.
E. Council Decisions Final: All decisions of the City Council shall be final. (2000 Code § 103.04)
8-4A-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM CHARGES:
Exemptions from charges are those permitted as follows:
A. Property owned by a public governmental entity, such as:
1. The State of Iowa;
2. The Counties of Polk and Dallas;
3. The City of Clive;
4. Des Moines waterworks; and
5. Des Moines Wastewater Reclamation Association.
B. Railroad right-of-way (tracks).
C. A subdivided lot until a substantially completed structure has been built on the lot. (2000 Code § 103.05)
8-4A-6: BILLING FOR SERVICE:
Billing and payment for stormwater services shall be in accordance with the following:
A. Bills Issued: The City Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for stormwater service on or before the first day of the month following each monthly billing
period.
B. Bills Payable: Bills for stormwater service shall be due and payable at the Office of the City Clerk by the fifteenth of the month following the end of
each monthly billing period.
C. Late Payment Penalty: Bills not paid when due shall be considered delinquent. A onetime late payment penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount
due shall be added to each delinquent bill.
D. Returned Checks: A fee, as set forth in the fee schedule established by City Council of the City of Clive, shall be charged for all checks not honored
by the bank. (2000 Code § 103.06)
8-4A-7: LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
A. Responsibility For Payment: The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for stormwater
service charges to the premises. Stormwater service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served
and may be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as Property Taxes. (2000 Code § 103.07)
B. Lien Notice: A lien for delinquent stormwater service charges shall not be certified to the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to
certify a lien is given to the customer. If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice,
the notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than thirty (30)
days prior to certification of the lien to the County Treasurer. (2000 Code § 103.08)
8-4A-8: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
After giving reasonable notice, the Director of Public Works may discontinue water service to any customer who has failed to pay the amounts due and
owing under this article and who has not contested the payment therefor in good faith. (2000 Code § 103.09)
8-4A-9: ANNUAL REVISION OF RATES:
The City will review the stormwater service charges at least yearly and revise the stormwater service charges as necessary to ensure that such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 244/439
charges as herein established and specified generate adequate revenues to pay the costs of maintenance and operation (including replacement and
debt service) of a stormwater management system and facilities and that the stormwater service charges continue to provide for the proportional
distribution of maintenance and operation costs (including replacement costs and debt service) for a stormwater management system and facilities
among the users and user classes. The liability of a stormwater service user to pay for charges as provided in this article shall not be contingent,
however, upon any such review or revision. (2000 Code § 103.10)
ARTICLE B. ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
8-4B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Clive through the regulation of nonstormwater
discharges to the city of Clive separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable, as required by federal law. This article establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city of Clive separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. (2000 Code § 104.01)
8-4B-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are defined for use in this article, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL CONNECTION: Either of the following: a) any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows
an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or b)
any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the city of Clive separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section
8-4B-3 of this article.
INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE: Discharges subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): Any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including inlets,
catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, or other drainage structures which are owned or maintained by the
city of Clive.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) PERMIT: A
permit issued by Iowa department of natural resources (IDNR) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the
permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and
other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects or accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
POLLUTION: The contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in color, turbidity, or
odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or
render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: For purposes of this article, is one or more persons that control or are in possession of or own property. Responsible parties
shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with this article and jointly and severally liable for any illicit discharge from the property
controlled, possessed or owned. For purposes of this article, "property" includes, but is not limited to, real estate, fixtures, facilities and premises of any
kind located upon, under or above the real estate. The definition of "responsible party" does not include the city when an illicit discharge is caused by a
person on a public street or on public property.
STORMWATER RUNOFF OR STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER CONTROL: A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the
characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. (2000 Code § 104.02)
8-4B-3: ALLOWABLE NONSTORMWATER:
Discharges from firefighting activities, fire hydrant flushing, potable water sources, water line flushing, uncontaminated ground water, foundation or
footing drains, springs, riparian habitats, wetlands, irrigation water, air conditioning condensate, exterior building wash water when no detergents or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 245/439
other surfactants are used and pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred and when no detergents
or other surfactants are used. (2000 Code § 104.03)
8-4B-4: ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
A. Any discharge into the city's storm sewer system prohibited by the city's NPDES permit, the terms of which are hereby incorporated by reference,
shall be deemed an illicit discharge in violation of this article.
B. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection shall constitute a violation of this article. This prohibition
expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or
practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. (2000 Code § 104.04)
8-4B-5: INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES:
Any responsible party subject to an industrial NPDES discharge permit issued by the IDNR shall comply with all provisions of such permit. (2000 Code
§ 104.05)
8-4B-6: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every responsible party owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such responsible party's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of
the watercourse within the property below the elevation of the 100-year flood free of trash, debris, grass clippings or other organic wastes and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly alter the quality of water flowing through the watercourse. (2000 Code § 104.06)
8-4B-7: DETECTION, REPORTING AND INSPECTION:
A. Authority: All detection activities permitted under this article shall be conducted by the public works director, or his or her designee, hereinafter
referred to as the "inspector".
B. Nonliability Of City: The city shall not be responsible for any direct or indirect consequences affecting responsible party or property as a result of an
illicit discharge, or circumstances which may cause an illicit discharge, whether detected or undetected by the city.
C. Duty Of Responsible Party: Every responsible party has an absolute duty to monitor conditions on property owned or controlled by them, to prevent
all illicit discharges, and to report to the city any illicit discharges, which the responsible party knows or should have known to occur. Failure to
comply with any provision of this article is a violation of this article.
D. Immediate Response To Illicit Discharge: Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any responsible party has information of any
known or suspected illicit discharge, the responsible party shall immediately take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of such discharge at the responsible party's sole cost.
E. Notify Emergency Response Agencies: If the illicit discharge consists of hazardous materials, the responsible party shall also immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
F. Record Of Discharge And Actions Taken: If the illicit discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of
such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall
be retained for at least three (3) years.
G. Time Limit For Reporting: A report of an illicit discharge shall be made in person or by phone or facsimile or e-mail to the inspector immediately, but
in any event within twenty four (24) hours of the illicit discharge; notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed
and mailed or e-mailed to the inspector within twenty four (24) hours of the personal or phone notice.
H. Report Risk Of Possible Discharge: Any responsible party shall also report to the city any circumstances which such person or entity reasonably
believes pose a risk of an illicit discharge.
I. Inspection Of Site: Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous subsections of this section or otherwise coming into possession of information
indicating an actual or imminent illicit discharge or an illegal connection, the inspector shall conduct an inspection of the site as soon as reasonably
possible and, if an illicit discharge or illegal connection is found, the inspector thereafter shall provide to the responsible party(s) for such premises
a written notice to abate conditions which have already caused or may cause an illicit discharge or the presence of an illegal connection. The
responsible parties shall immediately commence corrective action or remediation and shall complete such corrective action or remediation within
the time frame specified within the abatement notice.
J. Cooperation With Inspector: The inspector shall be permitted to enter and inspect any property subject to regulation under this section as often as is
necessary to determine compliance with this section. If a responsible party owning, controlling or possessing a property has security measures that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 246/439
require identification and clearance before entry to its property, such responsible party shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access by
the inspector. By way of specification, but not limitation:
1. A responsible party shall allow the inspector ready access to all parts of the property for purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records related to a suspected, actual, or imminent illicit discharge, and for the performance of any additional duties as defined by
state and federal law.
2. The inspector shall have the right to set up on any property such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the inspector to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling related to a suspected, actual or imminent illicit discharge.
3. Any temporary or permanent obstruction that obstructs the safe and easy access to property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the responsible party at the written or oral order of the inspector and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall
be borne by the responsible party.
4. An unreasonable delay in allowing the inspector access to a property is a violation of this article.
5. If the inspector has been refused access to any part of the property from which an illegal connection and/or illicit discharge is occurring,
suspected or imminent, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article, or to protect the
overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the inspector may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction. (2000 Code § 104.07)
8-4B-8: ABATEMENT NOTICE; PROCEDURE:
A. Contents: The notice to abate shall contain:
1. Description: A description of what constitutes the illicit discharge or illegal connection.
2. Location: The location of the illicit discharge or illicit connection.
3. Acts Necessary To Abate: A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the illicit discharge or illegal connection.
4. Reasonable Time: A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement.
5. Payment Of Costs: A statement that if the illicit discharge or illegal connection is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made
within the time prescribed, the city will abate it and invoice the costs to such responsible party.
B. Method Of Service Of Notice: The notice shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner.
C. Request For Hearing: Any responsible party ordered to abate an illicit discharge or illegal connection may have a hearing with the council as to
whether an illicit discharge or illegal connection exists. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the city clerk within the
time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that an illicit discharge or illegal connection exists and it must be abated as ordered.
The hearing will be before the council at a time and place fixed by the council. The findings of the council shall be conclusive and, if an illicit
discharge or illegal connection is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
D. Failure To Abate: Any responsible party causing or maintaining an illicit discharge or illegal connection who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove
the same within the reasonable time required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this code.
E. Abatement By City: If the responsible party notified to abate an illicit discharge or illegal connection neglects or fails to abate as directed, the city
may perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall be filed with
the clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the city.
F. Collection Of Costs: If it is determined that an illicit discharge is imminent or has occurred, the actual administrative costs incurred by the city in the
enforcement of this article shall be recovered from the responsible party. The inspector shall submit an invoice to the responsible party reflecting
the actual costs and wages and all other expenses incurred by the city for the enforcement activities undertaken. Failure to pay charges invoiced
under this article within thirty (30) days of billing shall constitute a violation of this article.
G. Abatement In Emergency: If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the illicit discharge or illegal
connection, the city may perform any action which may be required under this article without prior notice. The city shall bill the costs as provided in
subsection F of this section.
H. Abatement On Public Street Or Public Property: The person causing an illicit discharge on a public street or on public property shall be responsible
for abatement, as directed by the city, or shall pay all costs of abatement performed by the city. The city shall bill any costs incurred as provided in
subsection F of this section. In addition to paying the costs of abatement, any person causing an illicit discharge on a public street or on public
property shall be subject to a civil penalty in accordance with this article. (2000 Code § 104.08)
8-4B-9: PENALTY1:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this article or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 247/439
article A of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (2000 Code § 104.09)
Footnote 1: See also section 8-4-7 of this chapter.
ARTICLE C. POSTCONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
8-4C-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the CLIVE POSTCONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE, may be cited as such, and will be
referred to herein as "this article". (Ord. 872, 10-18-2007)
8-4C-2: PURPOSE:
A. The U.S. EPA's national pollutant discharge elimination system ("NPDES") permit program ("program") administered by the Iowa department of
natural resources ("IDNR") requires that cities meeting certain demographic and environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES
permit for the discharge of stormwater from a municipal separate storm sewer system ("MS4") ("MS4 permit"). The city of Clive ("city") is subject to
the program and is required to obtain, and has obtained, an MS4 permit. The city's MS4 permit is on file at the office of the city clerk and is
available for public inspection during regular office hours.
B. The purpose of this article is to comply with the MS4 permit requirements and establish a set of water quality and quantity policies applicable to all
surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from
degradation. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development and other construction activities in order to control and
minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion and nonpoint source pollution associated with
stormwater runoff, is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety. (Ord. 872, 10-18-2007)
8-4C-3: WARNING:
No person shall place reliance upon this article, any inspections performed or certificates issued pursuant to this article, as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this article nor inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in
the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a premises has been inspected pursuant to this article shall not in
any way, constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises. (Ord. 872, 10-18-2007)
8-4C-4: INTERPRETATION:
The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take precedence over any other language contained in this article. (Ord. 872, 10-18-
2007)
8-4C-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms have or include the following meanings:
APPLICANT: Person, firm or entity applying for a permit or development approval to develop, grade or construct any improvement within the corporate
limits of the city of Clive.
APPROVAL: Formal, written consent by the city council, or authorized representative of the city.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities prohibitions of practice, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. Common BMPs are described in the Iowa stormwater management manual
and SUDAS. The BMPs covered are not meant to be a comprehensive list of acceptable BMPs.
DRAINAGE, DETENTION OR OVERLAND FLOWAGE EASEMENT: A legal right granted by a property owner to a grantee allowing the use of private
land for stormwater management.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM: The program for issuing, modifying, revoking, terminating, monitoring and enforcing
permits under the clean water act (sections 301, 318, 402 and 405) and United States code of federal regulations title 33, sections 1317, 1328, 1342
and 1345.
POSTCONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: A set of plans and specifications approved by the city council during the approval of
the site plan, construction drawing and/or plat that defines the system of BMPs that are to be constructed and maintained on the site.
PROPERTY: Land located in the city, whether or not improved with buildings or other structures.
PROPERTY OWNER: A person who, alone or with another person or other persons, holds the legal title to property; except, however, where property
has been sold on contract to a person who has the present right to possess the property and the contract has been filed for record in the office of the
county recorder, the person so purchasing the property, whether alone or with another person or other persons, is the "property owner" and the person
retaining bare legal title to the property as security for the balance of the purchase price.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 248/439
REGIONAL DETENTION FACILITY: A wet or dry detention basin(s) which is designed to accept stormwater runoff from two (2) or more sites that is
required to obtain an NPDES general permit no. 2 and that otherwise complies with all city, state or federal permit requirements as they apply to
stormwater management requirements for those sites.
SUDAS: The current standard urban design and specifications manual, as locally amended, that specifies the stormwater guidelines and stormwater
controls deemed by SUDAS to meet the goals of the U.S. environmental protection agency NPDES permit program administered by the Iowa
department of natural resources.
STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff and surface runoff and drainage.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A plan as defined in the Iowa NPDES stormwater general permit. (Ord. 872, 10-18-
2007)
8-4C-6: POSTCONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (PCSWMP):
A. Every property owner or applicant of a project creating five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area, shall design, install
and maintain postconstruction stormwater management plan (PCSWMP) facilities as approved by the city council during the site plan, construction
drawing and/or platting process. PCSWMP facilities may be required for projects that create less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of
impervious surface area, if the project is part of a larger plan of development that meets the applicability threshold, even though multiple separate
and distinct projects may take place at different times on different schedules.
B. An Iowa licensed professional engineer or landscape architect shall design PCSWMP facilities in conformance with the guidelines established in the
city of Clive "Stormwater Management Manual", the Iowa "Stormwater Management Manual" and SUDAS. PCSWMP facilities shall be designed
with appropriate BMPs, such as detention and retention basins, wetlands, soil quality restoration, grass swales, buffer strips, bioretention basins,
and other similar types of infiltration based practices, so that the drainage through the property shall not cause adverse water quality or quantity
impacts to a downstream property owner, watercourse, channel or conduit receiving stormwater runoff from the proposed development site. (Ord.
1009, 11-10-2016)
C. In order to ensure that the PCSWMP facilities are constructed in accordance with the approved design, the property owner or applicant shall
provide to the city an as built plan detailing dimensions and elevations as well as certification that the approved facilities were installed and working
properly. The as built plan shall be completed by an Iowa licensed professional engineer or landscape architect and submitted to the city prior to
the acceptance of any public improvements or issuance of any certificate of occupancy.
D. At the discretion of the city, the property owner or applicant may satisfy the PCSWMP requirements by ensuring the conveyance of stormwater
discharge from the property to a regional detention facility. (Ord. 872, 10-18-2007)
8-4C-7: MAINTENANCE:
It shall be the property owner's duty to ensure that the site is periodically inspected and maintained in accordance with the approved PCSWMP.
Periodic inspections shall be completed as needed and in no case less than one time per year. Inspections shall be documented and shall be retained
by the property owner for at least three (3) years. Copies of the inspection documentation shall be made available to the city upon request. (Ord. 872,
10-18-2007)
8-4C-8: INSPECTIONS:
A. The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect any property with PCSWMP facilities subject to this regulation as often and as necessary to
determine compliance with this article.
B. The city may conduct site visits at any time to determine compliance with the approved PCSWMP. Additionally, the city may request that a property
owner verify, through the preparation of an as built plan completed by an Iowa licensed professional engineer or landscape architect, that the
PCSWMP facilities contain appropriate capacities and operational characteristics as originally designed and approved.
C. In the event that a site is found not to be in compliance with the PCSWMP, the city will communicate in writing, with the property owner a list of
deficiencies that identifies the area or incident of noncompliance. The property owner shall have fourteen (14) days from the date of notice to
provide a written response outlining the steps and implementation time lines for corrective action. The property owner shall have thirty (30) days
from the date of notice to complete the corrective action necessary to bring the site back into compliance with the approved PCSWMP.
D. Following the review of the property owner's written response, if extenuating circumstances exist which makes implementation of the necessary
corrective action difficult to complete within the specified time period, the city may grant, at its sole discretion, a reasonable extension of time to
complete the corrective action.
E. Failure of the property owner to allow access to the property, provide a written response or undertake corrective action shall constitute a violation of
this article. (Ord. 872, 10-18-2007)
8-4C-9: CORRECTIVE ACTION BY CITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 249/439
If the property owner fails to take corrective action, following notice prescribed for the service of civil process by the Iowa rules of civil procedure, the
city may do so by its own crews or by persons under its hire and assess against the property owner the city's cost therefor. Said costs shall include the
salaries and benefits earned by city employees during such corrective action, a charge for city machinery used and such other costs and expenses as
the city actually incurred. To the extent allowed by Iowa law, such costs and expenses may be assessed against the property owner and collected in
the same manner as a property tax. (Ord. 872, 10-18-2007)
8-4C-10: RESPONSIBILITY:
The failure of city officials to observe or foresee hazardous or unsightly conditions, or to impose other or additional conditions or requirements, or to
deny or revoke permits or approvals, or to stop work in violation of this article shall not relieve the property owners of the consequences of their actions
or inactions or result in the city, its officers or agents being liable therefor or on account thereof. Notwithstanding any provision of this article, every
applicant bears final and complete responsibility for compliance with the NPDES general permit no. 2 and any other requirements of state or federal
law or administrative rule. (Ord. 872, 10-18-2007)
8-4C-11: VIOLATIONS:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this article or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 872, 10-18-2007)
Chapter 5
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter pertaining to solid waste control is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection and disposal of solid waste, yard waste
and recyclable material, and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the city from such hazards to their health, safety and welfare as may result from the
uncontrolled disposal of solid waste, yard waste or recyclable material. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
BAGS: Any untreated paper bags acceptable under the Compost It! program administered by the Metro waste authority.
BRUSH BUNDLE: A stack of brush and/or tree branches bound together with biodegradable twine, which must be no more than eighteen inches (18")
in diameter, no more than four feet (4') long and may weigh no more than forty (40) pounds.
COLLECTION: The transportation of solid waste or recyclable material from the place it is generated and includes all activities up to the time the waste
is delivered to a sanitary disposal project for the disposal of solid waste or a recycling facility.
COLLECTOR: Any person authorized by the city to collect, transport and dispose of solid waste, yard waste or recyclable material.
COMPOSTING: A controlled microbial degradation of organic waste to produce a relatively nuisance free product of potential value as a soil
conditioner.
CONTAINER: A reusable receptacle constructed of plastic or metal materials used for the collection and storage of solid waste, yard waste or
recyclable material.
DISCARD: To place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit or drop.
DUPLEX: A structure containing two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are
intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE: All solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving and
consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal, excluding useful industrial byproducts, and includes all such substances from
all public and private establishments and from all residences.
IDNR DIRECTOR: The director of the Iowa department of natural resources or any designee.
LITTER: Any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials or debris.
MULTI-FAMILY PREMISES: Real property on which any multi-family dwelling or combination of more than two (2) dwelling units sharing common
driveways is located.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A structure containing more than two (2) dwelling units.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 250/439
OWNER: In addition to the record titleholder, any person residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in any premises,
and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
PROPERTY SERVED: Any property which is being used or occupied and is eligible to receive solid waste collection and disposal service as provided
herein.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Plastic necked bottles, plastic margarine and yogurt tubs, newspapers, magazines, mixed paper (junk mail, envelopes,
sticky notes, coloring books), phone books, cereal boxes, tissue boxes, cardboard (broken down to fit in collection container), tin and aluminum cans,
shredded paper placed in a paper bag and glass jars and bottles or as may be redefined by the Metro waste authority in the administration of the Curb
It! program.
RECYCLING: The separation, collection, processing, recovering and sale or reuse of materials which would otherwise be disposed of as solid waste.
REFUSE: Putrescible and nonputrescible waste, including, but not limited to, garbage, yard waste, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street
cleanings, market and industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry or semisolid form.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: A single-family dwelling, duplex, townhouse and townhouse style condominium used for residential purposes. Garden
type apartments and row type housing units are considered residential premises regardless of the total number of such apartments or units which may
be included in a given housing development.
RESIDENTIAL WASTE: Any garbage, refuse, rubbish and other similar discarded solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from
domestic activities of single-family dwelling units or duplexes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and noncombustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind.
SANITARY DISPOSAL: A method of treating solid waste so that it does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT: All facilities and appurtenances including all real and personal property connected with such facilities, which are
acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved, extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and which are approved by the IDNR director.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A structure containing one dwelling unit only.
SOLID WASTE: Garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded solid or semisolid materials, including, but not limited to, such materials
resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities. For purposes of these chapters, recyclable material recycled through the
Curb It! program is not included within the definition of solid waste.
SOURCE SEPARATION: The separation of recyclable materials from the residential waste stream at the point of waste generation.
YARD WASTE: Any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves,
grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5-3: SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED:
It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse accumulating on the owner's premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any
such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than thirty (30) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the city may proceed to
abate such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of title 5, chapter 6 of this code or by initiating proper action in district court. A single collector
shall be authorized to collect solid waste and yard waste and a single collector shall be authorized to collect recyclable material from residential
premises as set forth in this code. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5-4: HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD:
It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste, yard
waste or recyclable material that constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5-5: OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED:
No person shall allow, cause or permit open burning of combustible materials where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without
passing through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the following circumstances:
A. Disaster Rubbish: The open burning of rubbish, including yard waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially
declared emergency condition exists.
B. Flare Stacks: The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of
the Iowa department of natural resources.
C. Recreational Fires: Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation and ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air
contaminants established by the Iowa department of natural resources. Rubber tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 251/439
D. Training Fires: Fires set for the purpose of bona fide training of public or industrial employees in firefighting methods, provided that the training fires
are conducted in compliance with rules established by the Iowa department of natural resources.
E. Variance: Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not permitted herein may make application for a variance to the IDNR director.
(Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5-6: YARD WASTE:
All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid waste accumulated on the premises. For residential premises, the
owner or occupant may either compost such yard waste on the premises or place it in paper bags, bundles or containers in accordance with the
requirements of the Metro waste authority Compost It! program or the Clive/Metro waste authority premium yard waste program.
A. Collection: For residential premises, persons choosing not to manage yard waste on their own property may place yard waste in brown paper bags
which are imprinted with the Compost It! sticker (as a part of the Compost It! program) or affix a Compost It! sticker to a brown paper bag. Brush
bundles may also be placed for yard waste pick up provided that a Compost It! sticker is attached to the brush bundle and the brush bundle
complies with the length, diameter and weight restriction contained in the definition of brush bundle. Compost It! bags and stickers may be
purchased at participating grocery, hardware and convenience stores. The number of bags and brush bundles which residents may place out for
collection is unlimited, provided that a Compost It! sticker is attached to each bag or bundle. In the alternative, the owner of a residential premises
may chose to participate in the premium yard waste collection program in which a resident purchases a sticker for the season from the city in order
to be permitted to use a plastic wheeled container to collect yard waste for pick up by the authorized collector of yard waste.
B. Composting: Back yard composting of yard waste is encouraged. Owners and occupants are encouraged to accumulate upon property under their
respective control such quantities of leaves and/or yard debris as can be properly composted in a composting area (having at least 3 sides) or
composting bin without creating offensive odors, litter, fire or vector problems. Composting areas or bins must be located in a back yard, outside
the boundaries of any easement areas, and no closer than five feet (5') to the rear property line and no closer than two feet (2') to any side property
lines. Such composting so carried out shall be deemed to be an alternative disposition of the disposal of yard waste in satisfaction of any
requirement in this section.
C. Violations: It is prohibited and will be deemed a violation hereof for any owner, lessee or occupant of any residential, commercial or institutional
property in the city to put into or cause to be put into the solid waste collection system of the city any yard waste. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5-7: LITTERING PROHIBITED:
No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection
and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the
motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5-8: OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED:
No person shall dump or deposit or permit the dumping or depositing of any solid waste or yard waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or
stream of water at any place other than a sanitary disposal project, unless a special permit to dump or deposit solid waste or yard waste on land
owned or leased by such person has been obtained from the Iowa department of natural resources. However, this section does not prohibit
composting yard waste in accordance with this chapter or prohibit the use of dirt, stone, brick or similar inorganic material for fill, landscaping,
excavation, or grading at places other than a sanitary disposal project. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5-9: TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE:
No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported
and disposed of as prescribed by the Iowa department of natural resources. As used in this section, "toxic and hazardous waste" means waste
materials, including, but not limited to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological waste, flammable or explosive materials and
similar harmful waste which requires special handling and which must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the environment and protect
the public health and safety. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5-10: SOLID WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS:
A. Container Specifications: Solid waste storage containers shall comply with the following specifications:
1. Residential: The single collector licensed to collect solid waste from residential premises ("solid waste collector") shall provide and deliver to the
resident, at no cost to the resident, one plastic solid waste collection container. If a resident requests a second waste container, a second
monthly fee will be charged to the resident. All residents must use the plastic solid waste collection container provided by the solid waste
collector for storage and collection of solid waste. Extra trash bags not placed in the waste collection container provided by the solid waste
collector will be picked up by the solid waste collector if the trash bags have a trash bag tag sticker ("TBT sticker") attached. A TBT sticker
authorizes the pick up of a thirty three (33) gallon trash bag or box, which shall not weigh more than thirty five (35) pounds. A large item that
does not fit in a thirty three (33) gallon trash bag or box must have a large item sticker ("LI sticker") attached. The solid waste collector shall be
responsible for the sale of TBT stickers and LI stickers to residents.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 252/439
2. Commercial: Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any commercial premises shall maintain metal bulk solid waste
storage containers in good working order. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
B. Storage Of Containers: Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon the residential premises. Residential solid waste containers may not
be stored in the front yard or secondary front yard, as such terms are defined in title 11, chapter 2 of this code, of residential premises, except in
cases of hardship and when the owner has been granted written permission from the city manager or his/her designee to store waste containers in
an alternate location. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written
permission from the city manager or his/her designee to use public property for such purposes. The storage site shall be well drained; fully
accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and commercial premises shall
be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered around neighboring yards and
streets. Trash shall be bagged before it is placed in the residential solid waste containers in order to minimize blowing or loss of material when the
containers are emptied. (Ord. 1033, 3-9-2017)
C. Location Of Containers For Collection: The owner or occupant of each single- or two-family dwelling using solid waste collection service at the curb
shall place the containers storing solid waste and bags and bundles of "yard waste" at the curb, as defined herein, not earlier than five o'clock
(5:00) P.M. on the day preceding the regularly scheduled collection day. For purposes of this section, placing a container "at the curb" means
placing the solid waste container such that the side of the container with the metal bar is at least eighteen inches (18") from the curb or from the
edge of the road, if there is no curb. Yard waste bags and bundles and Curb It! recycling containers shall all be located at least three feet (3') away
from the solid waste container.
D. Optional House Side Collection Of Residential Solid Waste: No person who collects, hauls or transports solid waste, trash, rubbish, refuse,
garbage, offal or any other filthy or offensive substance shall pick up or collect same from the front yard of any single- or two-family dwelling within
the city unless the same is located at the curb of such dwelling, except: 1) if the resident has elected to pay an additional fee for house side
collection service for solid waste and recyclable materials or 2) as provided under subsection F of this section. For residents electing house side
collection service, containers for solid waste and recyclable materials shall be placed outdoors for collection at some easily accessible place not
more than ten feet (10') from the front of a single- or two-family dwelling, or a garage serving such building, on the regularly scheduled collection
day. The collector shall return all containers at the curb of the single- or two-family dwelling, whether the resident elects collection at the curb or
house side. The collector shall place all empty containers at the curb in a location that does not block ingress or egress to any driveways.
E. Removal Of Containers From Curb Or Edge Of Roadway: After collection, the owner or occupant of each single- or two-family dwelling shall remove
all empty solid waste containers from the curb or from the edge of the road, as applicable, on the same day as the scheduled collection day.
F. Assistance For Physically Impaired: In the event all occupants of a single- or two-family dwelling are physically impaired to the extent that no
occupant can place the containers storing solid waste at the curb, the city may, upon application by the occupant, authorize house side collection
service. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5-11: PROHIBITED PRACTICES:
It is unlawful for any person to:
A. Unlawful Use Of Containers: Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of
such containers.
B. Interference With Collectors: Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance
of their duties.
C. Incinerators: Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous
combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the
environmental protection agency.
D. Scavenging: Take or collect any solid waste which has been placed out for collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid
waste collector.
E. Unlawful Disposal: Dispose of refuse at any facility or location which is not a sanitary disposal project.
F. Unlawful Collection: Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of refuse within the city without a valid permit
therefor. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
ARTICLE A. SOLID WASTE COLLECTION; FEES AND CHARGES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 253/439
8-5A-1: COLLECTION SERVICE; LICENSED COLLECTORS:
The collection of solid waste within the city shall be only by collectors licensed by the city. A single collector shall be licensed to collect solid waste from
residential premises, a single collector shall be licensed to collect yard waste from residential premises and a single collector shall be licensed to
collect recyclable material from residential premises. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-2: COLLECTION VEHICLES:
Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall
be leakproof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding and shall be
maintained in good repair so as to prevent leaking of oil or hydraulic fluid onto the city streets. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-3: LOADING:
Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will
not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up
immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-4: FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION:
All solid waste, yard waste and recyclable materials shall be collected, on the same day, by the respective authorized collectors, from residential
premises at least once each week on a schedule approved by the council, and from commercial, industrial and institutional premises as frequently as
may be necessary, but not less than once each week. Collection shall not begin before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or continue after seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. on the same day. Yard waste shall be collected between March 15 and November 30. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-5: BULKY RUBBISH:
Bulky rubbish which is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal manner of other solid waste may be collected by the authorized single
residential collector. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-6: YARD WASTE COLLECTION:
In addition to meeting the requirements under section 8-5A-8 of this article relating to a collector's license, each licensed collector shall haul the yard
waste to a compost site approved by the city and shall keep an accurate accounting of the amount of such yard waste. Each licensed collector shall
submit a monthly written report to the city detailing the amount of such yard waste that has been collected and delivered for composting during the
reporting year. Any collector licensed under the provisions of this article shall not mix yard waste and solid waste together. The license of any hauler
who delivers for disposal yard waste and solid waste mixed together shall be subject to revocation as provided in section 8-5A-8 of this article. (Ord.
932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-7: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste, yard waste or recyclable material therefrom
as required by this article; however, the authorized single collector shall not enter dwelling units or other residential buildings. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-8: COLLECTORS; LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste, yard waste or recyclable material other than
waste produced by that person within the city without first obtaining from the city an annual license in accordance with the following:
A. Application: Application for a solid waste collector's license shall be made to the clerk and provide the following:
1. Name And Address: The full name and address of the applicant, and if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers thereof.
2. Customers Serviced: A description of the types or classes of customers which the applicant proposes to serve.
3. Equipment: A complete and accurate listing of the number and type of collection and transportation equipment to be used.
4. Collection Program: A complete description of the frequency, routes and method of collection and transportation to be used.
5. Disposal: A statement as to the precise location and method of disposal or processing facilities to be used.
6. Rates: A complete description of all rates to be charged to customers within the city for each service that is offered. This schedule of rates shall
be available for public inspection at the clerk's office. Any subsequent amendment of such rates shall be filed with the clerk not less than ten (10)
days prior to the date such rates are to take effect.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 254/439
B. Insurance:
1. No collector's license shall be issued until and unless the applicant therefor, in addition to all other requirements set forth, shall file and maintain
with the city evidence of satisfactory public liability insurance covering all operations of the applicant pertaining to such business and all
equipment and vehicles to be operated in the conduct thereof in the following minimum amounts:
Bodily injury $1,000,000.00 per person
$1,000,000.00 per occurrence
Property damage $1,000,000.00 per occurrence
2. Each insurance policy required hereunder shall include as a part thereof provisions requiring the insurance carrier to notify the city of the
expiration, cancellation or other termination of coverage not less than ten (10) days prior to the effective date of such action.
C. Fees To Customers: Fees charged by a commercial collector shall be based on the volume of solid waste and recyclable material collected. Fees
charged by the single collector authorized to collect solid waste and yard waste from residential premises and fees charged by the collector
authorized to collect recyclable material shall be established as set forth in section 8-5A-11 of this article. With respect to yard waste collection or
bulky items, fees may be charged only for services requested and provided.
D. License Fee: A license fee shall accompany the application. The license fee to be paid by the applicant shall be that fee set forth in the license fee
schedule approved by the Clive city council, which license fee schedule may be modified from time to time with the approval of the Clive city
council. In the event the requested license is not granted, the fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant.
E. License Issued: If the city clerk upon investigation finds the application to be in order and determines that the applicant will collect, transport,
process or dispose of solid waste, yard waste or recyclable material without hazard to the public health or damage to the environment and in
conformity with law and ordinance, the requested license shall be issued.
F. Term Of License: All licenses for collecting and hauling solid waste, yard waste or recyclable material shall expire June 30 of each year.
G. License Renewal: An annual license may be renewed simply upon payment of the required fee, provided the applicant agrees to continue to
operate in substantially the same manner as provided in the original application and provided the applicant furnishes the clerk with a current
evidence of insurance as required herein.
H. License Not Transferable: No license authorized by this article may be transferred to another person.
I. Revocation Of License: Failure of a licensee hereunder to comply with the provisions of this code or the regulations of the Polk County or Dallas
County board of health or of any other appropriate governmental agency shall be deemed sufficient cause for the suspension or revocation by the
city manager of such license for collecting and hauling solid waste. Such revocation by the city manager shall only be after notice to the licensee
and hearing. No new license shall be issued to any such licensee whose license is revoked for a period of twelve (12) months after revocation
except upon the direction of the council.
J. Owner May Transport: Nothing herein is to be construed so as to prevent the owner from transporting solid waste or yard waste accumulating upon
premises owned, occupied or used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of at city approved composting stations or neighborhood
collection sites in accordance with policies established by the composting station.
K. Grading Or Excavation Excepted: No license or permit is required for the removal, hauling or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or
excavation activities; however, all such materials shall be conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and maintained that none
of the material being transported spills upon any public right of way. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-9: UNIFORM COLLECTION FROM RESIDENTIAL PREMISES:
The collection of solid waste and recyclable material from residential premises and the maintenance of the availability of such service, whether or not
the service is used regularly or at all by the occupant of the residential premises, are hereby declared a benefit to such premises at least equal to the
monthly charge specified for the service. Such charge shall be paid whether the occupant uses the residential premises solid waste and recyclable
material collection service or not. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-10: CONTAINER SIZE AND CHARGES FOR RESIDENTIAL PREMISES:
Container size and charges for solid waste collection and disposal from residential premises shall be fixed and determined by the council. Such
container size and charges may from time to time be amended by the council by resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth the currently effective
size and charges shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and be open to inspection during regular business hours. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-11: BILLING FOR SERVICE TO RESIDENTIAL PREMISES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 255/439
Billing and payment for the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material shall be in accordance with the following:
A. Fee Charged: A fee shall be charged to each dwelling unit each month for the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material, which fee
shall include the fee paid to the collector authorized to collect solid waste from residential premises, the fee paid to the collector authorized to
collect recyclable material from residential premises, and the costs of the city for performing the billing service. The fee to be charged to each
dwelling unit shall be established from time to time. Each dwelling unit shall receive one waste container for solid waste. If a resident requests a
second waste container, a second monthly fee will be charged to the resident. For yard waste, a resident must purchase Compost It! stickers to be
attached to each bag of yard waste or each bundle of brush set out for collection. A sticker shall also be purchased each season by each resident
participating in the premium yard waste collection program.
B. Bills Issued: The clerk shall prepare and issue bills for the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material each month. The fee for the
collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material shall be included on the bill sent by the clerk to each dwelling unit for water service,
sewer service and stormwater service charges, as a combined service account.
C. Bills Payable: Bills for the collection of solid waste and recyclable material shall be due and payable at the office of the clerk by the fifteenth of the
month following the end of the month in which service was provided. If a bill for the combined service account is not paid in full, the amount paid
shall be applied pro rata to the amount billed for water service, for sewer service, for stormwater service charges and for the collection of residential
solid waste and recyclable material.
D. Late Payment Penalty: Bills not paid when due shall be considered delinquent. A late payment penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount due shall
be added to each delinquent bill.
E. Returned Checks: A fee, as set forth in the fee schedule established by the city council of the city of Clive, shall be charged for all checks not
honored by the bank on which the checks are written. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-12: SERVICE DISCONTINUED:
Collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material shall be discontinued in accordance with the following:
A. Notice: Within five (5) days following the date that bills for water service and the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material are due
and payable (i.e., the fifteenth day of the month), the clerk shall send a written notice to each delinquent customer that water service, sewer service
and the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material may be discontinued if payment, including late payment charges, is not
received within ten (10) days from the date the notice is mailed. The notice shall afford the customer the opportunity to request a hearing before the
city clerk prior to the discontinuance of service. Such written notice shall be sent by first class mail. If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or
landlord of the property has made written request for notice, the written notice sent to the customer shall also be given to the owner or landlord.
B. Service Discontinued: If payment for all of the services billed by the city on the combined service account is not received within ten (10) days
following the date the written notice is sent to the customer and payment arrangements have not been made pursuant to a hearing before the city
clerk, the supply of water to the customer may be shut off and collection of solid waste and recyclable material may be discontinued for
nonpayment. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-13: LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
A. Responsibility For Payment: The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for fees for the
collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material for the premises. Fees for the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable
material, if not paid as provided by this article, shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and may be certified in the same manner as
property taxes.
B. Lien Notice: A lien for delinquent fees for the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable material shall not be certified to the county treasurer
unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is given to the customer. If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property
has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by
ordinary mail not less than thirty (30) days prior to certification of the lien to the county treasurer. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5A-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
ARTICLE B. RECYCLING
8-5B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article pertaining to recycling is to promote recycling by maintaining residential recycling programs for single-family dwellings and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 256/439
duplexes and by permitting property owners of multi-family dwellings not otherwise served by residential recycling programs to provide facilities for the
source separation of recyclable materials. Any person engaged in the collection, processing and marketing of recyclable materials within the city or
who collects solid waste within the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5B-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF RECYCLING PROGRAM FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS AND DUPLEXES:
A. Adoption Of Curb It! Program: The city of Clive has determined that all single-family dwellings and duplexes in the city of Clive shall be served by
the Curb It! recycling program administered by Metro waste authority.
B. Preparation And Placement For Collection: Recyclable materials for single-family dwellings and duplexes shall be placed in containers provided by
the Curb It! program and placed at the curb for collection every other week on the same collection day as the regularly scheduled collection day for
solid waste. Only recyclable material shall be placed in the Curb It! program containers for collection. Placing residential waste or yard waste in the
Curb It! program collection containers will result in such containers not being emptied and other penalties applied in accordance with the Curb It!
contamination policy.
C. Residential Recycling Program Billing Procedure: The fees for the collection of the recyclable materials from single-family dwellings and duplexes
shall be billed to residents together with the solid waste collection fee in accordance with sections 8-5A-9 through 8-5A-11 of this chapter. The
monthly charges for collection of recyclable materials shall be paid whether the occupant of the residential premises utilized the recycling collection
program or not. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5B-3: RECYCLING PROGRAM FOR MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
Owners of multi-family dwellings may arrange for the collection of recyclable materials separate from the collection of solid waste.
A. Storage Of Recyclable Materials: An owner of multi-family dwelling premises that adopts a recycling program shall provide and keep, at all times, a
sufficient number of containers to hold all recyclable materials which may accumulate during the intervals between collection of such recyclable
materials by an authorized collector.
B. Storage Container Requirements: For multi-family dwelling premises that have adopted a recycling program, all recyclable materials accumulated
by owners and occupants of multi-family dwellings shall be placed in containers which are durable, watertight and made of metal or plastic. Each
container shall be clearly marked with both the recycling symbol and the type of material(s) to be deposited in the container. The containers shall
remain on the multi-family premises at all times and shall be kept in a clean condition and in good repair. The storage of recyclable materials shall
not result in the creation of a public nuisance. Containers shall have lids if necessary to avert a public nuisance or protect the marketing quality of
recyclable materials. Such lids must remain closed except when recyclable materials are being placed in or removed from the containers.
C. Storage Container Location: Containers for collection of recyclable materials at multi-family dwellings adopting a recycling program shall be located
on the multi-family premises at places agreed upon by the owner of the multi-family premises and the authorized collector. Such location shall not
interfere with private or public sidewalks, walkways, driveways, roads, streets, highways or entrances and exits of private or public buildings and
shall be in compliance with all applicable laws. Containers which are on wheels to facilitate their movement shall remain blocked at all times while
unattended to prevent unintentional movement.
D. Collection: Collectors shall collect and remove all recyclable materials from containers on multi-family premises and shall return the containers to
the multi-family premises in a manner so as not to create a public nuisance. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5B-4: COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION:
Any collector transporting recyclable materials within the city shall prevent any spillage from containers or vehicles used in the transport of such
recyclable materials. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle
or container and the area properly cleaned. Such vehicles or containers shall not be overfilled and shall be cleansed at sufficiently frequent intervals to
prevent obnoxious odors or unhealthful conditions. Such vehicles shall also be so constructed, loaded and driven as to prevent any portion of the load
from falling out upon the streets or highways. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
8-5B-5: ENFORCEMENT:
Failure to comply with the terms or provisions of this article constitutes a municipal infraction, subject to a civil penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this code. (Ord. 932, 8-19-2010)
Title 9
FRANCHISES AND OTHER SERVICES
Chapter 1
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 257/439
9-1-1: FRANCHISE GRANTED:
There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation, hereinafter called "company", and to its successors and assigns, the
right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the city of Clive, Iowa, hereinafter called the "city", a gas distribution system, to
furnish natural gas along, under and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public places to serve customers within and without the city and to furnish
and sell natural gas to the city and its inhabitants. This franchise shall be effective for a twenty five (25) year period from and after the effective date
hereof; provided, however, that there may be a reevaluation prior to the end of the fifteenth year of this franchise, with the opportunity for both parties
to request amendments to this franchise. If neither party requests such reevaluation by means of a written notice to the other party at least ninety (90)
days prior to the expiration of the fifteenth year of this franchise, this franchise will continue without change for the remaining ten (10) years. If such a
request to reevaluate or amend the terms of the franchise is made and the parties are unable to agree to amend the terms of this franchise within
ninety (90) days or by a mutually agreed upon date, then either party may terminate this franchise at the end of the fifteenth year. For the term of this
franchise, the company agrees not to exercise its right of eminent domain without the prior approval of the city council, which approval shall be
evidenced by a resolution of the city council. The company shall not, without consent of the city, sell, assign or convey its franchise rights granted
pursuant to the franchise except that the company may, without the city's consent, sell, assign or convey such franchise rights to its affiliated
companies or subsidiaries. (Ord. 874, 12-6-2007)
9-1-2: LOCATION OF COMPANY FACILITIES:
Company shall have the right to excavate in any public street for the purpose of laying, relaying, repairing or extending gas pipes, mains, conduits, and
other facilities, provided that the same shall be so placed as not to interfere with any of the city's utilities lines, including, but not limited to, water
mains, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and city owned fiber optic cable lines, which have been or may hereafter be located by authority of the
city, and to cause minimal interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets or other public
ways and places. (Ord. 874, 12-6-2007)
9-1-3: RELOCATION OF COMPANY FACILITIES:
The company shall, at its cost and expense, relocate its installations in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the city in such manner as the
city may at any time reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, modification, or repair of the
street or alley or any public utility or improvement of, in or about any such street or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such
improvement. The company will notify the city if project funds from a source other than the city are available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities,
the city shall make a good faith effort to attempt to secure said funds and provide them to the company to compensate the company for the costs of
relocation. (Ord. 874, 12-6-2007)
9-1-4: STREET OBSTRUCTION; COMPANY'S DUTY TO REPAIR SURFACE:
In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, and public places for the installation or repair of gas pipes, conduits or apparatus,
company shall not unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets. Prior to company making any excavations or causing any street obstructions,
company shall obtain the approval of the city's public works department, which shall not unreasonably deny approval and whose decision may be
appealed to the Clive city council. Any excavation or obstruction in the streets or other public ways made by company shall be guarded and protected
at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences or boarding, the boundaries of which shall be clearly designated by warning lights during
periods of dusk and darkness. In the case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, company shall, at its own cost and
expense and in a manner approved by the City Engineer, replace the surface disturbed, restoring the original pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other
surfacing as nearly as practicable to the condition existing before said work was commenced. All trenches and filled excavations must be tamped and
compacted to a ninety five percent (95%) standard proctor density. (Ord. 874, 12-6-2007)
9-1-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
Company shall indemnify and save harmless the City from any and all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses on account of injury or
damage to any person or property, caused or occasioned, or allegedly caused or occasioned, in whole or in part, by company's construction,
reconstruction, excavation, operation or maintenance of the gas utilities authorized by this franchise; provided, however, that the company shall not be
obligated to defend, indemnify and save harmless the City for any costs or damages arising from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees or
agents. (Ord. 874, 12-6-2007)
9-1-6: STANDARDS FOR OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
The company shall extend its mains and pipes and operate and maintain the system in accordance with the applicable laws of the State of Iowa,
regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board or its successors, and applicable ordinances, regulations and codes of the City. (Ord. 874, 12-6-2007)
9-1-7: STANDARDS FOR QUALITY AND QUANTITY OF SERVICE:
During the term of this franchise, the company shall furnish natural gas in the quantity and quality consistent with applicable Iowa laws and regulations.
(Ord. 874, 12-6-2007)
9-1-8: PROTECTION OF FACILITIES:
All reasonable and proper police regulations shall be adopted and enforced by the City for the protection of the facilities of the company. (Ord. 874, 12-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 258/439
6-2007)
9-1-9: FRANCHISE FEE:
In consideration of the right and franchise granted to MidAmerican Energy Company (the "company") in section 9-1-1 of this chapter, a franchise fee
equal to five percent (5%) of the gross receipts minus uncollectable amounts derived by the company in the City of Clive for delivery and sale of
natural gas, shall be imposed from and after January 1, 2011 until December 1, 2032.
A. The amount of franchise fee shall be shown separately on the utility bill to each customer. The company shall remit collected franchise fees to the
City on a quarterly basis, within thirty (30) days after the last day of the last revenue month of each quarter of the calendar year (i.e., remitted by
April 30, July 31, October 31 and January 31). The City shall not modify the level of the franchise fee more frequently than once in any twelve (12)
month period.
B. The City shall be solely responsible for the proper use of any amounts collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such franchise fees for
purposes as allowed by Iowa law and as set forth in the Revenue Purpose Statement adopted by the City.
C. The franchise fee shall be applied to all customers' bills in accordance with Iowa Code chapters 364.2(f) and 423B.5, except for the City's bills
which shall be exempt from the franchise fee.
D. Upon receipt of a final and unappealable order or approval authorizing annexation or changes in the corporate boundaries of the City, the City Clerk
shall provide written notification to the company of such annexation or change in the corporate boundaries of the City, and the company shall apply
the franchise fee to its customers who are affected by the annexation or change in the corporate boundaries of the City, commencing no more than
ninety (90) days after receipt of the written notice and City's verification of the area added to the City.
E. To fulfill the purpose and intent of this section, the City and the company may enter into an agreement addressing the implementation of the
collection of the franchise fee, which agreement shall be approved by resolution by the City. (Ord. 1062, 11-8-2018)
Chapter 2
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
9-2-1: FRANCHISE GRANTED:
There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation, hereinafter called the "company", and its successors and assigns, the
right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the city of Clive, Iowa, hereinafter called the "city", a system for the
transmission and distribution of electric energy and communications signals along, under, over and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public places
to serve customers within and without the city, and to furnish and sell electric energy to the city and its inhabitants. This franchise shall be effective for
a twenty five (25) year period from and after the effective date hereof; provided, however, that there may be a reevaluation prior to the end of the
fifteenth year of this franchise, with the opportunity for both parties to request amendments to this franchise. If neither party requests such reevaluation
by means of a written notice to the other party at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the fifteenth year of this franchise, this franchise will
continue without change for the remaining ten (10) years. If such a request to reevaluate or amend the terms of the franchise is made and the parties
are unable to agree to amend the terms of this franchise within ninety (90) days or by a mutually agreed upon date, then either party may terminate
this franchise at the end of the fifteenth year. For the term of this franchise, the company agrees not to exercise its right of eminent domain without the
prior approval of the city council, which approval shall be evidenced by a resolution of the city council. The company shall not, without consent of the
city, sell, assign or convey its franchise rights granted pursuant to the franchise except that the company may, without the city's consent, sell, assign or
convey such franchise rights to its affiliated companies or subsidiaries. (Ord. 875, 12-6-2007)
9-2-2: LOCATION OF COMPANY FACILITIES:
The company shall have the right to erect all necessary poles and to place thereon the necessary wires, fixtures and accessories as well as excavate
and bury conductors for the distribution of electric energy and communications signals in and through the city and shall be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or to
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to public ways, places and structures. If new or replacement wires are to be installed
under a street or roadway, a conduit shall be installed by the company, at the company's expense, in which the wires shall be located. The company
agrees that all said conduits and poles shall be placed in locations so as not to interfere with any of the city's utilities lines, including, but not limited to,
water mains, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and city owned fiber optic cable which have been or may hereafter be located by authority of the
city, and to cause minimal interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets or other public
ways and places. In order to further public safety, the company shall repair any streetlight which is not functioning within thirty (30) days of the city's
report that the streetlight is not operating. (Ord. 875, 12-6-2007)
9-2-3: TREE TRIMMING:
The company is authorized and empowered to prune or remove at company's expense any tree extending into any street, alley or public grounds to
maintain electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to prevent limbs, branches or trunks from interfering with the wires and facilities of the
company. The pruning of trees shall be completed in accordance with nationally accepted safety and utility industry standards, ANSI A300-2001,
"American National Standard For Tree Care Operations", and ANSI Z133-2006 pruning, repairing, maintaining and removing trees, and cutting brush
safety requirements, or subsequent revisions to these standards, and city ordinances regarding the trimming of trees and the protection of its facilities
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 259/439
upon public grounds. The removal of trees or pruning in public grounds shall require prior approval from the city's public works department, except in
emergency and outage situations. Whether trimming trees for maintenance purposes or in response to emergency and outage situations, the company
shall promptly remove the wood trimmed from the trees from the public right of way. (Ord. 875, 12-6-2007)
9-2-4: RELOCATION OF COMPANY FACILITIES:
The company shall, at its cost and expense, relocate its installations in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the city in such manner as the
city may at any time reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, modification, or repair of the
street or alley or any public utility or improvement of, in or about any such street or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such
improvement. The company will notify the city if project funds from a source other than the city are available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities,
and the city shall make a good faith effort to attempt to secure said funds and provide them to the company to compensate the company for the costs
of relocation. (Ord. 875, 12-6-2007)
9-2-5: STREET OBSTRUCTION; COMPANY'S DUTY TO REPAIR SURFACE:
In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, and public places for the excavation of conduits or the erection of poles and wires or
other appliances, the company shall not unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets. Prior to company making any excavations or causing any street
obstructions, company shall obtain the approval of the city's public works department, which shall not unreasonably deny approval and whose decision
may be appealed to the Clive city council. Any excavation or obstruction in the streets or other public ways made by company shall be guarded and
protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences or boarding, the boundaries of which shall be clearly designated by warning lights
during periods of dusk and darkness. In the case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, company shall, at its own cost
and expense and in a manner approved by the city engineer, replace the surface disturbed, restoring the original pavement, sidewalk, driveway or
other surfacing as nearly as practicable to the condition existing before said work was commenced. All trenches and filled excavations must be tamped
and compacted to a ninety five percent (95%) standard proctor density. (Ord. 875, 12-6-2007)
9-2-6: CITY SIGNAGE ON COMPANY POLES:
A. The city reserves the right to place upon company poles within the city limits, without charge, wire and pole fixtures for municipal purposes including
traffic and public safety signs.
B. In addition, the company may permit the city, at the city's expense, to install brackets on company poles in agreed upon locations for the city's
promotional banners. If, at the sole discretion of the company, it is determined that the location of the brackets or banners may create a hazardous
situation or wind or other conditions may place undue stress on specific company facilities, the city shall not be authorized to attach to those
facilities. If attachments are in place, upon notification by the company of damage or potential damage, the city shall promptly remove said banners
and brackets. The city shall to the extent allowed by law indemnify and save harmless the company for any injuries or damages that occur because
of or are contributed to by the existence of the city's promotional banners or the brackets for such banners.
C. Free access to the company facilities shall not be allowed for any communications, information or data transmittal systems owned or leased by the
city for which subscribers pay a fee ("city systems"). In the event the city requests that company permit equipment for such city systems to be
attached to the company's facilities, the city and the company shall enter into a pole attachment agreement prior to the installation of any
equipment for the city systems to the company's facilities. (Ord. 875, 12-6-2007)
9-2-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
The company shall indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses, on account of injury or
damage to any person or property, caused or occasioned in whole or in part, by the company's construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation or
maintenance of the electric or communications facilities authorized by this franchise; provided, however, that the company shall not be obligated to
defend, indemnify and save harmless the city for any costs or damages arising from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees or agents. (Ord.
875, 12-6-2007)
9-2-8: STANDARDS FOR OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
The company shall construct, operate and maintain its facilities in accordance with the applicable laws of the State of Iowa, regulations of the Iowa
Utilities Board or its successors, and applicable ordinances, regulations and codes of the City. (Ord. 875, 12-6-2007)
9-2-9: STANDARDS FOR QUALITY AND QUANTITY OF SERVICE:
During the term of this franchise, the company shall furnish electric energy in the quantity and quality consistent with applicable Iowa laws and
regulations. (Ord. 875, 12-6-2007)
9-2-10: PROTECTION OF FACILITIES:
All reasonable and proper police regulations shall be adopted and enforced by the City for the protection of the facilities of the company. (Ord. 875, 12-
6-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 260/439
9-2-11: FRANCHISE FEE:
In consideration of the right and franchise granted to MidAmerican Energy Company (the "company") in section 9-2-1 of this chapter, a franchise fee
equal to five percent (5%) of the gross receipts minus uncollectable amounts derived by the company in the City of Clive for delivery and sale of
electric energy, shall be imposed from and after January 1, 2011 until December 1, 2032.
A. The amount of franchise fee shall be shown separately on the utility bill to each customer. The company shall remit collected franchise fees to the
City on a quarterly basis, within thirty (30) days after the last day of the last revenue month of each quarter of the calendar year (i.e., remitted by
April 30, July 31, October 31 and January 31). The City shall not modify the level of the franchise fee more frequently than once in any twelve (12)
month period.
B. The City shall be solely responsible for the proper use of any amounts collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such franchise fees for
purposes as allowed by Iowa law and as set forth in the Revenue Purpose Statement adopted by the City.
C. The franchise fee shall be applied to all customers' bills in accordance with Iowa Code chapters 364.2(f) and 423B.5, except for the City's bills
which shall be exempt from the franchise fee.
D. Upon receipt of a final and unappealable order or approval authorizing annexation or changes in the corporate boundaries of the City, the City Clerk
shall provide written notification to the company of such annexation or change in the corporate boundaries of the City, and the company shall apply
the franchise fee to its customers who are affected by the annexation or change in the corporate boundaries of the City, commencing no more than
ninety (90) days after receipt of the written notice and City's verification of the area added to the City.
E. To fulfill the purpose and intent of this section, the City and the company may enter into an agreement addressing the implementation of the
collection of the franchise fee, which agreement shall be approved by resolution by the City. (Ord. 1062, 11-8-2018)
Chapter 3
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
9-3-1: FRANCHISE GRANTED1:
U.S. West is hereby granted and vested with the right, franchise and privilege for a period of twenty five (25) years from the effective date of the
franchise ordinance codified in this chapter, to acquire, construct, operate and maintain in the city the necessary facilities for telecommunications
services for public and private use and to construct and maintain along, upon, across and under the streets, highways, avenues, alleys, bridges and
public places the necessary fixtures and equipment for such purposes. (2000 Code § 112.01)
9-3-2: TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
U.S. West, hereinafter referred to as "grantee", shall be subject to the following terms and conditions during the term of the franchise granted
hereunder:
A. Service Requirements: The grantee shall furnish reasonable, adequate and efficient telecommunication services throughout the city and shall
maintain its system in reasonable repair and working order and provide adequate facilities for such maintenance.
B. Installation And Maintenance Of Service Facilities: The grantee's plant and equipment, including all telecommunication lines, whether overhead or
underground, and other distribution facilities shall be installed in accordance with good engineering practices and shall be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or to
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to public ways, places and structures. The erection, installation, construction,
replacement, removal, repair, maintenance and operation of the telecommunications system shall be in accordance with all applicable laws,
regulations and codes of the state and applicable ordinances, regulations and codes of the city. The grantee shall restore all property of the city
and of the inhabitants thereof to its original condition after the installation of either overhead or underground utility lines.
C. Transmission And Distribution Facilities; General Location Requirements: All telecommunication structures, lines and equipment erected by the
grantee within the city shall be located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, and other public ways and places, and to
cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, or other public ways
and places.
D. Grantee's Duty To Restore Ground Surface: In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall at its
own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city engineer, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or
alley disturbed in as good a condition as before said work was commenced. All trenches and filled excavations must be tamped and compacted to
a ninety five percent (95%) standard proctor density.
E. Alteration Of Street Or Street Grade: If at any time the city elects to alter or change a street or the grade of any street, or public way, and such
alteration or change requires the relocation of any of grantee's facilities located on public property, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the city,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 261/439
shall remove, re-lay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, or other distribution fixtures at its own expense.
F. Tree Trimming: The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the transmission or distribution lines of the grantee, all trimming to be done at the
expense of the grantee and subject to the approval of the city director of public works.
G. Street Obstruction: Any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public ways made by the grantee in the course of its operations, pursuant to
the authority granted hereunder, shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences or boarding, the bounds
of which during the periods of dusk and darkness shall be clearly designated by warning lights.
H. Approval Required: Grantee shall consult with the city prior to locating its facilities on private property that is adjoining current or proposed public
rights of way. Prior to making any opening or causing any street obstructions for construction or repair on public property, including easement,
grantee shall obtain the approval of the city public works department, which shall not unreasonably deny approval and whose decision may be
appealed to the council.
I. Pole Signs: The city shall be allowed to erect and maintain official signs on grantee's poles located within the city.
J. Indemnification: In the conduct of its operation pursuant to this chapter, the grantee shall at all times use due care and diligence. The grantee shall
further defend, indemnify, protect and save harmless the city and its political subdivision from and against any and all liability, losses and physical
damage to property and bodily injury or death to any persons from any cause of action which any person may have or claim to have by reason of
any act, conduct, negligence, fault or misconduct on the part of the grantee, its agent, officers, servants or employees.
K. Franchise Tax: If, during the term of the franchise there shall be enacted by the Iowa general assembly a valid taxing statute authorizing the city to
collect a tax on the revenues received by grantee from its customers in the city, then if such tax is levied by the city, said grantee will include,
subject to the approval of the Iowa state utilities board, such tax as a separate item on bills to its customers within the city, and remit the sums
collected to the city under the terms and provisions of such enacted statute. (2000 Code § 112.02)
9-3-3: ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE:
The grantee shall not, without consent of the city, sell, assign or convey its franchise rights granted pursuant to this chapter, except that grantee may,
without city consent, sell, assign or convey such franchise rights to its affiliated companies or subsidiaries. (2000 Code § 112.03)
Footnote 1: Ordinance 299, adopting a telephone franchise for the city, was passed and adopted December 2, 1982.
Chapter 4
CABLE TELEVISION
ARTICLE A. FRANCHISE
9-4A-1: FRANCHISE GRANTED1:
TCI of Central Iowa, a corporation organized under the laws of the state of Iowa, its successors and assigns (hereinafter collectively referred to as
"grantee"), are hereby granted and vested with the right, franchise, and authority for a period of twenty five (25) years, to acquire, construct, and
operate a cable television or community antenna television system, and to sell and supply to individuals, firms, and corporations, public or private, at
any and all places, within the corporate limits of the city as said limits now are or hereafter at any time may be established, audio and video
communications services, subject to the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided. (2000 Code § 113.01)
9-4A-2: RIGHT TO INSTALL AND MAINTAIN:
The city grants to grantee, subject to the provisions herein, the right to erect, install, construct, reconstruct, replace, repair, maintain, and operate in or
upon, under, above, across, and from the streets, avenues, highways, sidewalks, bridges, and other public ways, easements, rights of way, and lands
other than parks and recreational areas, as now existing and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, in the city, all equipment, facilities,
appurtenances, and apparatus of any nature, for the purpose of receiving, amplifying, transmitting, and distributing electrical and electronic energy,
pictures, sounds, signals, impulses, and communications, unidirectional, and multidirectional of any nature and description, audio and video,
embracing any and all of the frequencies of the electromagnetic spectrum, by studios, cameras, projectors, recorders, antennas, transmitters,
microwaves, wires, cables, coaxial cables, and wave guides; and to otherwise engage in the business, services and activities, generally known as, and
practiced now and in the future by, cable television systems providing audio and video communications services, in accordance with the laws of the
United States of America, the state of Iowa, and the city. Provided, grantee may not erect, install or construct any such equipment, facilities,
appurtenances or apparatus upon any public ways or lands until grantee has submitted detailed plans and specifications to the city therefor and such
plans and specifications have been approved by the council. (2000 Code § 113.02)
9-4A-3: FRANCHISE NOT EXCLUSIVE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 262/439
The franchise shall not be exclusive and shall not restrict in any manner the council, or any other governing body of the city, in the exercise of any
regulatory power which it now has or which may hereafter be authorized or permitted by the laws of the state. (2000 Code § 113.03)
9-4A-4: CONFORMITY WITH OTHER ORDINANCES:
The grantee shall at all times during the term of the franchise conform with, submit to, and carry out any and all ordinances relating to any person
furnishing audio and video communications services by cable television to the city or its inhabitants now in force or that may hereafter be enacted
together with any amendments thereto. (2000 Code § 113.04)
9-4A-5: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
Grantee shall at all times comply with the terms and conditions of article B of this chapter, which regulates cable television systems operating within
the city. (2000 Code § 113.05)
9-4A-6: REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE:
If grantee shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or default in any of its obligations hereunder, except for causes beyond the
reasonable control of grantee, and shall fail within thirty (30) days after written notice from the city to commence and, within a reasonable time,
complete the correction of such default or noncompliance, the council shall have the right to revoke the franchise and all rights of grantee hereunder.
In the event grantee shall be adjudicated bankrupt or placed in receivership, the city may declare the franchise herein granted forfeited and hereunder
terminated. (2000 Code § 113.06)
9-4A-7: TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE:
Grantee shall not sell, transfer or encumber its system or the franchise, nor shall any change of ownership in grantee to the extent of twenty five
percent (25%) or more of the now existing holdings be transferred by grantee, without first securing approval of the council. (2000 Code § 113.07)
9-4A-8: COMPLIANCE WITH FCC RULES:
Grantee shall at all times comply with all rules and regulations of the federal communications commission or any duly authorized agency of the United
States of America, and all laws duly enacted now or hereafter by the United States congress or Iowa general assembly. This article shall be
conformed, within one year of its date of adoption, to any and all rules and regulations relating to the permissible terms of cable television franchises
which may hereafter be adopted by the federal communications commission. (2000 Code § 113.08)
9-4A-9: DEFENSES OF GRANTEE:
Should the grantee, at any time, set up against the city in any claim or proceeding any condition or term of the franchise as being unreasonable,
arbitrary, illegal or void, or that the city had no power or authority to make such term or condition, or that any section of this article is void,
unreasonable, arbitrary, illegal or unconstitutional, the city may, at its option, void the franchise herein granted to grantee in its entirety. (2000 Code
§ 113.09)
9-4A-10: OTHER FRANCHISE MORE FAVORABLE:
In the event that the grantee shall be granted and accept a cable television franchise in the Des Moines, Iowa, metropolitan area on terms or
conditions more favorable to the governmental unit granting the franchise which is approved by the federal communications commission, then at the
option of the city, such terms or conditions, or portions thereof as designated by the city, shall be applicable to the franchise granted by the city to the
grantee herein. (2000 Code § 113.10)
Footnote 1: Ordinance 292, adopting a cable television franchise for the city, was passed and adopted August 26, 1982.
ARTICLE B. REGULATIONS
9-4B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to regulate the cable television system within the city. (2000 Code § 114.01)
9-4B-2: SYSTEM CAPACITY:
TCI of Central Iowa (hereinafter referred to as "grantee") shall install initially in the city a cable television system with at least one hundred twenty (120)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 263/439
MHz of bandwidth (the equivalent of 20 television channels) available for immediate or potential use. Grantee shall maintain an ability to expand the
channel capacity of the system as the demand for channel space increases pursuant to section 9-4B-12 of this article. (2000 Code § 114.02)
9-4B-3: RETURN COMMUNICATIONS:
Grantee shall design, engineer and construct its cable television system so that it has the potential capacity for nonvoice return communications, and
grantee shall make this service available when it becomes practical to do so on other than an experimental basis. (2000 Code § 114.03)
9-4B-4: SERVICE TO SCHOOLS AND MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS:
A. Schools And Community Buildings: Grantee shall install a color capable cable service line to all public and private primary and secondary schools
and all municipally owned or leased buildings located within the city, including all external wiring, and including all internal wiring for the connection
of one outlet. Grantee shall provide maintenance for such installations at grantee's cost. Grantee shall provide cable service to such buildings
without charge. Grantee shall make all improvements to such installations and service as technology permits to serve properly such schools and
municipal buildings. (2000 Code § 114.04)
B. School Originated Broadcasts: When available on other than an experimental basis, and upon request by schools located in the city, grantee shall
provide to the schools without charge a type of cable that will permit selected classrooms within each school building to originate live cable
transmissions. Such a two-way cable system shall be linked at the grantee's expense to grantee's head-end permitting cable transmissions
originated in the selected classrooms to be transmitted over the educational channels referred to in subsection C of this section. (2000 Code
§ 114.05)
C. Educational Channel: Grantee shall maintain at least one cable channel specifically designated for use by any and all recognized educational
authorities located in the city, both public and private, for such instructional and educational purposes as they may determine. Grantee may
establish rules prohibiting the presentation of this channel of any advertising material designed to promote the sale of commercial products or
services (including advertising by or on behalf of candidates for public office), lottery information, and obscene or indecent matter. A public record
may be kept of all persons or groups requesting access to such channel. Grantee shall not charge for the maintenance of such channel, except as
required by the federal communications commission and consistent with the regulations of the federal communications commission and approved
by council pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 9-4B-18 of this article. Grantee shall make no per channel or per program charge of any
kind to any subscriber for the privilege of receiving the channel designated for use by the educational authorities. Grantee shall provide to public
and private schools located within the city such textbooks as are available on matters such as equipping, purchasing, installing, and operating the
schools' own studio facilities. (2000 Code § 114.10)
D. School Activities: Grantee shall not televise, tape, or in any way reproduce or show to the general public any school activity, either as a public
service or as a commercial activity, without the prior approval of the schools involved. (2000 Code § 114.11)
9-4B-5: EMERGENCY WARNING SYSTEM:
Grantee shall provide an emergency warning system so that emergency information may be given simultaneously on all channels of grantee's cable
television system, and during an emergency, grantee shall allow proper city officials the complete use of its cable television system. (2000 Code
§ 114.06)
9-4B-6: TELEVISION BROADCAST SIGNALS:
Grantee shall provide as part of its cable television service the signals of all television broadcast signals presently available off the air in the city and
the maximum number of additional television signals consistent with the rules and regulations of the federal communications commission and all other
applicable laws, rules or regulations. Grantee may provide such automated video services and such audio services as it wishes and as are consistent
with the terms of this article. (2000 Code § 114.07)
9-4B-7: LOCAL PROGRAMMING:
Grantee shall provide cablecasting originated by it on one or more channels which it shall designate for such purpose. Grantee shall use its best
efforts to present programming which deals with the needs and interests of the city and its citizens. Grantee shall maintain the necessary studio,
facilities and equipment to produce and transmit such programming. (2000 Code § 114.08)
9-4B-8: MUNICIPAL CHANNEL:
Grantee shall maintain at least one cable channel specifically designated for use by the city for whatever lawful, noncommercial purposes the city may
determine. Grantee shall not charge for the maintenance of such channel except as required by the federal communications commission and
consistent with the regulations of the federal communications commission and approved by the council pursuant to the procedures set forth in section
9-4B-18 of this article. Grantee shall make no per channel or per program charge of any kind to any subscriber for the privilege of receiving the
channel designated for use by the city. (2000 Code § 114.09)
9-4B-9: USE OF STUDIO FACILITIES AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 264/439
Grantee shall allow the city and recognized educational authorities located in the city, both public and private, to use its studio and other production
facilities, equipment and materials, on reasonable notice, at reasonable times, and if a charge is made, at grantee's cost. Grantee shall provide at no
charge such technical assistance as may be reasonably required in the production of instructional, educational, and civic programs. Grantee shall
provide to public and private schools located within the city such equipment it owns and technology it has, at reasonable times and upon reasonable
request, as will permit said schools to produce and transmit programs of an educational nature without costs to the district. (2000 Code § 114.12)
9-4B-10: NONCOMMERCIAL PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL:
Grantee shall maintain at least one specially designated, noncommercial public access channel available to groups and individuals on a first come,
nondiscriminatory basis, together with equipment and facilities reasonably necessary for the production of programming on such channel. Grantee
shall make production costs, if any, which are incurred in live studio presentations exceeding five (5) minutes. Should an additional public access
channel or channels be made available pursuant to section 9-4B-12 of this article, grantee may make such reasonable charge for the use of the
channel(s) as may be approved by the council pursuant to section 9-4B-18 of this article. Grantee may establish rules providing for access to the
public channel on a first come, nondiscriminatory basis, prohibiting the presentation of any advertising material designed to promote the sale of
commercial products or services (including advertising by or on behalf of candidates for public office), lottery information, and obscene or indecent
matter. A public record may be kept of the names and addresses of all persons or groups requesting access time. Grantee shall make no per channel
or per program charge of any kind to any subscriber of the privilege of receiving the channel(s) designated for public access. (2000 Code § 114.13)
9-4B-11: LEASED CHANNELS:
Grantee may lease channel space to any organization, group, or individual at a reasonable charge. Grantee may adopt rules governing the leasing of
channel space which provide for access on a first come, nondiscriminatory basis, prohibit the presentation of lottery information and obscene or
indecent matter, require sponsorship identification, specify an appropriate rate schedule, and permit public inspection of a record of the names and
addresses of all persons or groups requesting time. (2000 Code § 114.14)
9-4B-12: EXPANSION OF ACCESS CHANNEL CAPACITY:
In the event that any of the channels provided for in subsection 9-4B-4C and sections 9-4B-8, 9-4B-10 and 9-4B-11 of this article shall be in use during
eighty percent (80%) of the weekdays (Monday through Friday) for eighty percent (80%) of the time during any consecutive three (3) hour period for
six (6) consecutive weeks, grantee shall make an additional channel for that purpose available within six (6) months for any or all of the uses and
under the conditions specified in subsection 9-4B-4C and sections 9-4B-8, 9-4B-10 and 9-4B-11 of this article. Nothing herein shall interfere with
grantee's right to add additional channels of the type described in subsection 9-4B-4C and sections 9-4B-8, 9-4B-10 and 9-4B-11 of this article
whenever it wishes, provided that such channels are operated in a manner consistent with those sections. (2000 Code § 114.15)
9-4B-13: COMPLAINTS:
Grantee shall maintain an office within the city or within an adjoining city for the purpose of receiving, investigating and responding to complaints and
grievances with respect to the quality of the service rendered by the grantee, equipment malfunctions and other similar matters pertaining to the cable
television system of the grantee. Within thirty (30) days from the occurrence of the facts and circumstances giving rise to a complaint or grievance, and
not thereafter, any subscriber in the city may state a complaint or grievance to the grantee in writing. In the event that a written complaint or grievance
is received by the city, the city shall forward the complaint or grievance to the grantee. Within five (5) days from the receipt of a complaint or grievance
by the grantee, the grantee shall state to the complainant its intentions with respect to the complaint or grievance in writing. In the event that the
complaint or grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of the complainant within fifteen (15) days after the receipt thereof by the grantee, the grantee
shall notify the city and the city shall forward a copy of such notice to the complainant, with a statement of the procedure to be followed to further
prosecute the complaint. When a complaint has not been satisfied, the complainant may file a formal complaint with the council in such form and
manner as prescribed by the city within thirty (30) days after the date of the grantee's notice of refusal or inability to satisfy the complaint. If the
complainant fails to file a formal complaint within such thirty (30) day period, complainant will be deemed to have abandoned the complaint, and such
complaint will be deemed dismissed. Upon receipt of a formal complaint, the council shall ascertain the facts and shall have the power to enforce its
decision, if against grantee, by all actions hereunder, including the revocation of the franchise. On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, the
grantee shall file a report in writing with the city stating the date and substance of each complaint or grievance received by it during the preceding
calendar month, the date and nature of the action taken by the grantee with respect thereto, and, if still pending, the status thereof. (2000 Code
§ 114.16)
9-4B-14: FRANCHISE FEE:
On or before April 1 of each year, grantee shall pay to the city at the office of the clerk a franchise fee of five percent (5%), subject to the approval of
the federal communications commission, or such other franchise fee as is approved by the federal communications commission, but in no event to be
less than three percent (3%) of grantee's gross subscriber receipts received for cable service operations in the city for the preceding calendar year
during the term of the franchise. In the event the franchise fee payable by grantee to the city provided herein is held invalid by any court or
governmental agency having jurisdiction thereof, then at the option of the city it may terminate and revoke grantee's franchise. In the event that a
franchise fee of five percent (5%) is not approved by the federal communications commission as provided in this section, then grantee shall reimburse
the city for all expenses incurred by the city for engineering services performed by or on behalf of the city with respect to the review of plans and
specifications submitted to the city by grantee and for all costs of the city arising out of review, inspection and supervision of the erection, installation,
construction, reconstruction, replacement, repair and maintenance of grantee's equipment, facilities, appurtenances and apparatus within the city.
(2000 Code § 114.17)
9-4B-15: ACCOUNTING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 265/439
Grantee shall keep complete records of accounts showing dates and payments received, and shall furnish an annual accounting by a certified public
accountant to the city on the payment date as above provided. The city shall have the right, power and authority to inspect the monthly service charge
records of the grantee at the premises of the grantee during the business hours of any workday, or at any other reasonable time and place, provided
grantee is given no less than seven (7) days' notice. (2000 Code § 114.18)
9-4B-16: FRANCHISE FEE NOT TAX:
Payments of the franchise fee by the grantee to the city pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be considered in the nature of a tax but shall
be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or hereafter required to be paid by any law of the United States, the state of Iowa or the city. (2000
Code § 114.19)
9-4B-17: SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Grantee shall have the right to prescribe service rules and regulations for the conduct of its business with its subscribers and service users, not
inconsistent with the provisions of its franchise or with the rules and regulations of the federal communications commission, and other applicable laws,
rules and regulations. Grantee shall submit to the city the form of its service agreement between grantee and its subscribers and channel users, shall
furnish the city a full schedule of its charges to be paid by subscribers before soliciting for subscribers within the city, and shall furnish the city any
amendments or alterations in the service agreement or schedule of charges. (2000 Code § 114.20)
9-4B-18: RATES AND CHARGES:
In consideration for services rendered to subscribers, the grantee shall have the right to charge and collect from subscribers fair and reasonable
compensation calculated to offset all necessary costs for provision of the services and including a fair rate of return on investment devoted thereto,
under efficient and economical management. (2000 Code § 114.21)
9-4B-19: SERVICE REQUIREMENTS:
Grantee shall, during the term of its franchise, furnish reasonable, adequate and efficient cable television reception services to the residents of the city
wherever possible, and grantee agrees to maintain its system in reasonable repair and working order and to provide adequate facilities for such
maintenance. These requirements may be temporarily suspended by disaster or emergency conditions or other circumstances beyond the reasonable
control of grantee. (2000 Code § 114.22)
9-4B-20: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM:
Grantee's plant and equipment, including the antenna site, head-end, distribution system, towers, structures, poles, wires, underground cable, and
appurtenances shall be installed in accordance with good engineering practices and shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced,
removed, repaired, maintained, and operated so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or to interfere with the improvements the city
may deem proper to make, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on, to, or from public ways, places, and structures.
Erection, installation, construction, replacement, removal, repair, maintenance and operation of the system shall be in accordance with the provisions
of the national electrical code of the National Fire Protection Association and national electric safety code (outside work) and such applicable laws of
the state of Iowa and applicable ordinances of the city which may now be in effect or enacted in the future. All installations shall be of a permanent
nature, durable and maintained in a safe, suitable, and substantial condition, in good order and repair. All installations shall be subject to the provisions
of section 9-4A-2 of this chapter. (2000 Code § 114.23)
9-4B-21: FCC STANDARDS:
Grantee's cable television system shall meet technical standards of the rules and regulations of the federal communications commission, and grantee
shall perform the periodic tests and make the measurements specified in such rules. The system shall be so designed, engineered, and maintained by
grantee so as not to interfere with the television and radio reception of residents of the city who are not subscribers to its services. (2000 Code
§ 114.24)
9-4B-22: USE OF POLES:
A. Right To Use Granted By City: The city hereby grants the right, privilege, and authority to grantee to lease, rent, or in any other manner obtain the
use of poles with overhead lines, conduits, trenches, ducts, lines, cables, and other equipment and facilities from any and all holders of public
licenses and franchises within the corporate limits of the city, and to use such poles, conduits, trenches, ducts, lines, and cables in the course of its
business subject to the provisions of section 9-4A-2 of this chapter. Grantee shall install its cable on existing poles owned by other holders of public
licenses and franchises within the corporate limits of the city whenever possible for the installation of its cable. When installation of cable on poles
is not possible, or when the holders of another public license or franchise have installed underground cable, then in that event, unless the council
shall otherwise decide, the cable used by grantee shall be installed underground. Grantee shall only be allowed to erect its own poles upon
receiving the permission of the council to do so. (2000 Code § 114.25)
B. Reservation Of Right To Use Poles: The city shall retain and does hereby retain the right to utilize the existing poles for future use and to require the
removal of the cable by grantee where existing poles are not sufficient to adequately handle the proposed city use and grantee's cable. (2000 Code
§ 114.26)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 266/439
9-4B-23: MAPS AND PLATS:
Grantee shall file with the city engineer a copy, true and accurate, of maps and/or plats of all existing and proposed installations upon the streets.
These maps and plats shall conform to the requirements of the city engineer and shall be kept continuously up to date. (2000 Code § 114.27)
9-4B-24: COMPLIANCE WITH CITY CODES:
Grantee shall be required to conform to all present city codes, including, but not limited to, building, plumbing and electrical codes. All underground
street crossing shall be by drilling or pushing. Grantee shall restore all property of the city and of the inhabitants thereof to its original condition after
the installation of either overhead or underground cable. (2000 Code § 114.28)
9-4B-25: HOLD HARMLESS:
Grantee shall hold the city harmless from any damage which grantee's cable, equipment, or other integral parts of its system may cause as a result of
any action by any city employee when carrying out said employee's duties. (2000 Code § 114.29)
9-4B-26: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Grantee shall install all of its wire, cable and other lines, whether overhead or underground, at the rear of all lots and other properties wherever
possible, as required by the city. All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment erected by grantee within the city shall be so located
as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways, easements and places, and to cause minimum
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners. Grantee shall not install its wire, cable and other lines through, over or on
private property, except to serve a building located thereon, without obtaining a written easement therefor. (2000 Code § 114.30)
9-4B-27: RESTORATION OF SURFACE:
In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing, grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved
by the city engineer, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good a condition as before
said work was commenced. Grantee shall not cut or otherwise remove any such surfacing without first obtaining approval therefor from the city director
of public works. (2000 Code § 114.31)
9-4B-28: RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
If at any time during the period of grantee's franchise, the city shall elect to alter, or change the grade of any street, alley or public way, or construct
any public improvement, grantee, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, re-lay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes, and other fixtures as requested by the city at grantee's own expense. (2000 Code § 114.32)
9-4B-29: INTERFERENCE WITH UTILITY FIXTURES:
Grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures when the same will interfere with any gas, electric, or telephone fixtures, water hydrant or main, and all
such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys
shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley, and then in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said streets,
alleys, and public ways. (2000 Code § 114.33)
9-4B-30: TEMPORARY REMOVAL OF WIRES:
Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of
buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same and grantee shall
have the authority to require such payment in advance. Grantee shall be given not less than five (5) days' advance notice to arrange for such
temporary wire changes. (2000 Code § 114.34)
9-4B-31: TREE TRIMMING:
Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the city so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of grantee, all trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of the
city and at the expense of grantee. (2000 Code § 114.35)
9-4B-32: PROTECTION OF STREET OBSTRUCTIONS:
Any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public ways made by the grantee in the course of the construction, operation, or removal of cable
installation shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences, or boarding, the bounds of which during periods
of dusk and darkness shall be clearly designated by warning lights. Grantee shall whenever it is deemed necessary by the city director of public works
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 267/439
install such steel plates as may be necessary to allow a public roadway to remain open while grantee is in the course of the construction, operation, or
removal of cable installation. Grantee shall comply with the Iowa state highway commission manual on uniform traffic control devices. (2000 Code
§ 114.36)
9-4B-33: REMOVAL OF FACILITIES ON TERMINATION:
Upon the termination of its franchise, grantee shall remove its poles, cable television transmission and distribution system, and other appurtenances
from the streets and sidewalks in the city, when ordered to do so by the city, and shall restore such streets and sidewalks to their original condition.
(2000 Code § 114.37)
9-4B-34: INDEMNIFICATION:
Grantee shall at all times defend, indemnify, protect, and save harmless the city, its officers and employees and its political subdivisions from and
against, and agrees to pay the city for, any and all liability, losses, physical damage to property and bodily injury or death to the city or to persons,
including payments made under workers' compensation laws, claims, settlements, judgments, decrees and awards of every kind and nature, including
attorney fees, costs and disbursements however arising out of or related to, or be caused by the erection, construction, replacement, removal,
maintenance, and operation of grantee's cable television system, or the granting of its franchise. Grantee shall carry public liability insurance for the
protection of itself and the city, its officers and employees, and its political subdivisions in not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the
aggregate. Grantee shall hold the city, its officers and employees, and its political subdivisions harmless against damages resulting from legal action
which may be brought against it in connection with the establishment and/or operation of grantee's cable television system in the city, and shall defend
at its expense any action brought against the city, its officers and employees and its political removal, maintenance and operation of grantee's cable
television system or the granting of its franchise. Grantee shall also carry workers' compensation insurance coverage on its employees who are
engaged in any manner in the erection, construction, replacement, repair, maintenance and operations of grantee's plant and equipment. Grantee shall
be notified of any claim, demand, or action brought against the city, its officers or employees or its political subdivisions for which the city, its officers or
employees or its political subdivisions may seek reimbursement or defense as provided hereunder, and the city, its officers or its employees or its
political subdivisions shall not settle, capitulate, or admit any such claim, demand, or action. (2000 Code § 114.38)
9-4B-35: RATES NONDISCRIMINATORY:
Grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations, employment or in any other respects, make or grant any preference or
advantage to any person nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage; provided, however, this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the
establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification shall be entitled.
(2000 Code § 114.39)
9-4B-36: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
Grantee shall not engage in the business of selling, leasing, renting, or servicing television or radio receivers, or their parts and accessories, in
connection with the operation of its cable television system, nor shall grantee and its employees require or attempt to direct its subscribers to deal with
any particular firm or person in regard to the above activities. (2000 Code § 114.40)
9-4B-37: REGULATION OF SUBSCRIBER SERVICE RATES:
The city shall regulate cable television basic service tier rates and charges for related equipment, installation and services, notwithstanding any
different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise or municipal code of the city. Such regulation shall be consistent with any regulations of the federal
communications commission relating thereto, whether now or hereinafter enacted. In all cases in which the city shall pass upon such cable television
rates and charges, the city shall provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. (2000 Code § 114.41)
Chapter 5
UTILITY AND FIBER OPTIC CABLE LINES
9-5-1: UNDERGROUND UTILITY LINES REQUIRED:
All utility lines, except electric lines of nominal voltage in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) volts, shall be installed underground unless such lines
can be installed and service be provided using only existing utility poles. Such utility lines required to be installed underground shall be installed in
such a manner so as not to interfere with other underground utilities. Incidental appurtenances to such underground utility lines, such as pad mounted
electrical equipment and its enclosures, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meters, and meter cabinets may be placed aboveground but shall be
located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. (2000 Code § 115.01)
9-5-2: FIBER OPTIC CABLE LINES:
A. Application For License: An applicant must submit an application for a license to install or repair fiber optic cable in, over or upon the city of Clive
right of way. Upon issuance of a license by the city, the applicant agrees to abide by the terms and conditions of a license agreement to be
approved by the council. (2000 Code § 116.01)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 268/439
B. License Fee: Before any fiber optic cable license is issued, the applicant may be required to pay a license fee in accordance with a fee schedule
established from time to time and approved by the council. (2000 Code § 116.02)
Title 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CLIVE BUILDING CODE, and may be cited as such and may also be known, referred to and cited as the "Building
Code". (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders, contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their responsibilities with
respect to proper construction, construction techniques, and premises safety, and to provide for inspection as a means of compelling compliance
therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers, agents, or employees, owing to any individual
member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this chapter to create any duty or
liability by the City, its officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-3: WARNING:
No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed, or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of
or quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in
the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in
any way constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the International
Building Code, 2015 edition, or International Residential Code, 2015 edition, adopted herein. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-5: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the International Building Code, 2015 edition, and the International Residential
Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., are adopted in full except for such portions as may be hereinafter deleted,
modified, or amended, and shall constitute the "Building Code of the City of Clive, Iowa", to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City, and
the same are, by this reference, incorporated herein as fully and completely as if set forth in full. The use of the term "Building Code" in this chapter
shall be interpreted to refer to the International Building Code, 2015 edition. The dwelling construction under the International Residential Code, 2015
edition, and appendix chapters to the International Residential Code may be utilized to determine basic guidelines or acceptable solutions to Code
requirements (determination to be made by the Construction Services Administrator). Furthermore, the use of the term IBC in this chapter shall be
interpreted to refer to the International Building Code, 2015 edition, and the use of the term IRC shall be interpreted to refer to the International
Residential Code, 2015 edition. An official copy of the International Building Code, 2015 edition, and the International Residential Code, 2015 edition,
as adopted, and a certified copy of this chapter can be viewed in the Community Development Department. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-6: SCOPE:
The provisions of this Building Code shall apply to:
A. New Construction: The construction of new buildings.
1. Public or private installations as governed by the IBC and/or IRC.
B. Existing Buildings:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 269/439
1. Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing buildings, if covered by this Code. The Construction Services Administrator may, when such
additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable additions or alterations in a building, structure, or on a premises when a
danger to life or property may result if such other additions or alterations were not made.
2. Installations, which were in compliance with the Code in existence at the time such installations were made, shall be presumed to be safe and
proper, which presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the installation may be dangerous to life or property.
3. If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change in occupancy, the entire building shall comply with all the building standards
applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy of a building has been changed to a mixed occupancy, with the required fire separation
between the mixed occupancy, each occupancy thereof shall comply with its own particular classification.
C. Conversion To Condominium Or Multiple Housing Cooperative:
1. The conversion of any building or portion thereof to a horizontal property regime or to a multiple housing cooperative shall be treated as a
change of occupancy classification for the building.
2. Any person or entity seeking to establish a horizontal property regime or multiple housing cooperative by establishing a horizontal property
regime pursuant to Iowa Code 499B or by establishing a multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Iowa Code 499A shall establish and document
compliance with the following. In addition to the following, the person or entity shall file and obtain approval from the Community Development
Department for the development application defined in subsection C3 of this section:
a. That all materials, manner and means of construction in the proposed building meet current codes for new construction including current Fire,
Building, Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical, Energy Conservation, and Post Construction Stormwater Management Codes.
b. That the building and site meet all requirements of the zoning ordinance that would be required for new construction.
c. That the building and site meet all requirements for handicapped accessibility that would be required for new construction.
d. That separate utility services, with separate metering, be provided to each unit that would be required for new construction.
3. At least sixty (60) days before a declaration or other instrument establishing a horizontal property regime pursuant to Iowa Code 499B or
establishing a multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Iowa Code 499A ("declaration") is to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder,
any person or entity shall file a development application for approval with the Community Development Department. In addition to the
development application, the applicant shall file the following:
a. A site plan, building plans, and Code analysis demonstrating compliance with the provisions addressed above.
b. A copy of the declaration or other instrument consistent with Iowa Code 499A or 499B.
4. The declaration shall not be recorded unless a certificate of occupancy for the proposed building has been issued by the City. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-
2017)
10-1-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
The applicant for any permit under this Code, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever,
and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection
with or related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants
of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the City; and such applicant, by making such
application, forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of
the City, its officers or employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued
under this Code whether expressly recited therein or not. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES:
A. Required: Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, add to, alter, relocate, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or to repair,
install, add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this
Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall not do so without first securing a permit from the Community Development Department.
B. Issuance: After proper application on forms provided by the Community Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the
property owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the Iowa Division of Labor Services, according to their rules and standards. The property
owner or authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not
transferable. No permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any
ordinance of the City.
C. Fees: There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved from time to time by the City Council. Fees on all buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or
nonprofit organization may be waived by the City Council. No fees shall be collected on buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
D. Expiration:
1. Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 270/439
abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of sixty (60) days. Before such work can be commenced, a new permit shall be
first obtained, and a fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) of the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one hundred twenty (120) days.
2. All permits shall expire after three hundred sixty five (365) days unless an extension is requested in writing to the Construction Services
Administrator fourteen (14) days prior to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may refuse any extension, but shall
do so in writing within seven (7) days of receipt of the extension request.
3. In addition, anytime work is suspended or abandoned for more than ten (10) days, the permit shall expire due to neglect if the site is not properly
secured, including:
a. Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
b. A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
c. Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be given
to proximity of the construction site, as described in chapter 11 of this title.
E. Revocation: Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the
violation of any provision of this Code.
F. Outstanding Permits: If a permit is outstanding on the effective date hereof, the provisions of this chapter, the International Building Code, 2015
edition, and the International Residential Building Code, 2015 edition, adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to
the extent that the Construction Services Administrator shall determine that the application of such provisions to said work would be unreasonable.
The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the unreasonableness of such provisions.
G. Work Without Permit: If any repairs, additions, alterations, or demolitions to any building or portions of any building or any electrical, gas,
mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining a
permit, the owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has been completed in accordance with the applicable codes. The
Construction Services Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special inspection necessary to ensure that the work was completed in
accordance with the applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an approved inspector who is qualified and/or licensed to inspect
work similar to that which is being performed. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-9: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
For the purposes of this Code the Construction Services Administrator may also be referred to as the building official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction
Services Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise
discharging his/her official duties, the Construction Services Administrator or an appointed assistant or agent shall have the right to enter at any time
any building, area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of
the Construction Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the
premises shall be in such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers, or the general public, the Construction Services
Administrator shall at once order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-10: INSPECTION:
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal or cause to be covered or concealed any new construction, electrical,
plumbing or mechanical systems or apparatus for which a permit has been issued, until such new construction, electrical, plumbing or mechanical
systems or apparatus have been inspected and approved as required by this Code. The Construction Services Administrator shall have authority to
remove or cause the removal of any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection of new construction, electrical, plumbing or mechanical
systems or apparatus. Upon the completion of the new construction, electrical, plumbing or mechanical systems or apparatus in any building, it shall
be the duty of the company, firm or individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services Administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt
of such notice for conformance to the provisions of this Code. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless the new construction, electrical,
plumbing or mechanical systems or apparatus are in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-11: STOP WORK ORDER:
A. Authority: Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to
the provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
B. Issuance: The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
C. Unlawful Continuance: Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premises shall be limited to the removal or correction of the violation or unsafe condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 271/439
10-1-12: DELETIONS:
The following are deleted from the IBC and IRC and are of no force or effect in this chapter:
A. IBC sections:
101.4 Referenced Codes
103.3 Deputies
104.5 Identification
104.10.1 Flood Hazard Areas
105.1.1 Annual Permit
105.1.2 Annual Permit Records
105.2 Work Exempt From Permit
Under Building Subsection, Item numbers 1, 2, 9, and 10
105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application
105.5 Expiration
105.7 Placement of Permit
110.3.5 Lath and Gypsum Board Inspection
111.2 Certificate Issued
Item number 10
1013.5 Internally Illuminated Exit Signs
1013.6 Externally Illuminated Exit Signs and Subsections
Delete Chp 13 Energy Efficiency
Delete Chp 28 Mechanical Systems
Delete Chp 29 Plumbing Systems
B. IRC sections:
R103.3 Deputies
R104.5 Identification
R105.2 Work Exempt from Permit
Under Building Subsection, Item numbers 1, 2, 7, and 10
R105.3 Application for Permit
Item number 5
R105.3.2 Time Limit of Application
R105.5 Expiration
R105.7 Placement of Permit
Delete Chp 11 Energy Efficiency
Delete Chp 25 - Section 2903, Section 2905 - Chp 33 Plumbing
Delete Chp 34 - 42 Electrical, Swimming Pools
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-13: AMENDMENTS TO ADMINISTRATION:
The paragraphs in this section represent amendments to the requirements contained in the IBC and IRC. Those section numbers preceded by "R"
represent sections contained in the IRC; those section numbers without an "R" represent sections contained in the IBC.
Sections 103.1, R103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency: Delete section and add the following in lieu thereof:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 272/439
The code enforcement agency created to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall be known and referred to as the community development
department. For purposes of this chapter, the department of building safety shall also be known and referred to as the community development
department. The building official in charge thereof shall be known as the Construction Services Administrator.
Sections 103.2, R103.2 Appointment: Delete section and add the following in lieu thereof:
The Construction Services Administrator shall be appointed by the Community Development Director.
Section 105.2 Work Exempt from Permit, Under Building Subsection: Delete item number 6 and add the following in lieu thereof:
Private sidewalks and driveways
Section R105.2 Work Exempt from Permit, Under Building Subsection: Delete item number 5 and add the following in lieu thereof:
Private sidewalks and driveways.
Sections 111.2, R110.3: Add the following new to form sections 111.2.1 and R110.3.1 Certificate Issued:
On all permitted construction or activity, the site improvements, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, driveways and approaches, seeding, sod,
trees, screening of rooftop mechanical units, and any other site plan requirements are to be installed before a final certificate of occupancy is
issued.
Sections 111.3, R110.4 Temporary Occupancy: Add the following sentence after the second sentence:
Prior to the issuance of a temporary occupancy certificate, the permit holder shall file a temporary occupancy permit application on forms
provided by the Community Development Department. If the temporary occupancy permit application is accepted, a temporary occupancy
certificate may be issued subject to the execution of an agreement to complete and security bond. A permanent certificate of occupancy will be
issued upon completion of all outstanding improvements listed within the agreement to complete.
Sections 113.1, R112.1 add the following new to form sections 113.1.1 and R112.1.1 Granting of Hearing:
Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator may request, and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as
described in title 2, chapter 2 of this code of ordinances.
Section 114.4, R113.4 Violation Penalties: Delete section and insert the following in lieu thereof:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in
title 1, chapter 4, article A of the city code of ordinances. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the
city seeks court intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the city may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and
additional costs. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy
violations.
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-14:AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE:
Table R301.2 (1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria: Insert the following table:
Ground
Snow
Load
Wind Design
Seismic
Design
Category
Subject To Damage From
Winter
Design
Temp.
Ice Barrier
Underlayment
Required
Flood
Hazard
Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Temp.
Speed
Topographic
Effects
Weathering
Frost
Line
Depth Termite
Ice Barrier
Required
NFIP
Adoption
30 psf 90 No A Severe 42" Moderate
0°F Yes 1992 1833 48.6
Section R302.1 Exterior walls: Delete exceptions 3 and 4. Add the following exception:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 273/439
Accessory buildings and garages and their associated projections, openings, and penetrations shall be subject to the separation requirements as
listed in tables R302.1 (1) and R302.1 (2).
Table R302.6 Dwelling/Garage Separation: Delete the table and insert the table below:
Separation Material
From the residence & attics 5/8-inch type X gypsum board or equivalent - applied to the
garage side
From all habitable rooms above the garage 5/8-inch type X gypsum board or equivalent
Structure(s) supporting floor/ceiling assemblies used for separation required by
this section
5/8-inch type X gypsum board or equivalent
Section R302.13 Fire Protection of Floors: Delete section R302.13, exception #4 and insert in lieu thereof the following new exception:
4. Approved floor assemblies demonstrating equivalent fire performance as determined by the building official.
Section R303.3 Bathrooms: Delete section R303.3 and insert in lieu thereof the following new section:
R303.3 Bathrooms. Bathrooms, water closet compartments and similar rooms shall be provided with natural or artificial light and be provided with
a mechanical ventilation system. The minimum ventilation rates shall be 50 cubic feet per minute (24 L/s) for intermittent ventilation or 20 cubic
feet per minute (10 L/s) for continuous ventilation. Ventilation air from the space shall be exhausted directly to the outside.
Section R310.1 Emergency Escape and Rescue Required: Delete the words "habitable attics" from the first sentence and replace it with "habitable
stories above and below grade".
Section R310.1 Emergency Escape and Rescue Required: Add the following exception:
Habitable stories below the base flood elevation within flood hazard areas as determined by the city's floodplain manager.
Section R310.1.1 Operational Constraints and Opening Control Devices: Add the following sentence:
Removal of a window sash to gain a larger clear opening size is not permitted.
Section R310.2.2 Egress Window Sill Height: Add the following exception:
1. A landing may be provided to meet the maximum sill height of forty-four (44) inches above the floor or landing provided. The landing shall be
not less than thirty-six (36) inches wide, not less than twelve (12) inches out from the exterior wall, and not more than twenty-four (24) inches in
height. The landing shall be permanently affixed to the floor below or the wall under the window it serves.
Section R311.3 Landings at Doors: Add the following sub-sections:
Section R311.3.4 Frost Protection of Landings
Exterior landings at doors shall be provided with frost protection per table 301.2(1).
Section R311.7.5.1 Risers: Add the following exception:
3. The dimension of the top and bottom riser of a stair may vary up to 1-inch (25.4mm) from the stairway riser dimension. In no case shall the
riser height exceed the maximum height of 73/4 inches.
Section R311.7.8.2 Continuity: Add the following exception:
3. Handrails within a dwelling unit shall be permitted to be interrupted at one location in a straight stair. The rail may terminate into a wall or
ledge. The extension of rail after the termination shall immediately continue.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 274/439
Section R313.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems: Delete section R313.1 and insert in lieu thereof the following new section:
R313.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler System. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses.
Exceptions:
1. Townhouse structures that contain eight (8) or less dwelling units.
2. Townhouse structures less than eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet of floor space. The calculation of square footage is inclusive of any
attached garages and exclusive of any unenclosed spaces.
Section R313.2 One- and Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Systems: Delete sections R313.2 and insert in lieu thereof the following new section:
R313.2 One and Two Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in oneand
two-family dwellings.
Exceptions:
1. One- and two-family dwellings containing less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet of floor space. The calculation of square footage is
inclusive of attached garages and exclusive of any unenclosed areas.
Section R314.3: Smoke Alarm Location: Add the following:
2. Immediate vicinity shall mean within twenty-five (25) feet of the sleeping room door.
4. Theater rooms, flex rooms over seventy (70) square feet with a closet and door, exercise, and mechanical rooms.
Section R322.1 Flood Resistant Construction: Add the following exception:
Exception 1. Buildings and structures constructed in whole or in part in flood hazard areas and substantial improvements and restoration of
substantial damage of buildings and structures in flood hazard areas shall be regulated in accordance with chapters 11A, 11B, and 11C of the
zoning ordinance.
Section R322.1.3 Flood-Resistant Construction: Add the following sub-section:
Section R322.1.3.1 Minimum Protection Elevation
When an engineer has designed a minimum protection elevation for a given lot within or not within a flood hazard area, the lowest building
opening(s) shall be placed above this elevation. An elevation survey shall be completed by the owner/builder of said lot and the as built drawing
shall be submitted to the city for review and for record keeping purposes.
Exception: Basement window openings may be placed below the minimum protection elevation, provided that a waterproofed, concrete
window well is installed to an elevation that meets or exceeds the prescribed minimum protection elevation. The concrete window well shall
have standard building footings for support and shall match the foundation wall for thickness and design. The window well shall be poured with
the basement wall to create a seamless transition and the outside surface of the window well shall be waterproofed to the same extent as the
foundation walls.
Add section R401.5 As built Foundation Survey
Any foundation, which supports roof loads, that is closer than one (1) foot from a required setback line or easement line, shall be surveyed in
place. An as built drawing shall be submitted to the city for review and for record keeping purposes.
Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection: Delete Exceptions 1, 2 and 3 and insert the following in lieu thereof:
1. Protection of freestanding accessory buildings with an area of 400 square feet and under of light-framed construction and with an eave height
of 10 feet or less shall not be required to have frost footings under a 4 inch concrete slab.
2. Protection of freestanding accessory buildings with an area of 400 square feet and under of other than light-framed construction and with an
eave height of 10 feet or less shall have reinforced 12 inch by 12 inch thickened edge footings below a 4 inch concrete slab. All vegetation and/or
debris shall be removed and the area under the slab shall be provided with a minimum of 3 inches of compacted aggregate backfill.
3. Protection of freestanding accessory buildings with an area of 401 to 600 square feet of light-framed construction and with an eave height of
10 feet or less shall have reinforced 12 inch by 12 inch thickened edge footing below a 4 inch concrete slab. All vegetation and/or debris shall be
removed and the area under the slab shall be provided with a minimum of 3 inches of compacted aggregate backfill.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 275/439
4. Protection of freestanding accessory buildings over 600 square feet shall meet the requirement of Table 301.2(1)
5. Decks not supported by a dwelling or accessed from a dwelling need not be provided with footings that extend below the frost line.
Section R403.1.1 Minimum Size: Amend this section by adding a new sentence following this section:
The minimum width for all footings shall be 16 inches.
Section R404.1.1 Design required: Add the following subsection:
Section R404.1.1.1 Cast-In-Place Concrete Foundation Walls Exceeding Eight Feet To A Maximum Of Ten Feet Tall
Cast-in-place concrete foundation walls shall be of concrete having a minimum compressive strength of three thousand pounds (3,000) per
square inch at 28 days. All materials, proportioning, and placing shall conform to the requirements of chapter 19 of the IBC. In addition:
1. The minimum thickness of the wall shall be eight (8) inches.
2. The reinforcing steel shall be a minimum of ASTM grade 40.
3. The minimum vertical reinforcement shall be #4 bars spaced at 20 inches on center or #5 bars spaced at 30 inches on center.
4. The minimum horizontal reinforcement shall be #4 bars spaced 24 inches on center, spaced a minimum of three inches from the bottom of
the wall.
5. All wall reinforcement shall be located in the area from the center of the wall towards the inner face of the wall, with the minimum clearance
being two inches from the inner face of the wall.
6. All reinforcement bar splices shall be lapped a minimum twenty (20) times the bar diameter.
7. Bars shall bend around corners, and the minimum bend radius is six (6) times the diameter of the bar.
8. Reinforcement around window and door openings shall comply with the requirements IBC Chapter 19.
9. Foundation drainage shall be provided. 12 inches of granular fill shall extend above the drainage pipe.
10. The wood sole plate shall be anchored to the top of the wall with a minimum of 1/2 inch anchor bolts spaced a maximum of six feet on
center. When the floor joists are parallel to the wall, solid blocking between the rim joist and the adjoining joist shall be provided, spaced at a
maximum of six feet on center. Approved anchors shall be provided, spaced a maximum of six (6) feet on center. Anchor bolts, solid blocking,
and anchors shall be placed in close proximity to each other.
Section R405.2.3 Drainage System: Delete the last sentence and insert the following in lieu thereof:
The sump pump shall discharge to the provided storm sewer service line provided at the right of way or within an easement. Storm water shall
not discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Alternate discharge may be approved if a storm sewer service has not been provided to the
property.
Section R905.1.2 Ice Barriers: Amend this section by adding the following exception:
Exception:
2. The building is constructed with the following components:
a. A raised heel truss or similar design, and
b. A minimum of R-38 attic insulation extends across the top plate to a point aligning with the exterior sheathing, and
c. The plans for the alternative design described in this section are submitted and approved at the time the building permit is issued.
Section M1601.4 Installations: Add the following subsection:
Section M1601.4.11 Air Plenum and Duct Separation:
Air plenums and ducts located in the floor and wall cavities shall be separated from unconditioned spaces by construction with sufficient
insulation to meet energy code requirements. The areas include but are not limited to exterior walls, cantilevered floors, and floors above
garages.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 276/439
Section P2904: Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems
Adopt this section in full as a supplement to NFPA 13D. All sprinkler systems shall be installed per the Fire Departments requirements and
adoptions.
Appendix M of the IRC: Home Day Care - R-3 Occupancy is hereby adopted in full.
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-15: AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE:
Section 308.6.4 Five or Fewer Persons Receiving Care in a Dwelling Unit: Delete section 308.6.4 and insert in lieu thereof the following new section:
Section 308.6.4 Eight or Fewer Persons Receiving Care in a Dwelling Unit. A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having eight or
fewer persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the International Residential Code.
Section 310.5 Residential Group R-3: Delete section 310.5 and insert in lieu thereof the following section:
Section 310.5 Residential Group R-3. Residential Group R-3 occupancies where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature and not
classified as Group R-1, R-2, R-4 or I, Including:
Buildings that do not contain more than two dwelling units.
Boarding houses (nontransient) with 16 or fewer occupants.
Boarding houses (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants.
Care facilities as identified in sections 308.3.4 or 308.4.2 that provide accommodations for five or fewer persons receiving care.
Day care facilities as identified in section 308.6.4 located within single family dwellings with 8 or fewer persons receiving custodial care.
Congregate living facilities (nontransient) with 16 or fewer occupants.
Congregate living facilities (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants.
Lodging houses with five or fewer guest rooms.
Section 310.5.1 Care Facilities within a Dwelling: Delete section 310.5.1 and insert in lieu thereof the following section and subsections:
Section 310.5.1 Care Facilities within a Dwelling. Care facilities that are located within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the
International Residential Code in accordance with this section.
Subsection 310.5.1.1 24-Hour Care Facilities within a Dwelling. Care facilities as identified in sections 308.3.4 or 308.4.2 that provide
accommodations for 5 or fewer persons receiving custodial care in a single-family dwelling for 24-hours per day are permitted to comply with
the International Residential Code provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.3 or section P2904 of
the International Residential Code.
Subsection 310.5.1.2 Day Care Facilities within a Dwelling. Day care facilities as identified in section 308.6.4 that provide custodial care for 8
or fewer persons for less than 24-hours per day in a single-family dwelling, are permitted to comply with the International Residential Code.
Exception: Day care facilities as identified in section 308.6.4 that provide custodial care for 16 or fewer persons for less than 24-hours per
day in a single-family dwelling, and are registered with the State of Iowa Department of Human Services as child development homes on or
before January 1, 2017, are permitted to comply with the International Residential Code.
Section 403.3.2 Water Supply to Required Fire Pumps. Delete section 403.3.2 and insert in lieu thereof the following section.
Section 403.3.2 Water Supply to Required Fire Pumps. Required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to a minimum of two water mains
located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each
connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps
to operate.
Exception: Two connections to the same main shall be permitted provided the main is valved such that an interruption can be isolated so that
the water supply will continue without interruption through at least one of the connections.
Section 423.3 Critical Emergency Operations: Amend this section by adding the following exception:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 277/439
2. Existing critical emergency operation buildings undergoing alterations, additions, or construction of new accessory buildings.
Section 423.4 Group E Occupancies: Amend this section by adding the following exception:
4. Existing schools undergoing alterations, additions, or construction of new accessory buildings.
Section 901 General: Add the following section:
Section 901.9 Fire Sprinkler Riser Room. A fire sprinkler riser room shall be separated from the electrical room. The riser room shall have no
electrical panels, devices or apparatus inside the room other than the outlets or support equipment (lighting, air compressor, and heater) required
for the use of the fire sprinkler system and/or fire alarm panel. The sprinkler riser room shall not be accessed from the electrical room, but the
electrical room may be accessed from the fire riser room.
Section 903.2 Automatic Sprinkler Systems: Where Required. Add the following language:
Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided as required per the local Fire Code.
Section 903.2.11.1.3 Basements. Delete section 903.2.11.1.3 and insert in lieu thereof the following section.
Section 903.2.11.1.3 Basements. Where any portion of a basement is located more than 75 feet from openings required by section 903.2.11.1,
the basement shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
Section 903.4.2 Alarms. Delete section 903.4.2 and insert in lieu thereof the following section.
903.4.2 Alarms. An approved weather proof audible device suitable for outdoor use with 110 candela visual signal shall be connected to every
automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of
the smallest orifice sized installed in the system. Alarm devices shall be provided on the exterior of the building in an approved location. Where a
fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system.
Section 905.3 Required Installations: Add the following section.
905.3.9 Building Footprint and Access. Where the most remote portion of a floor or story is more than 400 feet from a hose connection or fire
department access road, the fire code official is authorized to require standpipes to be provided in approved locations. Class I manual standpipes
shall be allowed.
Section 907 Fire Alarm and Detection Systems: Where required-new buildings and structures. Add the following language.
Approved fire alarm and detection systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided as required per the local Fire Code.
Section 907 Fire Alarm and Detection Systems: Insert the following new section:
Section 907.1.4 Fire Alarm Control Panels (FACP). Each building shall have no more than one Fire Alarm Control Panel. Installation of fire alarm
control panel shall not exceed six feet in height measured from the floor to the top of the control panel.
Exception: Suppression system releasing panels are not required to meet the height requirement or the limitation in the number of panels.
Section 907.6.6 Monitoring. Delete section 907.6.6 and insert in lieu thereof the following new section:
Section 907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this chapter or by the International Fire Code shall be monitored by a central station
approved and listed under UL 827 in accordance with NFPA 72.
Exception: Monitoring is not required for automatic sprinkler and fire alarm systems in one- and two-family dwellings.
Section 910.2.1 Group F-1 or S-1. Delete section 910.2.1 and insert in lieu thereof the following new section:
Section 910.2.1 Group F-1 or S-1. Smoke and heat vents installed in accordance with section 910.3 or a mechanical smoke removal system
installed in accordance with section 910.4 shall be installed in buildings and portions thereof used as a Group F-1 or S-1 occupancy having more
than 30,000 square feet of undivided area. In occupied portions of a building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with 903.3.1.1, where the upper surface of the story is not a roof assembly, a mechanical smoke removal system in accordance with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 278/439
section 910.4 shall be installed.
Exception: Group S-1 aircraft repair hangers.
Section 1008.3.1 General. Delete section 1008.3.1 and insert in lieu thereof the following new section:
Section 1008.3.1 General. In the event of the power supply failure in rooms and spaces 400 square feet or greater, and emergency electrical
system shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
1. Aisles
2. Corridors
3. Exit access stairways and ramps
Section 1008.3.2 Buildings. Delete section 1008.3.2 and insert in lieu thereof the following new section:
Section 1008.3.2 Buildings. In the event of the power supply failure in rooms and spaces 400 square feet or greater, an emergency electrical
system shall automatically illuminate all the following areas:
1. Interior exit access stairways and ramps.
2. Interior and exterior exit stairways and ramps.
3. Exit passageways.
4. Vestibules and areas on the level of exit discharge used for exit discharge in accordance with section 1028.1.
5. Exterior landings as required by section 1010.6 for exit doorways that lead directly to exit discharge.
Section 1008.3.3 Rooms and Spaces. Replace item #5 with the following:
5. Restrooms containing more than one water closet/urinal or that are accessible.
Section 1009.2 Continuity and Components. Add the following to this section:
11. Components of exterior walking surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or other approved hard surface.
Section 1010.1.6 Landings at Doors: Add the following sub-sections:
Section 1010.1.6.1 Frost Protection of Landings
Exterior landings at doors shall be provided with frost protection.
Section 1013.1 Where Required. Add the following subsection:
Section 1013.1.1 Additional Exit Signs. Exit signs may be required at the discretion of the building official to clarify an exit or exit access.
Section 1013.3 Illumination. Delete section 1013.3 and insert in lieu thereof the following new section:
Section 1013.3 Exit Sign Illumination. Exit signs shall use a Light Emitting Diode (LED) lighting system and be illuminated internally. Exit signs
are required to have battery backup unless an onsite generator is used. Luminance on the face of an exit sign shall have an intensity of not less
than 5 foot-candles.
Exception: Tactile signs required by section 1013.4 need not be provided with illumination.
Section 1028.5 Access to Public Way. Add subsection 1028.5.1 Exterior Walking Surfaces:
Section 1028.5.1 Exterior Walking Surfaces. Components of exterior walking surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or other approved hard
surfaces.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 279/439
Section 1030.5 Window Wells: Add the following subsection:
1030.5.3 Window Well Drainage
All window wells shall be designed for proper drainage by connecting to the perimeter foundation drainage system or another approved
alternate means. The drainage system shall connect to a sump pit that contains a pump that will discharge the drainage to a storm sewer.
Storm water shall not discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Alternate discharge may be approved if a storm sewer service has not been
provided to the property.
Section 1608.2 Ground Snow Loads: Delete section and insert the following in lieu thereof:
The ground snow load to be used in determining the design snow load for roofs is hereby established at 30 pounds per square foot. Subsequent
increases or decreases shall be allowed as otherwise provided in the building code, except that the minimum allowable flat roof snow load may
be reduced to not less than 80 percent of the ground snow load.
Section 1612.1 General: Delete section and insert the following in lieu thereof:
See Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 11, of the City Code.
Section 1809.5 Frost Protection: Delete Exceptions 1, 2 and 3 and insert the following in lieu thereof:
1. Protection of freestanding accessory buildings with an area of 400 square feet and under of light-framed construction and with an eave height
of 10 feet or less shall not be required to have frost footings under a 4 inch concrete slab.
2. Protection of freestanding accessory buildings with an area of 400 square feet and under of other than light-framed construction and with an
eave height of 10 feet or less shall have reinforced 12 inch by 12 inch thickened edge footings below a 4 inch concrete slab. All vegetation and/or
debris shall be removed and the area under the slab shall be provided with a minimum of 3 inches of compacted aggregate backfill.
3. Protection of freestanding accessory buildings with an area of 401 to 600 square feet of light-framed construction and with an eave height of
10 feet or less shall have reinforced 12 inch by 12 inch thickened edge footing below a 4 inch concrete slab. All vegetation and/or debris shall be
removed and the area under the slab shall be provided with a minimum of 3 inches of compacted aggregate backfill.
4. Protection of freestanding accessory buildings over 600 square feet shall meet the requirement of Table 301.2(1)
5. Decks not supported by a dwelling or accessed from a dwelling need not be provided with footings that extend below the frost line.
Appendix E of the IBC: Supplementary Accessibility Requirement is hereby adopted in full.
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-16: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the Building Code adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a provision of the Code of Iowa
or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or Code of the City of Clive, Iowa, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-17: SITE MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be the permit holder's responsibility to inspect the construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of excess debris.
In no case shall debris, refuse, and/or junk be permitted to blow, drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
B. Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction project. Erosion
control shall be managed in accordance with chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-18: STREET PROTECTION:
No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials or performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-1-19: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a Municipal infraction as set forth in title 1,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 280/439
chapter 4, article A of this Code of ordinances. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks
court intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-
2017)
10-1-20: APPEALS:
Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as
described in title 2, chapter 2 of this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
Chapter 2
ELECTRICAL CODE
10-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CLIVE ELECTRICAL CODE, and may be cited as such and may also be known, referred to and cited as the
"Electrical Code". (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders, contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their responsibilities with
respect to proper electrical installation, material selection, installation methods, and premises safety, and to provide for inspection as a means of
compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers, agents, or employees,
owing to any individual member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this
chapter to create any duty or liability by the City, its officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person. (Ord.
1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-3: WARNING:
No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed, or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of
or quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in
the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in
any way constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-4: INTERPRETATION:
The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the National
Electrical Code, adopted herein. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-5: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to State published notice and public hearing, as required by State law, the National Electrical Code (NEC), published by the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA 70), year and edition as amended and adopted by the State of Iowa Electrical Board, is adopted in full and shall
constitute the "Electrical Code of the City of Clive, Iowa". The use of the term "Electrical Code" in this chapter shall be interpreted to refer to the
National Electrical Code (NEC), year and edition as adopted by the State of Iowa. An official copy of the National Electrical Code, as adopted, and a
certified copy of this chapter, can be viewed in the Community Development Department. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-6: SCOPE:
This Code shall regulate the design, installation, maintenance, alteration, and inspection of electrical systems. The provisions of this Electrical Code
shall apply to:
A. New Construction:
1. Public or private electrical installations as governed by the National Electrical Code.
B. Existing Buildings:
1. Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing electrical if covered by this Electrical Code. The Construction Services Administrator may,
when such additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable additions or alterations to the electrical on a premises when a
danger to life or property may result if such other additions or alterations were not made.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 281/439
2. Installations, which were in compliance with the Electrical Code in existence at the time such installations were made, shall be presumed to be
safe and proper, which presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the installation may be dangerous to life or property. Any of the provisions
required by the "Electrical Update Code" shall take precedence over this section of Code.
3. If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change in occupancy, the electrical in the entire building shall comply with all the
electrical standards applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy of a building has been changed to a mixed occupancy, with the required
fire separation between the mixed occupancy, each occupancy shall comply with its own particular classification and shall be wired in compliance
with the electrical standards of its particular classification. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
The applicant for any permit under this Code, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever,
and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection
with or related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants
of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the City; and such applicant, by making such
application, forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of
the City, its officers or employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued
under this Code whether expressly recited therein or not. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES:
A. Required: Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, install, add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any electrical system or part thereof,
of which is regulated by this Electrical Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall not do so without first securing a permit from the
Community Development Department.
Exceptions:
1. Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
2. Replacement of one hundred twenty (120) volt lighting fixtures, receptacles, or switches.
3. Single phase overcurrent protection devices of the same capacity and location.
4. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than twenty five (25) volts and not capable of supplying more
than fifty (50) watts of energy.
B. Issuance: After proper application on forms provided by the Community Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the
property owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the Iowa Division of Labor Services, according to their rules and standards. The property
owner or authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not
transferable. No permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any
ordinance of the City.
C. Fees: There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved from time to time by the City Council. Fees on all buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or
nonprofit organization may be waived by the City Council. No fees shall be collected on buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
D. Expiration:
1. Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of sixty (60) days. Before such work can be commenced, a new permit shall be
first obtained, and a fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) of the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one hundred twenty (120) days.
2. All permits shall expire after three hundred sixty five (365) days unless an extension is requested in writing to the Construction Services
Administrator fourteen (14) days prior to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may refuse any extension, but shall
do so in writing within seven (7) days of receipt of the extension request.
3. In addition, anytime work is suspended or abandoned for more than ten (10) days, the permit shall expire due to neglect if the site is not properly
secured, including:
a. Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
b. A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
c. Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be given
to proximity of the construction site, as described in chapter 11 of this title.
E. Revocation: Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the
violation of any provision of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 282/439
F. Outstanding Permits: If a permit is outstanding on the effective date hereof, the provisions of this chapter and the National Electrical Code, adopted
hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to the extent that the Construction Services Administrator shall determine that the
application of such provisions to said work would be unreasonable. The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the
unreasonableness of such provisions.
G. Work Without Permit: If any repairs, additions, alterations, conversions, or demolitions to any electrical system, which is regulated by this Code, the
work having been completed without first obtaining a permit, the owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has been completed in
accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction Services Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special inspection
necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with the applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an approved
electrical inspector who is qualified and/or licensed to inspect work similar to that which is being performed. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-9: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall engage or represent himself or herself to the public as engaging in the activity or business of
installing, altering, or repairing any electrical systems or apparatus for which permits are required by this Electrical Code unless such person shall
have first obtained from the State of Iowa, Department of Public Safety, State Fire Marshal Division, an electrical contractor's license, as provided for in
chapter 100C of the State Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-10: INSTALLATION BY OWNER:
Homeowners (owner/occupant) who qualify for the Homestead Tax exemption may acquire permits for their principal residence (not apartment) and
appurtenant accessory structures for remodel electrical work if such residence is an existing dwelling rather than new construction, and is not larger
than a single family dwelling. The installation of service conductors, service disconnects, service grounding, and panel boards shall not be allowed
under this provision. The Construction Services Administrator may require the homeowner to pass an electrical exam as he or she sees fit. (Ord. 1039,
6-22-2017)
10-2-11: CONNECTION TO SYSTEM:
It is unlawful for any person(s) to generate or distribute electrical current for private use or commercial use within the City without first acquiring proper
permits and inspections. Permission shall also be granted by the utility provider if such current is back fed to the commercial grid. Documentation of
the utility provider's approval shall be provided to the Construction Services Administrator before any inspections are conducted. Any person violating
the provisions of this section shall, upon written notice from the Construction Services Administrator, immediately remove such connection and cut off
such current. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-12: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
For the purposes of this Code the Construction Services Administrator may also be referred to as the building official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction
Services Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise
discharging his/her official duties, the Construction Services Administrator or an appointed assistant or agent shall have the right to enter at any time
any building, area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of
the Construction Services Administrator, any electrical is suspected of being or found to be defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the
premises shall be in such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers, or the general public, the Construction Services
Administrator shall at once order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-13: INSPECTION:
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal or cause to be covered or concealed any electrical wiring or electrical
apparatus for which a permit has been issued, until such wiring or electrical apparatus has been inspected and approved as required by this Code.
The Construction Services Administrator shall have authority to remove or cause the removal of any obstructions which may prevent the proper
inspection of the electrical wiring or electrical apparatus. Upon the completion of any wiring or electrical installation in any building, it shall be the duty
of the company, firm or individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services Administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt of such
notice for conformance to the provisions of this Code. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless all the electrical installations are in
conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-14: STOP WORK ORDER:
A. Authority: Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to
the provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
B. Issuance: The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 283/439
C. Unlawful Continuance: Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premises shall be limited to the removal or correction of the violation or unsafe condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-15: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the Electrical Code adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a provision of the Code of Iowa
or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or Code of the City of Clive, Iowa, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-16: SITE MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be the permit holder's responsibility to inspect the construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of excess debris.
In no case shall debris, refuse, and/or junk be permitted to blow, drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
B. Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction project. Erosion
control shall be managed in accordance with chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-17: STREET PROTECTION:
No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials or performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-2-18: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a Municipal infraction as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this Code of ordinances. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks
court intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-
2017)
10-2-19: APPEALS:
Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as
described in title 2, chapter 2 of this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
Chapter 2A
ELECTRICAL UPDATE CODE
10-2A-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CLIVE ELECTRICAL UPDATE CODE, and may be cited as such and may also be known, referred to and cited as
the "electrical update code". (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders, contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their responsibilities with
respect to proper electrical installation, material selection, installation methods, and premises safety, and to provide for inspection as a means of
compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the city, its officers, agents, or employees, owing
to any individual member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this chapter to
create any duty or liability by the city, its officers, agents, or employees, to premises' occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person. (Ord. 998, 1-8-
2015)
10-2A-3: WARNING:
No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed, or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of
or quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in
the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in
any way constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 284/439
10-2A-4: INTERPRETATION:
The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the national
electrical code, 2011 edition, adopted herein. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-5: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the national electrical code (NEC), 2011 edition, published by the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA 70) and the code provisions herein, are adopted in full except for such portions of the 2011 national electrical code as
may be hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, and shall constitute the "electrical update code of the city of Clive, Iowa". An official copy of the
national electrical code, 2011 edition, as adopted, and a certified copy of this chapter, can be viewed in the community development department. (Ord.
998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-6: SCOPE:
The provisions of this code shall apply to existing buildings when:
A. A new electrical service replaces an existing electrical service.
B. A one hundred (100) amp or greater subpanel is installed on an existing electrical service.
C. The code official, upon substantial evidence, determines the existing service is, or existing installations are, unsafe and pose(s) a risk to property or
life.
D. If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change in occupancy, the electrical system in the entire building shall comply with all
the electrical standards applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy of a building has been changed to a mixed occupancy, with the
required fire separation between the mixed occupancy, each occupancy shall comply with its own particular classification and shall be wired in
compliance with the electrical standards of its particular classification. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
The applicant for any permit under this code, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever,
and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection
with or related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants
of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this code or any other ordinance of the city; and such applicant, by making such
application, forever indemnifies the city, its officers and employees and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of
the city, its officers or employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued
under this code whether expressly recited therein or not. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES:
A. Required: Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, install, add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any electrical system or part thereof,
which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall not do so without first securing a permit from the community
development department.
Exceptions:
1. Listed cord and plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
2. Replacement of one hundred twenty (120) volt lighting fixtures, receptacles, or switches.
3. Single phase overcurrent protection devices of the same capacity and location.
4. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than twenty five (25) volts and not capable of supplying more
than fifty (50) watts of energy.
B. Issuance: After proper application on forms provided by the community development department, permits shall be issued in the name of the
property owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the Iowa division of labor services, according to their rules and standards. The property
owner or authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not
transferable. No permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any
ordinance of the city.
C. Fees: There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved from time to time by the city council. Fees on all buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or
nonprofit organization may be waived by the city council. No fees shall be collected on buildings or structures constructed by or for the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 285/439
D. Expiration:
1. Every permit issued under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit is
not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of sixty (60) days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall
be first obtained, and a fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) of the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided that such suspension
or abandonment has not exceeded one hundred twenty (120) days.
2. All permits shall expire after three hundred sixty five (365) days unless an extension is requested in writing to the construction services
administrator fourteen (14) days prior to expiration of said permit. The construction services administrator may refuse any extension, but shall do
so in writing within seven (7) days of receipt of the extension request.
3. In addition, any time work is suspended or abandoned for more than ten (10) days, the permit shall expire due to neglect if the site is not
properly secured, including:
a. Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that make the area unsightly and create a public nuisance.
b. A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
c. Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be given
to proximity of the construction site, as described in chapter 11 of this title.
E. Revocation: Any permit required by the provisions of this code may be summarily revoked by the construction services administrator upon the
violation of any provision of this code.
F. Outstanding Permits: If a permit is outstanding on the effective date hereof, the provisions of this chapter and the national electrical code, 2011
edition, adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to the extent that the construction services administrator shall
determine that the application of such provisions to said work would be unreasonable. The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show
the unreasonableness of such provisions.
G. Work Without Permit: If any repairs, additions, alterations, conversions, or demolitions to any electrical system, which is regulated by this code, the
work having been completed without first obtaining a permit, the owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has been completed in
accordance with the applicable codes. The construction services administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special inspection necessary
to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with the applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an approved electrical
inspector who is qualified and/or licensed to inspect work similar to that which is being performed. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-9: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall engage or represent himself or herself to the public as engaging in the activity or business of
installing, altering, or repairing any electrical systems or apparatus for which permits are required by this code unless such person shall have first
obtained from the state of Iowa, department of public safety, state fire marshal division, an electrical contractor's license, as provided for in chapter
100C of the state code. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-10: INSTALLATION BY OWNER:
Homeowners (owner/occupant) who qualify for the homestead tax exemption may acquire permits for their principal residence (not apartment) and
appurtenant accessory structures for electrical work if such residence is an existing dwelling rather than new construction, and is not larger than a
single-family dwelling. The installation of service conductors, service disconnects, service grounding, and panelboards shall not be allowed under this
provision. The construction services administrator may require the homeowner to pass an electrical exam as he or she sees fit. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-11: CONNECTION TO SYSTEM:
It is unlawful for any person(s) to generate or distribute electrical current for private use or commercial use within the city without first acquiring proper
permits and inspections. Permission shall also be granted by the utility provider if such current is back fed to the commercial grid. This permission shall
be available to the construction services administrator before any inspections are conducted. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall,
upon written notice from the construction services administrator, immediately remove such connection and cut off such current. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-12: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
For the purposes of this code the construction services administrator may also be referred to as the building official. It shall be the duty of the
construction services administrator, appointed under provisions of the community development director, to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons may be appointed as assistants or agents of the construction services
administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise discharging
his/her official duties, the construction services administrator or an appointed assistant or agent shall have the right to enter at any time any building,
area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of the
construction services administrator, any electrical is suspected of being or found to be defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the
premises shall be in such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers, or the general public, the construction services
administrator shall at once order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 286/439
10-2A-13: INSPECTION:
Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person shall cover or conceal or cause to be covered or concealed any electrical wiring or electrical
apparatus for which a permit has been issued, until such wiring or electrical apparatus has been inspected and approved as required by this code. The
construction services administrator shall have authority to remove or cause the removal of any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection
of the electrical wiring or electrical apparatus. Upon the completion of any wiring or electrical installation in any building, it shall be the duty of the
company, firm or individual doing the same to notify the construction services administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt of such notice for
conformance to the provisions of this code. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless all the electrical installations are in conformity with the
rules and regulations set forth in this code. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-14: STOP WORK ORDER:
A. Authority: Whenever the construction services administrator finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to
the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe, the construction services administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
B. Issuance: The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
C. Unlawful Continuance: Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premises shall be limited to the removal or correction of the violation or unsafe condition. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-15: CODE PROVISIONS:
The following provisions, along with the national electrical code, 2011 edition, as amended in chapter 2 of this title shall be applied for all updates for
residential dwellings:
A. Services:
1. A minimum of a one hundred (100) amp electrical service panel shall be provided.
2. The first point of disconnect shall be either on the exterior of the dwelling or immediately inside the exterior wall. For the purposes of this section
"immediately inside the exterior wall" shall mean the conductors shall not extend more than five feet (5') inside the dwelling.
B. Kitchens:
1. Kitchens shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) receptacle outlets.
2. Kitchens shall be provided with at least one electric luminaire.
3. All countertop receptacle outlets, including those installed in an island or peninsula, and receptacle outlets within six feet (6') of the outside edge
of a sink shall be ground fault circuit interceptor (GFCI) protected. If no equipment ground is available within these specific receptacle outlets, the
GFCI shall be labeled "No Equipment Ground".
C. Bathrooms:
1. A minimum of one ground fault circuit interrupter protected receptacle outlet shall be provided to serve the lavatory or lavatories. This shall not
be established through a lighting fixture with a convenience outlet attached.
2. Each bathroom shall be provided with at least one electric luminaire.
3. Lighting fixtures and exhaust fans installed above or within bathtub or shower areas shall be effectively ground fault circuit interrupter protected.
If no equipment ground is available within these specific outlets, the GFCI shall be labeled "No Equipment Ground".
4. All receptacles shall be ground fault circuit interrupter protected. If no equipment ground is available within these specific receptacle outlets, the
GFCI shall be labeled "No Equipment Ground".
D. Laundry Rooms:
1. A minimum of one 120-volt grounded or ground fault circuit interrupter protected receptacle outlet shall be provided within the laundry room. If no
equipment ground is available within this specific receptacle outlet, the GFCI shall be labeled "No Equipment Ground".
2. All receptacle outlets within six feet (6') of a sink basin shall be ground fault circuit interrupter protected. If no equipment ground is available
within these specific outlets, the GFCI shall be labeled "No Equipment Ground".
E. Bedrooms And Other Habitable Rooms:
1. All bedrooms and habitable rooms shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) receptacle outlets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 287/439
2. All bedrooms and habitable rooms shall be provided with an electric luminaire.
3. All one hundred twenty (120) volt receptacle and lighting outlets within bedrooms shall be protected by an appropriate arc fault protected device
as required by the national electrical code.
F. Unfinished Basements:
1. Any deficient wiring identified as a hazard shall be corrected.
2. A minimum of one ground fault circuit interrupter protected receptacle shall be provided.
3. All receptacle outlets shall be ground fault circuit interrupter protected. If no equipment ground is available within these specific receptacle
outlets, the GFCI shall be labeled "No Equipment Ground".
4. Basements and areas around equipment shall be provided with an electric luminaire.
G. Attics:
1. Any identified deficient wiring shall be corrected. Wiring, boxes, and outlets will not be required to have the attic insulation removed during the
update process. It is assumed the old wiring covered by the insulation is compliant.
H. Exterior Receptacle Outlets And Lights:
1. All exterior receptacle outlets shall be ground fault circuit interrupter protected.
2. All exterior lighting fixtures shall be listed for exterior use.
I. Furnaces, A/C Units, And Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing (CSST):
1. There shall be a means to disconnect the furnace at the furnace or within the line of sight of the panelboard breaker controlling the furnace.
2. The A/C condenser or equipment shall have a disconnect within six feet (6') of the condenser or equipment.
3. The overcurrent protection device for the A/C condenser or equipment shall be sized according to the manufacturer nameplate rating.
4. Corrugated stainless steel tubing shall be bonded to the electrical grounding system or panelboard utilized by the existing electrical service. This
shall be done according to the tubing manufacturer recommendations.
J. Garages And Accessory Buildings:
1. All receptacle outlets installed in garages and accessory buildings shall be ground fault circuit interrupter protected. If no equipment ground is
available within these specific receptacle outlets, the GFCI shall be labeled "No Equipment Ground".
K. Smoke Detectors And Carbon Monoxide Detectors:
1. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in all locations required by the currently adopted version of the international
residential code and per the manufacturer specifications.
2. All new smoke detectors shall be dual sensor type detectors.
L. Knob And Tube Wiring:
1. If knob and tube wiring is identified within the residence, it shall be removed and replaced with code compliant wiring. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-16: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the electrical code adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a provision of the code of Iowa
or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the city of Clive, Iowa, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-17: SITE MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be the permit holder's responsibility to inspect the construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of excess debris.
In no case shall debris, refuse, and/or junk be permitted to blow, drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
B. Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction project. Erosion
control shall be managed in accordance with chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-18: STREET PROTECTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 288/439
No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials or performing services within the city shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
(Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-19: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this code. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the city seeks court intervention
for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the city may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-2A-20: APPEALS:
Any person affected by a decision of the construction services administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as described
in title 2, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
Chapter 3
PLUMBING CODE
10-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CLIVE PLUMBING CODE, and may be cited as such and may also be known, referred to and cited as the
"Plumbing Code". (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders, contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their responsibilities with
respect to proper plumbing installation, material selection, installation methods, and premises safety, and to provide for inspection as a means of
compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers, agents, or employees,
owing to any individual member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this
chapter to create any duty or liability by the City, its officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person. (Ord.
1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-3: WARNING:
No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed, or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of
or quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in
the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in
any way constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-4: INTERPRETATION:
The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the Uniform
Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted herein. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-5: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, published by the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is adopted in full except for such portions as may be hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, and
shall constitute the "Plumbing Code of the City of Clive, Iowa". The use of the term "Plumbing Code" in this chapter shall be interpreted to refer to the
Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 edition. An official copy of the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, as adopted, and a certified copy of this chapter
can be viewed in the Community Development Department. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-6: SCOPE:
This Code shall regulate the design, installation, maintenance, alteration, and inspection of plumbing systems. The provisions of this Plumbing Code
shall apply to:
A. New Construction:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 289/439
1. Public or private plumbing installations as governed by the Uniform Plumbing Code.
B. Existing Buildings:
1. Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing plumbing, if covered by this Plumbing Code. The Construction Services Administrator may,
when such additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable additions or alterations to the plumbing on a premises when a
danger to life or property may result if such other additions or alterations were not made.
2. Installations, which were in compliance with the Plumbing Code in existence at the time such installations were made, shall be presumed to be
safe and proper, which presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the installation may be dangerous to life or property.
3. If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change in occupancy, the plumbing in the entire building shall comply with all the
plumbing standards applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy of a building has been changed to a mixed occupancy, with the
required fire separation between the mixed occupancy, each occupancy shall comply with its own particular classification and shall be plumbed
in compliance with the plumbing standards of its particular classification. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
The applicant for any permit under this Code, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever,
and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection
with or related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants
of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the City; and such applicant, by making such
application, forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of
the City, its officers or employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued
under this Code whether expressly recited therein or not. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES:
A. Required: Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, install, add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any plumbing system or part thereof,
of which is regulated by this Plumbing Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall not do so without first securing a permit from the
Community Development Department.
B. Issuance: After proper application on forms provided by the Community Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the
property owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the Iowa Division of Labor Services, according to their rules and standards. The property
owner or authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not
transferable. No permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any
ordinance of the City.
C. Fees: There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved from time to time by the City Council. Fees on all buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or
nonprofit organization may be waived by the City Council. No fees shall be collected on buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
D. Expiration:
1. Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of sixty (60) days. Before such work can be commenced, a new permit shall be
first obtained, and a fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) of the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one hundred twenty (120) days.
2. All permits shall expire after three hundred sixty five (365) days unless an extension is requested in writing to the Construction Services
Administrator fourteen (14) days prior to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may refuse any extension, but shall
do so in writing within seven (7) days of receipt of the extension request.
3. In addition, anytime work is suspended or abandoned for more than ten (10) days, the permit shall expire due to neglect if the site is not properly
secured, including:
a. Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
b. A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
c. Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be given
to proximity of the construction site, as described in chapter 11 of this title.
E. Revocation: Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the
violation of any provision of this Code.
F. Outstanding Permits: If a permit is outstanding on the effective date hereof, the provisions of this chapter and the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015
edition, adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to the extent that the Construction Services Administrator shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 290/439
determine that the application of such provisions to said work would be unreasonable. The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show
the unreasonableness of such provisions.
G. Work Without Permit: If any repairs, additions, alterations, or demolitions to any building or portions of any plumbing system, which is regulated by
this Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining a permit, the owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has been
completed in accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction Services Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special
inspection necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with the applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an
approved plumbing inspector who is qualified and/or licensed to inspect work similar to that which is being performed. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-9: PLUMBING CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall engage or represent himself or herself to the public as engaging in the activity or business of
installing, altering, or repairing any plumbing systems or apparatus for which permits are required by this Plumbing Code unless such person shall
have first obtained from the State of Iowa, Department of Health, a plumbing license, as provided for in chapter 105 of the State Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-
22-2017)
10-3-10: INSTALLATION BY OWNER:
Homeowners who qualify for the Homestead Tax exemption may acquire permits for their principal residence for remodel plumbing work if such
residence is an existing dwelling rather than new construction, and is not larger than a single family dwelling. The Construction Services Administrator
may require the homeowner to pass a plumbing exam as he or she sees fit. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-11: CONNECTION TO CITY OWNED SYSTEM:
It is unlawful for any person(s) to connect his or her plumbing system to a City owned sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or water service without proper
permits. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon written notice from the Construction Services Administrator, immediately remove
or cut off such connection. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-12: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
For the purposes of this Code the Construction Services Administrator may also be referred to as the building official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction
Services Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise
discharging his/her official duties, the Construction Services Administrator or an appointed assistant or agent shall have the right to enter at any time
any building, area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of
the Construction Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the
premises shall be in such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers, or the general public, the Construction Services
Administrator shall at once order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-13: INSPECTION:
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal or cause to be covered or concealed any new construction, electrical,
plumbing or mechanical systems or apparatus for which a permit has been issued, until such new construction, electrical, plumbing or mechanical
systems or apparatus have been inspected and approved as required by this Code. The Construction Services Administrator shall have authority to
remove or cause the removal of any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection of new construction, electrical, plumbing or mechanical
systems or apparatus. Upon the completion of the new construction, electrical, plumbing or mechanical systems or apparatus in any building, it shall
be the duty of the company, firm or individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services Administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt
of such notice for conformance to the provisions of this Code. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless the new construction, electrical,
plumbing or mechanical systems or apparatus are in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-14: STOP WORK ORDER:
A. Authority: Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to
the provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
B. Issuance: The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
C. Unlawful Continuance: Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premises shall be limited to the removal or correction of the violation or unsafe condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-15: DELETIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 291/439
The following are deleted from the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), 2015 edition and are of no force or effect in this chapter:
A. UPC sections:
101.1 Title
101.2 Scope
101.3 Purpose
104.3.2 Plan Review Fees
104.3.3 Time Limitation of Application
104.4.3 Expiration
104.4.4 Extensions
104.5 Fees
106.0 Violations and Penalties
107.0 Board of Appeals
612.0 Residential Fire Sprinkler Systems
1204 Certificate of Inspection
1205 Authority to Render Gas Service
1207 Temporary Use of Gas
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-16: AMENDMENTS:
The paragraphs in this section represent amendments to the requirements contained in the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 edition.
Subsection 314.4.1 Installation of Thermoplastic Pipe and Fittings: Delete this subsection and replace with the following:
Trench width for thermoplastic pipe shall be limited to six times the outside diameter of the piping at the base. Thermoplastic piping shall be
bedded in not less than 4 inches (4") of aggregate bedding material supporting the pipe. Initial backfill shall encompass the pipe. Aggregate
material shall be three-eighths inch (3/8") p-gravel or one inch (1") clean class one bedding.
Add section 321 Clive Water Division Rules and Regulations: Add the following subsections under 321:
Section 321.1 Water Meters: Water meters shall be installed according to the most recently adopted Clive Water Division Rules and Regulations.
Section 321.2 City Right of Way: All work conducted within the city right of way shall be done in accordance with the Urban Standard
Specifications and the most recently adopted Clive Water Division Rules and Regulations.
Section 321.3 Building Ownership: Each separately owned building or dwelling unit shall have a separate sewer and water service connection for
each building or dwelling unit.
Section 407.3 Limitation of Hot Water Temperature for Public Lavatories: Modify this section by adding the following sentence to the end of the section:
These devices shall be installed at or as close as possible to the point of use.
Section 408.4 Waste Outlet: Modify this section by adding the following exception to the end of this section:
Exception: In a residential dwelling unit where a two inch (2") waste pipe is not readily available and approval of the Authority Having Jurisdiction
has been granted, the waste outlet, fixture tailpiece, trap and trap arm may be one and one half inch (11/2") when an existing tub is being
replaced by a shower sized per section 408.6(2). This exception only applies where one shower head rated at 2.5 gpm is installed.
Section 409.4 Limitation of Hot Water in Bathtubs and Whirlpool Bathtubs: Modify this section by adding the following sentence to the end of the
section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 292/439
These devices shall be installed at or as close as possible to the point of use.
Section 410.3 Limitation of Water Temperature in Bidets: Modify this section by adding the following sentence to the end of the section:
These devices shall be installed at or as close as possible to the point of use.
Section 418.3 Location of Floor Drains: Modify this section by adding the following to the end of the section:
(5) Rooms equipped with a water heater.
Section 422.1 Fixture Count: Modify this section by deleting the first paragraph and inserting the following in lieu thereof:
Plumbing fixtures shall be provided in each building for the type of building occupancy and in the minimum number shown in table 403.1 of the
International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition. The design occupant load and occupancy classification shall be determined in accordance with
Section 1004 of the International Building Code, 2015 edition. Required public facilities shall be designated by a legible sign for each sex. Signs
shall be readily visible and located near the entrance to each toilet facility.
Subsection 422.1.1 Family or Assisted-Use Toilet and Bathing Facilities: Modify this subsection by adding the following sentence to the end of the
subsection:
Required family or assisted-use fixtures are permitted to be included in the number of required fixtures for either the male or female occupants in
assembly and mercantile occupancies.
Add Section 422.6 Pay Facilities: Where pay facilities are installed, such facilities shall be in excess of the required minimum facilities. Required
facilities shall be free of charge.
Add Section 422.7 Substitution for Water Closets: In each bathroom or toilet room, urinals shall not be substituted for more than 67 percent of the
required water closets in assembly and educational occupancies. Urinals shall not be substituted for more than 50 percent of the required water
closets in all other occupancies.
Section 609.11 Pipe Insulation: Modify this section by deleting this section and inserting the following in lieu thereof:
Insulation of domestic hot water piping shall be in accordance with the applicable energy conservation code.
Section 611.4 Sizing of Residential Softeners: Modify this section by adding the following to the end of the last sentence in this section:
Or as specified in the manufacturer's installation instructions.
Section 710.1 Backflow Protection: Add the following to this section:
The requirement for the installation of a backwater valve shall apply only when determined necessary by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
Section 717.1 General: Add the following to this section:
The minimum diameter for a building sewer shall be four (4) inches.
Section 807.3 Domestic Dishwashing Machine: Delete this section and replace it with the following:
No domestic dishwashing machine shall be directly connected to a drainage system or food waste disposer without the use of an approved
dishwasher air gap fitting on the discharge side of the dishwashing machine, or by looping the discharge line of the dishwasher as high as
possible near the flood level of the kitchen sink where the waste disposer is connected. Listed air gap fittings shall be installed with the flood level
marking at or above the flood level of the sink or drainboard, whichever is higher.
Section 901.2 Vents Required: Add the following to this section:
In every new construction basement, there shall be not less than one two (2) inch dry vent pipe installed within the basement for future use. The
vent pipe shall be connected to a properly sized vent stack that exits through the roof. The vent pipe shall be labeled as future vent and shall be
capped or connected to the sewer. The vent pipe shall also be extended through all construction materials so that it is visible from the finished
floor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 293/439
Section 902 Vents Not Required: Add the following to this section.
A vent is not required on a three (3) inch residential basement floor drain provided its drain branches into the building drain on the sewer side at
a distance of five feet or more from the base of the stack and the branch line to such floor drain is not more than twelve (12) feet in length.
Section 906.7 Frost or Snow Closure: Modify this section by deleting two (2) inches in the first sentence and inserting three (3) inches in lieu thereof.
Table 1002.2 Horizontal Lengths of Trap Arms: Delete the table and insert the following table in lieu thereof:
Horizontal Lengths of Trap Arms
(Except for Water Closets and Similar Features) Notes: 1, 2
Trap Arm Diameter
(Inches)
Distance Trap To Vent
Minimum (Inches)
Length Maximum
(Feet)
11/4 21/2 5
11/2 3 6
2 4 8
3 6 12
4 8 12
Exceeding 4 2 x Diameter 12
For SI Units: 1 inch = 25.4mm
Notes to table 1002.2:
1. Maintain 1/4 inch per foot slope (20.8 mm/m.)
2. The developed length between the trap of a water closet or similar fixture (measured from the top of the closet flange to the inner edge of
the vent) and its vent shall not exceed 6 feet (1829 mm).
Section 1014.1 General: The city of Clive will work with the state Wastewater Reclamation Authority for the sizing and installation requirements of
grease interceptors.
Subsection 1014.1.3 Food Waste Disposers and Dishwashers: Modify this subsection by deleting the second sentence and inserting the following in
lieu thereof:
Commercial food waste disposers shall discharge into the building's drainage system in accordance with the requirements of the Authority
Having Jurisdiction.
Add subsection 1014.1.4 Odor Containment Device: Any required venting for a grease interceptor shall be capped with an approved odor containment
device. The odor containment device shall be periodically inspected, maintained, and replaced by the owner in accordance with the manufacturer's
requirements.
Add subsection 1101.12.3 Storm Drainage Discharge: All sumps and pumping systems shall be connected to the city's storm sewer system if
available. In the case that the city's storm sewer system is not available for connection, the discharge may be permitted to grade provided that the
discharge is made at least ten (10) feet from a public sidewalk and five (5) feet from a property line, or as determined by the Construction Services
Administrator.
Subsection 1501.11.2.1 Visual System Inspection: Modify this subsection by deleting "by the Authority Having Jurisdiction and other authorities having
jurisdiction" from the first sentence.
Subsection 1501.11.2.2 Cross-Connection Test: Modify the subsection by deleting "by the applicant in the presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction
and other authorities having jurisdiction" from the first sentence.
Subsection 1501.11.2.3 Discovery of Cross-Connection: Modify the subsection by deleting "in the presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction".
Subsection 1504.5 Initial Cross-Connection Test: Modify the section by deleting "by the applicant in the presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction
and other authorities having jurisdiction", and by deleting the final sentence "The test shall be ruled successful by the Authority Having Jurisdiction
before final approval is granted."
Subsection 1602.5 Initial Cross-Connection Test: Modify the section by deleting "by the applicant in the presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction
and other authorities having jurisdiction", and by deleting the final sentence "The test shall be ruled successful by the Authority Having Jurisdiction
before final approval is granted."
Subsection 1602.11.2.1 Visual System Inspection: Modify the subsection by deleting "by the Authority Having Jurisdiction and other authorities having
jurisdiction" from the first sentence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 294/439
Subsection 1602.11.2.2 Cross-Connection Test: Modify the subsection by deleting "by the applicant in the presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction
and other authorities having jurisdiction" from the first sentence.
Subsection 1602.11.2.3 Discovery of Cross-Connection: Modify the subsection by deleting "in the presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction".
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-17: BACKFLOW PREVENTION WITH CONTAINMENT:
All backflow prevention with containment shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the Clive Water Division Rules and Regulations as
adopted from time to time by City Council. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-18: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a
provision of the Code of Iowa or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or Code of the City of Clive, Iowa, the provision
which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-19: SITE MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be the permit holder's responsibility to inspect the construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of excess debris.
In no case shall debris, refuse, and/or junk be permitted to blow, drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
B. Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction project. Erosion
control shall be managed in accordance with chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-20: STREET PROTECTION:
No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials or performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-3-21: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a Municipal infraction as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this Code of ordinances. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks
court intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-
2017)
10-3-22: APPEALS:
Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as
described in title 2, chapter 2 of this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
Chapter 4
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
10-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CLIVE ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE, and may be cited as such and may also be known, referred to and cited
as the "Energy Code". (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders, contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their responsibilities with
respect to proper construction, construction techniques, and premises safety, and to provide for inspection as a means of compelling compliance
therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers, agents, or employees, owing to any individual
member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this chapter to create any duty or
liability by the City, its officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 295/439
10-4-3: WARNING:
No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed, or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of
or quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in
the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in
any way constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-4: INTERPRETATION:
The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the International
Energy Conservation Code, adopted herein. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-5: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to State published notice and public hearing, as required by State law, the International Energy Conservation Code, published by the
International Code Council Inc., year and edition as amended and adopted by the State of Iowa Building Code Bureau, is adopted in full and shall
constitute the "Energy Code of the City of Clive, Iowa". The use of the term "Energy Code" in this chapter shall be interpreted to refer to the
International Energy Conservation Code, year and edition as adopted by the State of Iowa. An official copy of the International Energy Conservation
Code, as adopted, and a certified copy of this chapter, can be viewed in the Community Development Department. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-6: SCOPE:
This Code shall establish thermal energy efficiency standards for the design of new buildings and structures, or portions thereof, additions to existing
buildings, and renovation and remodeling of existing buildings.
Exception: The renovation and remodeling of residential buildings of one and two dwelling units, which are intended for human occupancy and which
are heated or cooled by regulating their exterior envelopes and selection of their heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning systems, service water
heating systems and equipment for the efficient use of energy, and lighting efficiency standards for buildings intended for human occupancy which are
lighted. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
The applicant for any permit under this Code, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever,
and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection
with or related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants
of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the City; and such applicant, by making such
application, forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of
the City, its officers or employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued
under this Code whether expressly recited therein or not. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES:
A. Required: Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, add to, alter, relocate, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building of which is
regulated by this Energy Conservation Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall not do so without first securing a building permit from the
Community Development Department. All building plans will be reviewed for energy compliance as specified in this Energy Conservation Code.
B. Issuance: After proper application and a full staff review, permits shall be issued in the name of the property owner or of a firm or corporation
registered with the Iowa Division of Labor Services, according to their rules and standards. The property owner or authorized representative of the
firm or corporation named on the registration shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not transferable. No permits shall be issued to any
person, firm, or corporation who has fees outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any ordinance of the City.
C. Fees: There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved from time to time by the City Council. Fees on all buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or
nonprofit organization may be waived by the City Council. No fees shall be collected on buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
D. Expiration:
1. Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of sixty (60) days. Before such work can be commenced, a new permit shall be
first obtained, and a fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) of the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one hundred twenty (120) days.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 296/439
2. All permits shall expire after three hundred sixty five (365) days unless an extension is requested in writing to the Construction Services
Administrator fourteen (14) days prior to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may refuse any extension, but shall
do so in writing within seven (7) days of receipt of the extension request.
3. In addition, anytime work is suspended or abandoned for more than ten (10) days, the permit shall expire due to neglect if the site is not properly
secured, including:
a. Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
b. A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
c. Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be given
to proximity of the construction site, as described in chapter 11 of this title.
E. Revocation: Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the
violation of any provision of this Code.
F. Outstanding Permits: If a permit is outstanding on the effective date hereof, the provisions of this chapter and the International Energy Conservation
Code, adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to the extent that the Construction Services Administrator shall
determine that the application of such provisions to said work would be unreasonable. The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show
the unreasonableness of such provisions.
G. Work Without Permit: If any repairs, additions, alterations, or demolitions to any building or portions of any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing
system, which is regulated by this Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining a permit, the owner shall have the responsibility to
certify that the work has been completed in accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction Services Administrator shall determine the
appropriate level of special inspection necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with the applicable codes. Special
inspections shall be performed by an approved energy inspector who is qualified and/or licensed to inspect work similar to that which is being
performed. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-9: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
For the purposes of this Code the Construction Services Administrator may also be referred to as the building official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction
Services Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise
discharging his/her official duties, the Construction Services Administrator or an appointed assistant or agent shall have the right to enter at any time
any building, area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of
the Construction Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the
premises shall be in such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers, or the general public, the Construction Services
Administrator shall at once order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-10: INSPECTION:
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal or cause to be covered or concealed any mandatory energy conservation
requirement, for which a permit has been issued, until such requirements have been inspected and approved as required by this Code. The
Construction Services Administrator shall have authority to remove or cause the removal of any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection
of the building envelope or equipment. After the energy conservation measures have been installed and verification is needed, it shall be the duty of
the company, firm or individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services Administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt of such notice
for conformance to the provisions of this Code. The Construction Services Administrator has the authority to allow an approved third party energy
inspector to conduct inspections and tests as required by this Code. Inspection reports and tests results shall be made available to the Construction
Services Administrator. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless the energy conservation requirements are in conformity with the rules and
regulations set forth in this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-11: STOP WORK ORDER:
A. Authority: Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to
the provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
B. Issuance: The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
C. Unlawful Continuance: Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premises shall be limited to the removal or correction of the violation or unsafe condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-12: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 297/439
In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the International Energy Conservation Code, adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a
provision of the Code of Iowa or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or Code of the City of Clive, Iowa, the provision
which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-13: SITE MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be the permit holder's responsibility to inspect the construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of excess debris.
In no case shall debris, refuse, and/or junk be permitted to blow, drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
B. Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction project. Erosion
control shall be managed in accordance with chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-14: STREET PROTECTION:
No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials or performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-4-15: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a Municipal infraction as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this Code of ordinances. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks
court intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-
2017)
10-4-16: APPEALS:
Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as
described in title 2, chapter 2 of this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
Chapter 5
MECHANICAL CODE
10-5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CLIVE MECHANICAL CODE, and may be cited as such and may also be known, referred to and cited as the
"Mechanical Code". (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders, contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their responsibilities with
respect to proper mechanical installation, material selection, installation methods, and premises safety, and to provide for inspection as a means of
compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers, agents, or employees,
owing to any individual member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this
chapter to create any duty or liability by the City, its officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person. (Ord.
1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-3: WARNING:
No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed, or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of
or quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in
the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in
any way constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-4: INTERPRETATION:
The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the International
Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, or the International Residential Code chapters 12 - 24, 2015 edition, adopted herein. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 298/439
10-5-5: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, and International Residential
Code chapters 12 - 24, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council Inc., are adopted in full except for such portions as may be
hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, and shall constitute the "Mechanical Code of the City of Clive, Iowa". The use of the term "Mechanical
Code" in this chapter shall be interpreted to refer to the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, and International Residential Code chapters 12 -
24, 2015 edition. An official copy of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, and International Residential Code chapters 12 - 24, 2015
edition, as adopted, and a certified copy of this chapter can be viewed in the Community Development Department. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-6: SCOPE:
This Code shall regulate the design, installation, maintenance, alteration, and inspection of mechanical systems. The provisions of this Mechanical
Code shall apply to:
A. New Construction:
1. Public or private mechanical installations as governed by this Mechanical Code.
2. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories high with separate
means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with chapters 12 - 24 of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition.
B. Existing Buildings:
1. Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing mechanical systems, if covered by this Mechanical Code. The Construction Services
Administrator may, when such additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable additions or alterations to the mechanical
systems on a premises when a danger to life or property may result if such other additions or alterations were not made.
2. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories high with separate
means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with chapters 12 - 24 of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition.
3. Installations, which were in compliance with the Mechanical Code in existence at the time such installations were made, shall be presumed to be
safe and proper, which presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the installation may be dangerous to life or property.
4. If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change in occupancy, the mechanical systems in the entire building shall comply
with all the mechanical standards applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy of a building has been changed to a mixed occupancy,
with the required fire separation between the mixed occupancy, each occupancy shall comply with its own particular classification and shall have
mechanical systems installed in compliance with the mechanical standards of its particular classification. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
The applicant for any permit under this Code, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever,
and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection
with or related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants
of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the City; and such applicant, by making such
application, forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of
the City, its officers or employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued
under this Code whether expressly recited therein or not. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES:
A. Required: Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, install, add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any mechanical system or part
thereof, of which is regulated by this Mechanical Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall not do so without first securing a permit from
the Community Development Department.
B. Issuance: After proper application on forms provided by the Community Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the
property owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the Iowa Division of Labor Services, according to their rules and standards. The property
owner or authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not
transferable. No permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any
ordinance of the City.
C. Fees: There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved from time to time by the City Council. Fees on all buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or
nonprofit organization may be waived by the City Council. No fees shall be collected on buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
D. Expiration:
1. Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 299/439
abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of sixty (60) days. Before such work can be commenced, a new permit shall be
first obtained, and a fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) of the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one hundred twenty (120) days.
2. All permits shall expire after three hundred sixty five (365) days unless an extension is requested in writing to the Construction Services
Administrator fourteen (14) days prior to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may refuse any extension, but shall
do so in writing within seven (7) days of receipt of the extension request.
3. In addition, anytime work is suspended or abandoned for more than ten (10) days, the permit shall expire due to neglect if the site is not properly
secured, including:
a. Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
b. A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
c. Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be given
to proximity of the construction site, as described in chapter 11 of this title.
E. Revocation: Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the
violation of any provision of this Code.
F. Outstanding Permits: If a permit is outstanding on the effective date hereof, the provisions of this chapter and the International Mechanical Code,
2015 edition, and International Residential Code chapters 12 - 24, 2015 edition, adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit,
except to the extent that the Construction Services Administrator shall determine that the application of such provisions to said work would be
unreasonable. The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the unreasonableness of such provisions.
G. Work Without Permit: If any repairs, additions, alterations, or demolitions to any building or portions of any mechanical system, which is regulated
by this Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining a permit, the owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has
been completed in accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction Services Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special
inspection necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with the applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an
approved mechanical inspector who is qualified and/or licensed to inspect work similar to that which is being performed. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-9: MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall engage or represent himself or herself to the public as engaging in the activity or business of
installing, altering, or repairing any mechanical systems or apparatus for which permits are required by this Mechanical Code unless such person shall
have first obtained from the State of Iowa, Department of Health, a mechanical license, as provided for in chapter 105 of the State Code. (Ord. 1039,
6-22-2017)
10-5-10: INSTALLATION BY OWNER:
Homeowners who qualify for the Homestead Tax exemption may acquire permits for their principal residence for remodel mechanical work if such
residence is an existing dwelling rather than new construction, and is not larger than a single family dwelling. The Construction Services Administrator
may require the homeowner to pass a mechanical exam as he or she sees fit. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-11: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
For the purposes of this Code the Construction Services Administrator may also be referred to as the building official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction
Services Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise
discharging his/her official duties, the Construction Services Administrator or an appointed assistant or agent shall have the right to enter at any time
any building, area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of
the Construction Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the
premises shall be in such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers, or the general public, the Construction Services
Administrator shall at once order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-12: INSPECTION:
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal or cause to be covered or concealed any new construction, electrical,
plumbing or mechanical systems or apparatus for which a permit has been issued, until such new construction, electrical, plumbing or mechanical
systems or apparatus have been inspected and approved as required by this Code. The Construction Services Administrator shall have authority to
remove or cause the removal of any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection of new construction, electrical, plumbing or mechanical
systems or apparatus. Upon the completion of the new construction, electrical, plumbing or mechanical systems or apparatus in any building, it shall
be the duty of the company, firm or individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services Administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt
of such notice for conformance to the provisions of this Code. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless the new construction, electrical,
plumbing or mechanical systems or apparatus are in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 300/439
10-5-13: STOP WORK ORDER:
A. Authority: Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to
the provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
B. Issuance: The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
C. Unlawful Continuance: Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premises shall be limited to the removal or correction of the violation or unsafe condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-14: DELETIONS:
The following are deleted from the International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2015 edition, and International Residential Code chapters 12 - 24, 2015
edition, and are of no force or effect in this chapter:
A. IMC sections:
103.3 Deputies
104.5 Identification
106.1.1 Annual Permit
106.1.2 Annual Permit Records
106.3.3 Time Limitation of Application
106.4.3 Permits: Expiration
106.4.4 Permits: Extensions
106.4.8 Posting of Permit
106.5 Fees
108 Violations
109 Means of Appeal
504.8.4.2 Manufacturer's Instructions
504.8.5 Length Identification
B. IRC sections:
1502.4.5.2 Manufacturer's Instructions
1502.4.6 Length Identification
2439.7 Domestic Clothes Dryer Exhaust Ducts
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-15: AMENDMENTS:
The paragraphs in this section represent amendments to the requirements contained in the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition and the
International Residential Code chapters 12 - 24, 2015 edition.
Delete all references to the "International Plumbing Code" and insert in lieu thereof:
Uniform Plumbing Code 2015 edition
Section 504.8.2 Dryer Duct Installation: Delete this section and insert the following in lieu thereof:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 301/439
Exhaust ducts shall be supported at 4-foot intervals and secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall extend into the adjoining duct or fitting
in the direction of airflow. Ducts shall not be joined with screws or similar fasteners that protrude into the inside of the duct. Exhaust duct joints
shall be sealed in accordance with IRC section 1601.4.1.
Section IRC 1502.4.2 Dryer Duct Installation: Delete this section and insert the following in lieu thereof:
Exhaust ducts shall be supported at 4-foot intervals and secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall extend into the adjoining duct or fitting
in the direction of airflow. Ducts shall not be joined with screws or similar fasteners that protrude into the inside of the duct. Exhaust duct joints
shall be sealed in accordance with IRC section 1601.4.1.
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-16: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, or International Residential Code chapters 12 -
24, 2015 edition, adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a provision of the Code of Iowa or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or
health ordinance or Code of the City of Clive, Iowa, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people shall prevail. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-17: SITE MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be the permit holder's responsibility to inspect the construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of excess debris.
In no case shall debris, refuse, and/or junk be permitted to blow, drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
B. Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction project. Erosion
control shall be managed in accordance with chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-18: STREET PROTECTION:
No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials or performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-5-19: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a Municipal infraction as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this Code of ordinances. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks
court intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-
2017)
10-5-20: APPEALS:
Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as
described in title 2, chapter 2 of this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
Chapter 6
FUEL GAS CODE
10-6-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CLIVE FUEL GAS CODE, and may be cited as such and may also be known, referred to and cited as the "Fuel
Gas Code". (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders, contractors, property owners, their agents, and others to meet their responsibilities with
respect to proper fuel gas installation, material selection, installation methods, and premises safety, and to provide for inspection as a means of
compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers, agents, or employees,
owing to any individual member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this
chapter to create any duty or liability by the City, its officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person. (Ord.
1039, 6-22-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 302/439
10-6-3: WARNING:
No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed, or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter as indicating the safety of
or quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in
the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in
any way constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-4: INTERPRETATION:
The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the International
Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, or the International Residential Code chapter 24, 2015 edition, adopted herein. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-5: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, and International Residential Code
chapter 24, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council Inc., are adopted in full except for such portions as may be hereinafter deleted,
modified, or amended, and shall constitute the "Fuel Gas Code of the City of Clive, Iowa". The use of the term "Fuel Gas Code" in this chapter shall be
interpreted to refer to the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, and International Residential Code chapter 24, 2015 edition. An official copy of
the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, and International Residential Code chapter 24, 2015 edition, as adopted, and a certified copy of this
chapter can be viewed in the Community Development Department. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-6: SCOPE:
This Code shall regulate the design, installation, maintenance, alteration, and inspection of fuel gas systems. The provisions of this Fuel Gas Code
shall apply to:
A. New Construction:
1. Public or private mechanical installations as governed by this Fuel Gas Code.
2. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories high with separate
means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with chapter 24 of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition.
B. Existing Buildings:
1. Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing fuel gas systems, if covered by this Fuel Gas Code. The Construction Services Administrator
may, when such additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable additions or alterations to the fuel gas systems on a premises
when a danger to life or property may result if such other additions or alterations were not made.
2. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories high with separate
means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with chapter 24 of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition.
3. Installations, which were in compliance with the Fuel Gas Code in existence at the time such installations were made, shall be presumed to be
safe and proper, which presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the installation may be dangerous to life or property.
4. If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change in occupancy, the fuel gas systems in the entire building shall comply with all
the fuel gas standards applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy of a building has been changed to a mixed occupancy, with the
required fire separation between the mixed occupancy, each occupancy shall comply with its own particular classification and shall have fuel gas
systems installed in compliance with the fuel gas standards of its particular classification. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
The applicant for any permit under this Code, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property whatsoever,
and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection
with or related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants
of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the City; and such applicant, by making such
application, forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of
the City, its officers or employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of any permit issued
under this Code whether expressly recited therein or not. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES:
A. Required: Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, install, add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any fuel gas system or part thereof, of
which is regulated by this Fuel Gas Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall not do so without first securing a permit from the Community
Development Department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 303/439
B. Issuance: After proper application on forms provided by the Community Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the
property owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the Iowa Division of Labor Services, according to their rules and standards. The property
owner or authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not
transferable. No permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any
ordinance of the City.
C. Fees: There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved from time to time by the City Council. Fees on all buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or
nonprofit organization may be waived by the City Council. No fees shall be collected on buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
D. Expiration:
1. Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of sixty (60) days. Before such work can be commenced, a new permit shall be
first obtained, and a fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) of the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one hundred twenty (120) days.
2. All permits shall expire after three hundred sixty five (365) days unless an extension is requested in writing to the Construction Services
Administrator fourteen (14) days prior to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may refuse any extension, but shall
do so in writing within seven (7) days of receipt of the extension request.
3. In addition, anytime work is suspended or abandoned for more than ten (10) days, the permit shall expire due to neglect if the site is not properly
secured, including:
a. Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
b. A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
c. Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be given
to proximity of the construction site, as described in chapter 11 of this title.
E. Revocation: Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the
violation of any provision of this Code.
F. Outstanding Permits: If a permit is outstanding on the effective date hereof, the provisions of this chapter and the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015
edition, and International Residential Code chapter 24, 2015 edition, adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to
the extent that the Construction Services Administrator shall determine that the application of such provisions to said work would be unreasonable.
The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the unreasonableness of such provisions.
G. Work Without Permit: If any repairs, additions, alterations, or demolitions to any building or portions of any fuel gas system, which is regulated by
this Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining a permit, the owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has been
completed in accordance with the applicable codes. The Construction Services Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special
inspection necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with the applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an
approved fuel gas inspector who is qualified and/or licensed to inspect work similar to that which is being performed. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-9: PLUMBING OR MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall engage or represent himself or herself to the public as engaging in the activity or business of
installing, altering, or repairing any fuel gas system or apparatus for which permits are required by this Code unless such person shall have first
obtained from the State of Iowa, Department of Health, a plumbing or mechanical license, as provided for in chapter 105 of the State Code. (Ord.
1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-10: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
For the purposes of this Code the Construction Services Administrator may also be referred to as the building official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction
Services Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise
discharging his/her official duties, the Construction Services Administrator or an appointed assistant or agent shall have the right to enter at any time
any building, area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of
the Construction Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the
premises shall be in such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers, or the general public, the Construction Services
Administrator shall at once order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-11: INSPECTION:
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal or cause to be covered or concealed any new construction, electrical,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 304/439
plumbing, mechanical, or fuel gas system or apparatus for which a permit has been issued, until such new construction, electrical, plumbing,
mechanical, fuel gas system or apparatus have been inspected and approved as required by this Code. The Construction Services Administrator shall
have authority to remove or cause the removal of any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection of new construction, electrical, plumbing,
mechanical, or fuel gas system or apparatus. Upon the completion of the new construction, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or fuel gas system or
apparatus in any building, it shall be the duty of the company, firm or individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services Administrator, who
shall inspect the same on receipt of such notice for conformance to the provisions of this Code. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless
the new construction, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or fuel gas system or apparatus are in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this
Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-12: STOP WORK ORDER:
A. Authority: Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to
the provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
B. Issuance: The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
C. Unlawful Continuance: Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premises shall be limited to the removal or correction of the violation or unsafe condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-13: DELETIONS:
The following are deleted from the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2015 edition, and IRC chapter 24, 2015 edition, and are of no force or effect in
this chapter:
A. IFGC sections:
103.3 Deputies
104.5 Identification
106.1.1 Annual Permit
106.1.2 Annual Permit Records
106.3.2 Time Limitation of Application
106.5.3 Permits: Expiration
106.5.4 Permits: Extensions
106.5.8 Posting of Permit
106.6 Fees
108 Violations
109 Means of Appeal
B. IRC sections:
2439.7 Domestic Clothes Dryer Exhaust Ducts
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-14: AMENDMENTS:
The paragraphs in this section represent amendments to the requirements contained in the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition and the
International Residential Code chapter 24, 2015 edition.
Delete all references to the "International Plumbing Code" and insert in lieu thereof:
Uniform Plumbing Code 2015 edition
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 305/439
Delete all reference to the electrical provisions of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition and insert in lieu thereof:
National Electrical Code as adopted by the state of Iowa.
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-15: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, or International Residential Code, chapter 24, 2015
edition, adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with a provision of the Code of Iowa or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health
ordinance or Code of the City of Clive, Iowa, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the people shall prevail. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-16: SITE MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be the permit holder's responsibility to inspect the construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of excess debris.
In no case shall debris, refuse, and/or junk be permitted to blow, drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
B. Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction project. Erosion
control shall be managed in accordance with chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-17: STREET PROTECTION:
No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials or performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-6-18: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a Municipal infraction as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this Code of ordinances. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks
court intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-
2017)
10-6-19: APPEALS:
Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as
described in title 2, chapter 2 of this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
Chapter 7
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
10-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CLIVE EXISTING BUILDING CODE and may be cited as such and may also be known, referred to and cited as the
"Existing Building Code". (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders, contractors, property owners, their agents and others, to meet their responsibilities with
respect to proper construction, construction techniques, and premises safety and to provide for inspection as a means of compelling compliance
therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers, agents, or employees, owing to any individual
member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this chapter to create any duty or
liability by the City, its officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-3: WARNING:
No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter, as indicating the safety of
or quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 306/439
the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in
any way constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-4: INTERPRETATION:
The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take precedence over any other language contained in this chapter or the International
Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, adopted herein. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-5: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted in full except for such portions as may be hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, and shall constitute
the "Existing Building Code of the City of Clive, Iowa", to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal,
demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of structures in the City, and the same are, by this reference,
incorporated herein as fully and completely as if set forth in full. The use of the term IEBC in this chapter shall be interpreted to refer to the
International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition. An official copy of the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, as adopted, and a certified
copy of this chapter can be viewed in the Community Development Department. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-6: SCOPE:
The provisions of this Code shall apply to:
A. Existing Buildings Defined As Buildings Constructed Prior To October 26, 1972:
1. Additions to, alterations of, and repairs to existing buildings, if covered by this Code. The Construction Services Administrator may, when such
additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable additions or alterations in a building, structure, or on a premises when a
danger to life or property may result if such other additions or alterations were not made.
2. Installations, which were in compliance with the Code in existence at the time such installations were made, shall be presumed to be safe and
proper, which presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the installation may be dangerous to life or property.
3. If the classification of a building has been changed due to a change in occupancy, the entire building shall comply with all the building standards
applicable to the new classification. If the occupancy of a building has been changed to a mixed occupancy, with the required fire separation
between the mixed occupancy, each occupancy thereof shall comply with its own particular classification.
B. Conversion To Condominium Or Multiple Housing Cooperative:
1. The conversion of any building or portion thereof to a horizontal property regime or to a multiple housing cooperative shall be treated as a
change of occupancy classification for the building.
2. Any person or entity seeking to establish a horizontal property regime or multiple housing cooperative by establishing a horizontal property
regime pursuant to Iowa Code 499B or by establishing a multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Iowa Code 499A shall establish and document
compliance with the following, by filing and obtaining approval from the Community Development Department of the development application
defined in subsection B3 of this section:
a. That all materials, manner and means of construction in the proposed building meet current codes for new residential construction including
current Fire, Building, Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical, Energy Conservation, and Post Construction Stormwater Management Codes.
b. That the building and site meet all requirements of the zoning ordinance that would be required for new residential construction.
c. That the building and site meet all requirements for handicapped accessibility that would be required for new residential construction.
d. That separate utility services, with separate metering, be provided to each dwelling unit that would be required for new residential construction.
3. At least sixty (60) days before a declaration or other instrument establishing a horizontal property regime pursuant to Iowa Code 499B or
establishing a multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Iowa Code 499A ("declaration") is to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder,
any person or entity shall file a development application for approval with the Community Development Department. In addition to the
development application, the applicant shall file the following:
a. A site plan, building plans, and Code analysis demonstrating compliance with the provisions addressed above.
b. A copy of the declaration or other instrument consistent with Iowa Code 499A or 499B.
4. The declaration shall not be recorded unless a certificate of occupancy for the proposed building has been issued by the City. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-
2017)
10-7-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
The applicant for any permit under this Existing Building Code, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to
property whatsoever, and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising
from or in connection with or related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents,
employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the City; and such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 307/439
applicant, by making such application, forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and
all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though
acts or omissions of the City, its officers or employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part
of any permit issued under this Existing Building Code whether expressly recited therein or not. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS, AND FEES:
A. Required: Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, add to, alter, relocate, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or to repair,
install, add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this
Existing Building Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall not do so without first securing a permit from the Community Development
Department.
B. Issuance: After proper application on forms provided by the Community Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of the
property owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the Iowa Division of Labor Services, according to their rules and standards. The property
owner or authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not
transferable. No permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who has fees outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any
ordinance of the City.
C. Fees: There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved from time to time by the City Council. Fees on all buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or
nonprofit organization may be waived by the City Council. No fees shall be collected on buildings or structures constructed by or for the City.
D. Expiration:
1. Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of sixty (60) days. Before such work can be commenced, a new permit shall be
first obtained, and a fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) of the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one hundred twenty (120) days.
2. All permits shall expire after three hundred sixty five (365) days unless an extension is requested in writing to the Construction Services
Administrator fourteen (14) days prior to expiration of said permit. The Construction Services Administrator may refuse any extension, but shall
do so in writing within seven (7) days of receipt of the extension request.
3. In addition, anytime work is suspended or abandoned for more than ten (10) days, the permit shall expire due to neglect if the site is not properly
secured, including:
a. Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
b. A fence to protect any excavation, including open basement foundations, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in the
neighborhood.
c. Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be given
to proximity of the construction site, as described in chapter 11 of this title.
E. Revocation: Any permit required by the provisions of this Code may be summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator upon the
violation of any provision of this Code.
F. Outstanding Permits: If a permit is outstanding on the effective date hereof, the provisions of this chapter, the International Existing Building Code,
2015 edition, adopted hereby, shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to the extent that the Construction Services Administrator
shall determine that the application of such provisions to said work would be unreasonable. The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to
show the unreasonableness of such provisions.
G. Work Without Permit: If any repairs, additions, alterations, or demolitions to any building or portions of any building or any electrical, gas,
mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this Code, the work having been completed without first obtaining a
permit, the owner shall have the responsibility to certify that the work has been completed in accordance with the applicable codes. The
Construction Services Administrator shall determine the appropriate level of special inspection necessary to ensure that the work was completed in
accordance with the applicable codes. Special inspections shall be performed by an approved home inspector who is qualified and/or licensed to
inspect work similar to that which is being performed. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-9: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
For the purposes of this Code the Construction Services Administrator may also be referred to as the building official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction
Services Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise
discharging his/her official duties, the Construction Services Administrator or an appointed assistant or agent shall have the right to enter at any time
any building, area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of
the Construction Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 308/439
premises shall be in such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers, or the general public, the Construction Services
Administrator shall at once order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-10: INSPECTION:
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall cover or conceal or cause to be covered or concealed any new construction, electrical,
plumbing or mechanical systems or apparatus for which a permit has been issued, until such new construction, electrical, plumbing or mechanical
systems or apparatus have been inspected and approved as required by this Code. The Construction Services Administrator shall have authority to
remove or cause the removal of any obstructions which may prevent the proper inspection of new construction, electrical, plumbing or mechanical
systems or apparatus. Upon the completion of the new construction, electrical, plumbing or mechanical systems or apparatus in any building, it shall
be the duty of the company, firm or individual doing the same to notify the Construction Services Administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt
of such notice for conformance to the provisions of this Code. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless the new construction, electrical,
plumbing or mechanical systems or apparatus are in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-11: STOP WORK ORDER:
A. Authority: Whenever the Construction Services Administrator finds any work regulated by this Code being performed in a manner either contrary to
the provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Construction Services Administrator shall be authorized to issue a stop work order.
B. Issuance: The stop work order shall be in writing and shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the work will be permitted
to resume. The stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon
issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease. All other persons shall vacate the job site immediately or be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
C. Unlawful Continuance: Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work shall immediately cease and all persons shall vacate the job site immediately.
Any work on the premises shall be limited to the removal or correction of the violation or unsafe condition. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-12: DELETIONS:
The following are deleted from the Existing Building Code, 2015 edition (hereinafter known as the IEBC) and are of no force or affect in this chapter:
101.1 Title
101.2 Scope
103.0 Department of Building Safety
105.1.1 Annual Permit
105.1.2 Annual Permit Records
105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application
105.5 Expiration
105.7 Placement of Permit
108.0 Fees
109.3.5 Lath or Gypsum Board Inspection
112.0 Board of Appeals
113.0 Violations
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-13: AMENDMENTS:
The paragraphs in this section represent amendments to the requirements contained in the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition.
Section 105.2 Work Exempt From Permit: Delete item number 1 and add the following in lieu thereof:
1. Private sidewalks and driveways
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-14: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 309/439
with a provision of the Code of Iowa or a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or Code of the City of Clive, Iowa, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-
2017)
10-7-15: SITE MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be the permit holder's responsibility to inspect the construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of excess debris.
In no case shall debris, refuse, and/or junk be permitted to blow, drift, or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
B. Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction project. Erosion
control shall be managed in accordance with chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-16: STREET PROTECTION:
No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials or performing services within the City shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
(Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
10-7-17: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a Municipal infraction as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this Code of ordinances. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks
court intervention for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-
2017)
10-7-18: APPEALS:
Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as
described in title 2, chapter 2 of this Code. (Ord. 1039, 6-22-2017)
Chapter 8
FIRE CODE
10-8-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
The International Fire Code (IFC) 2015 edition, recommended by the participating communities of the Central Iowa Code Consortium, is hereby
adopted by the City Council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards
arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the
occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of Clive; providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous use or operations; that a certain
document known as the International Fire Code, including appendix chapters B, C and D as published by the International Fire Code Council, being
particularly the 2015 editions thereof and the whole thereof, save and except those portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by
section 10-8-4 of this chapter, one (1) copy of the local amendments which have been and are now filed in the Office of the City Clerk and one (1)
complete set of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, to include local amendments filed in the Fire Administrative Offices, and the same are hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provision thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the City. (Ord. 1042, 6-22-2017)
10-8-2: DUTIES OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
The International Fire Code as adopted and amended herein shall be enforced by the Fire Prevention Bureau of the City, which is hereby established
and which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department. (Ord. 1042, 6-22-2017)
10-8-3: STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES; DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
Establishment of limits and districts referred to and placed upon certain sections of the International Fire Code 2015 edition, are as follows:
A. The limits referred to in section 5504.3.1.1 in which flammable cryogenic fluids storage in stationary containers are prohibited are hereby
established as follows: the entire City of Clive, Iowa, except M-1 Light Industrial and M-2 Heavy Industrial District.
B. The limits that are placed on chapter 57 in which outside aboveground storage of flammable or combustible liquids is restricted are hereby
established as follows: the entire City of Clive, Iowa, except as allowed as a principal, accessory or conditional use in the M-1 Light Industrial
District; M-2 Heavy Industrial District. Exceptions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 310/439
1. An aggregate amount of one thousand (1,000) gallons or less may be stored above ground on a premises if used exclusively for heating fuel oil.
A permit is required and the proposed installation must be approved by the Code official prior to the issuance of a permit.
2. After July 1, 2005, any new above ground installations of Class I liquids shall have an aggregate total of not more than one thousand one
hundred (1,100) gallons; Class II liquids shall have an aggregate total of not more than five thousand (5,000) gallons; and storage of more than
one thousand one hundred (1,100) gallons shall be restricted to an approved vaulted tank above ground where allowed as a principal, accessory
or conditional use in the in M-1 and M-2 Zoning Districts; or ten thousand (10,000) gallons or less of Class I and/or Class II liquids on
construction sites, per legal lot or contiguous lots under common ownership. A permit is required and the proposed installation must be approved
by the Code official prior to the issuance of a permit.
3. After July 1, 2005, any new outside installation of a generator shall be limited to a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons of
Type II fuel in an NFPA/UL compliant sub-base tank; quantities greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons but less than five
thousand one (5,001) gallons of a Type II fuel shall be stored in an approved vaulted tank. Exception: Fuel storage requirements for generator
use only shall not be limited to only M-1 and M-2 Districts.
C. The limits that are placed on chapter 57 in which new bulk plants and terminals for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited are hereby
established as follows: the entire City of Clive, Iowa.
D. The limits that are placed on section 6104.4 (see section 10-8-4, "Amendments To International Fire Code", of this chapter) in which storage of
liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted are hereby established as follows: the entire City of Clive, Iowa.
E. The limits that are placed on section 5601.1 in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be restricted are hereby established as follows:
the entire City of Clive, Iowa.
F. The limits that are placed on section 5301.1 exception 2, in which the storage of compressed natural gas is prohibited, are hereby established as
follows: the entire City of Clive, Iowa, with the exception of M-1 and M-2 Districts. (Ord. 1042, 6-22-2017)
10-8-4: AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
The International Fire Code is amended and changed in the following respects:
Chapter 1 Section 101.1 Insert in section 101.1 "the City of Clive".
Section 102 Amend section 102 Applicability:
Section 102.3 Change Of Use Or Occupancy - to read as follows. No change shall be made in the character of occupancy or use of any building
which would place the building in a different division of the same group of occupancy or in a different group of occupancies as defined in Chapter
3 of the 2015 international building code or sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10 inclusive unless such building is made to comply with the
requirements of this section of the code for new buildings.
Exception: The character of the occupancy of existing buildings may be changed subject to the approval of the code official and the building
may be occupied for purposes in other groups without conforming to the requirements of this section of the code for those groups, provided the
new or proposed use is equal to or less hazardous, based on the life and fire risk, than the existing use.
Section 103.1.1 Add section 103.1.1 Definitions.
A. Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the International Fire Code, it is the City of Clive, Iowa.
B. Where the party responsible for the enforcement of the International Fire Code is given a title of "Fire Marshal", and the following definition:
"Fire Marshal is the Code Official of the Fire Prevention Bureau" or a duly authorized representative.
C. Whenever the words "department of fire prevention" are used they shall be held to mean "Fire Prevention Bureau".
D. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
Section 105.6 Amend section 105.6 Required Operational Permits. The Code Official is authorized to issue operational permits for the
operations as set forth in sections § 105.6.2, 105.6.11, 105.6.14, 105.6.15, 105.6.21, 105.6.27, 105.6.32, 105.6.37, 105.6.38, 105.6.42, 105.6.44,
105.6.45.
Section 105.6.32. Delete 105.6.32 Exception: Recreational fires.
Section 105.7. Amend 105.7 Required Construction Permits. The Code Official is authorized to issue construction permits for the operations as
set forth in 105.7.1, 105.7.6, 105.7.7, 105.7.8, 105.7.10, 105.7.12, 105.7.13, 105.7.17, 105.7.18.
Section 108. Amend section 108. Refer to 10-8-5 Appeals of the Clive Fire Prevention Code.
Section 109.4 Amend section 109.4 Violation Penalties. 109.4 to read as follows - Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail
to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate used under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of [SPECIFY
OFFENSE] punishable by a fine not exceeding 500.00 dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 311/439
Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 111.4 Amend section 111.4 Failure To Comply. 111.4 to read as follows - Any person who shall continue any work after having been
served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to
a fine of not less than [refer to 10-8-11 of the Clive city code for amount] dollars or more than [refer to 10-8-11 of the Clive city code]
dollars.
Section 113. Amend section 113 Fees
Add Section 113.1 General. A fee for operational permits and construction permits that are required by this 10-8-4 of the Clive city code shall be
paid to the City of Clive at Fire Administration offices.
Add Section 113.2.1 Issuance. A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Prevention Bureau prior to engaging in activities, operations, practices
or functions set forth in 105.6 and 105.7 where required.
Add Section 113.4.1 Operational Permit Fees.
A. Each operational permit fee shall include one hour of inspection time plus an hourly rate after the first hour as set by Resolution approved
by City Council.
B. Each construction permit shall include one hour of inspection time; plus an hourly rate after the first hour; and after normal business hours
(normal hours are 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday), occupancy inspection fees shall be based per hour, per inspector at rate as
set by Resolution approved by the City Council.
Section 113.6 Add Section 113.6 Reinspection Fee
Reinspection Fees
First reinspection No charge
Second reinspection $100.00
Third reinspection 200.00
Fourth reinspection 400.00
Fifth or more reinspections 800.00
Section 113.7 Add Section 113.7 Mitigation Reimbursement Fees. Reimbursement fees that are actual and necessary expenses incurred in
carrying out the mitigation of specialized emergencies including, but not limited to, hazardous materials, specialized rescue and crime scenes
(including arson) shall be invoiced to the responsible person, firm or corporation. An available fee schedule shall be reviewed and posted
annually by the Fire Chief's office. Fees may include, but not be limited to, personnel compensation, apparatus use, equipment use and
specialized contract labor associated with the mitigation of the specialized emergency.
Section 114 Add Section 114.1 General
No change shall be made in the character of occupancy or use of any building which would place the building in a different division of the
same group of occupancy or in a different group of occupancies as defined in Chapter 2 of the 2015 International Fire Code or 903.2.1 through
903.2.11 inclusive unless the building is made to comply with the requirements of 903.2 of this Code for new buildings.
Exception. The character of the occupancy of existing buildings may be changed subject to the approval of the Code Official and the building
may be occupied for purposes in other groups without conforming to the requirements of this section of the code for those groups, provided the
new or proposed use is equal to or less hazardous, based on fire and fire risk, than the existing use.
Section 115 Life Safety Plans. Add Section 115 Life Safety Plans. All life safety plans submitted for review to include, but not limited to, fire
sprinkler system plans, fire alarm system plans and clean agent system plans shall be designed and stamped by a person with a minimum of a
NICET III certification, fire protection engineer, qualified engineer with two years demonstrated experience in life safety system design or
equivalency as determined by the Code Official. Plan approval will be based upon the plans submitted by the equipment supplier utilizing the
above requirements.
Section 116 Inspection Tags. Add Section 116 Inspection Tags. Tags for inspection of fire suppression systems, fire extinguishers and fire
alarm systems are required to be purchased from the West Des Moines Fire Prevention Bureau for use in the City of Clive as part of the West
Metro licensing for fire protection contractors.
Section 117 Add Section 117 Additions to Buildings or Structures.
Section 117.1 Add Section 117.1 General. Additions to buildings or structures shall comply with all of the requirements of §903.2 of this Code for
new buildings or structures. The entire building or structure, existing and proposed additions, shall comply with all of the requirements of the fire
sprinkler §903.2 of the Fire Code for new buildings and structures. Any building or structure which increases its square footage to, or beyond the
gross floor area for that occupancy must comply for the entire building or structure.
Section 118 Occupancy Requirement. Add Section 118 Occupancy Requirement
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 312/439
Section 118.1 Add Section 118.1 General. When a building is used for more than one occupancy purpose or use, the entire building shall meet
the requirements of the fire sprinkler section 903.2 of the Fire Code based on the requirements for the most restrictive occupancy group as
defined in Chapter 2 of the 2015 International Fire Code.
Chapter 2 Section 202 Definitions. Add to section 202
Business is a commercial enterprise or establishment that is not part of a home occupation, for the purpose of the fire code.
Commercial Buildings or Structures are buildings that are used for purposes other than detached dwellings, for the purpose of the fire code.
Amend Section 202 [M] Commercial Cooking Appliances:
[M] Commercial Cooking Appliances are appliances used in a commercial food service establishment for heating or cooking food and which
produce grease laden vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed through a local exhaust ventilation system. Such
appliances include deep fat fryers; upright broilers; griddles; broilers; steam-jacketed kettles; hot-top ranges; under-fired broilers; (charbroilers);
ovens; barbecues; rotisseries; residential stoves/ovens and similar appliances. For the purposes of this definition, a food service establishment
shall include any commercial building or a portion thereof used for the preparation and serving of food including for employee purposes.
Condominium is a building or structure of residential occupancies containing sleeping units or more than two dwelling units where the
occupants are primarily permanent in nature, having public space, unless defined as a townhouse, for purpose of the fire code.
Dwelling is a detached building on a building site designed for and used exclusively for residential purposes by one and two families and
containing one or two dwelling units, for the purpose of the fire code.
Dwelling Unit is one room or rooms connected together and containing independent cooking, sleeping and bathroom facilities, constituting a
separate, independent housekeeping establishment for one family, for owner occupancy or rental or lease to the same family for a time period of
more than 31 consecutive days and physically separated from any other dwelling unit by a wall or yard.
Fire Prevention Bureau is the Fire Department of the jurisdiction.
Home Occupation is any occupation or profession conducted solely by the resident occupants in their place of abode, involving primarily service
and limited sale of commodities upon the premises, for the purposes of the fire code.
Licensed Daycare is a daycare that is licensed with the State of Iowa.
Licensed Fire Alarm Monitoring Service is a business that supplies and/or contracts with a UL listed remote station monitoring service.
Self-Luminous is having the ability to self-generate light without the aid of batteries or electrical current.
Townhouse is a single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units in which each unit extends from foundation to
roof and open on at least two sides for the purpose of the fire code.
WestCom is the 9-1-1 dispatch center that serves the City of Clive.
Chapter 3 GENERAL PRECAUTIONS AGAINST FIRE
Add Section 307.2.1.1 Responsible Agencies For Open Burning. Within the city limits of Clive; in Polk County, approval from Polk County
Water, Air and Waste Management Department and the Code Official; in Dallas County, approval from State of Iowa DNR and the Code Official;
future annexed land shall use the County Water, Air and Waste Management Department of record and/or DNR and the Code Official.
Add Section 307.2.1.2 Businesses That Sell Fire Pits, Chiminea And Other Outdoor Recreational Fire Devices:
Within the City limits of Clive, any business that offers for sale fire pit product lines such as patio fire tables, chimineas and other outdoor
recreational fire/ember/ash producing devices, shall clearly post signage or notice to customers stating that the devices are not legal to use as
designed within the City limits of Clive.
Amend section 308.1.4 Open Flame Cooking Devices.
Replace with: No barbecue grills or other devices which produce ashes or embers shall be operated or stored within twenty (20) feet of multistory
buildings such as apartment buildings and condominiums. A maximum of one 20# propane cylinder attached to the cooking device shall be
allowed. Exception: One- and two-family dwellings and townhomes. Cooking devices and/or the propane cylinders shall not be stored inside the
living unit of apartment buildings and/or condominiums.
Chapter 5 FIRE SERVICE FEATURE
Amend section 503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm),
exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14
feet.
Amend section 505.1 Premises Identification to read as follows: Approved numbers or addresses shall be placed on all new and existing
buildings in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property. Said numbers shall be black or white
and contrast with their background. Where required by the Code Official, address numbers shall be provided in greater dimension or additional
approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building is not visible from the public
way, a monument sign, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be maintained.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 313/439
Address numbers shall be in Arabic numerals or alphabet letters a minimum of four (4) inches in height with a minimum stroke width of two
inches. Exceptions:
1. Color of numbers may deviate from black or white for just cause when approved by the Code Official.
2. All commercial buildings shall have address numbers in Arabic numerals or alphabet letters a minimum of five inches in height with a
minimum stroke width of one-half inch. Monument signs shall have the address installed a minimum of 36 inches from the ground. Addresses
located 100 to 199 feet from the street shall have be a minimum of six (6) inches in height with a minimum stroke width of one-half (1/2) inch.
Addresses located 200 to 299 feet from the street shall have be a minimum of eight (8) inches in height with a minimum stroke width of one
inch. For each additional 100 feet from the street, the number shall increase by an additional two (2) inches in height with the stroke increased
proportionally. Measurements to determine the minimum number or letter size shall be measured from the approved address location to the
centerline of the street for which the premises is addressed. Minimum height and minimum stroke may be increased by the Code Official.
3. Exterior suite numbers shall be a minimum of four inches in height with a minimum stroke width of one-half (1/2) inch.
4. Interior suite numbers shall be a minimum of two inches in height and ADA compliant.
5. Address location for commercial buildings shall be determined by the Code Official.
Add section 506.3 Location Of Knox Box. The location of the key box "Knox Box" is to be determined by the Code Official. Height of the key
box shall be no more than six feet from the ground to the top of the key box unless approved otherwise by the Code Official.
Amend section 507.5.1.1 Fire Sprinkler System Support. A fire hydrant shall be located no more than 100 feet from a fire sprinkler connection
on hard surface, easily accessible by fire apparatus and meeting the approval of the Code Official.
Add Exception: The distance shall be permitted to exceed 100 feet (30 m) where approved by the Fire Code Official.
Amend section 507.5.5 Clear Space Around Hydrants. Replace with: A five-foot clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of
fire hydrants as measured from the center-point of the hydrant except as otherwise required or approved.
Add section 507.5.7 Fire Hydrant Markers And Identification Color. When required by the Code Official, hydrant locations shall be identified
by the installation of an approved reflective marker. Both public and private hydrants shall be painted to Clive Water Utility specifications.
Add section 507.5.8 Fire Hydrant Installation. Fire hydrants to be installed with grade mark on fire hydrant at finish grade and steamer
connection to face parking lot or access road for fire apparatus hook-up.
Add section 507.5.9 Fire Hydrant Maintenance Schedule. Private fire hydrants shall be inspected, tested and lubricated on a five year basis or
sooner by Clive Public Works per rules established by Clive Public Works Water Utility.
Amend section 511 Fire And Emergency Vehicle Lanes
511.1 General. Fire Department fire lanes shall be provided and maintained in accordance with section 511.
511.2. Designation. The Code Official may designate fire lanes on private and public property as deemed necessary for the protection of life
and property.
511.3. Obstruction. No person shall stop, stand, park a vehicle, place or keep any obstruction or thing in a designated fire lane that would
prevent the fire lane from being immediately accessible to the Fire Department or in any other manner to deter or hinder the Fire Department
from gaining immediate access to the fire lane. A written request to the Code Official for temporary obstruction of a fire lane shall be submitted
for approval.
Amend 511.4. Signs And Markings. Wherever a fire lane has been designated, the Code Official shall cause appropriate signs and markings
to be placed identifying those fire lanes. Fire lanes may be painted traffic red in addition to fire lane signage. Fire lane signs shall be
permanently mounted and the front of the sign set at 90 degrees to the street facing the direction of travel or as approved by the Code Official.
Fire lane signs shall be placed two to four feet from the edge of the street. The top of fire lane signs shall be approximately six feet from the
ground. Intermediate fire lane signs shall be set every 100 feet in a continuous fire lane. The "begins" sign shall mark the beginning of a fire
lane and shall be mounted below the first fire lane sign. The "ends" and "begins" signage may be omitted due to location of the fire lane by the
Code Official. The "ends" sign shall mark the ending of a fire lane and shall be mounted below the last fire lane sign. Signs shall be 18 inches
tall by 12 inches wide, with red letters on a white reflective background to read "Fire Lane - No Parking Except for Emergency Vehicles, Fine
$50," unless otherwise directed and approved by the Fire Code Official, conforming to state law.
Amend 511.5 Maintenance. Maintenance of the fire lane signage and painted curbs where applicable shall be the responsibility of the property
owner/tenant. All markings as required above shall be maintained as often as needed to clearly identify the designated fire lane area.
Chapter 6 BUILDING SERVICES AND SYSTEMS
Delete sections 603.8, 603.8.1, 603.8.2, 603.8.3, 603.8.4 and 603.8.5
Amend section 604.8 Shutdown Of Emergency And Standby Power Systems. In addition to the requirements of NFPA 10 for a remote
manual stop, a keyed switch to shut down the generator shall be located at the remote annunciator panel or fire panel. Location to be determined
by the Code Official. If there is no annunciator or fire alarm panel, or the location of the switch is determined to be inadequate for safe operation,
the Code Official shall determine a satisfactory location.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 314/439
Amend section 604.9 Emergency Generator Signs. Signage as determined by the Code Official shall be placed on the main electrical
disconnect and local breaker panel tied to generator power. Signage shall be placed on doors to electrical rooms and rooms with emergency
power in them. Signage shall be placed near the annunciator panel or fire alarm panel if a keyed shut down switch is unable to be installed
denoting the location of the emergency shutdown switch or button for the generator. Any approved signs shall contain the word "CAUTION" in
black letters at least 2 inches high on a yellow background. Such warning signs shall be placed so as to be readily discernible.
Chapter 9 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
Amend section 903.2 Where Required to read as follows: An approved automatic fire extinguishing system is required if the gross square
footage of a building is equal to or greater than the following: For the purposes of this section, "fire separations" shall not be permitted to reduce
the total gross square footage of a building or area for the purpose of calculating the fire sprinkler square footage requirements.
For the purposes of this section, "story" shall be defined as any level of a structure, whether above or below grade capable of occupancy.
Exemption for buildings or structures. To be exempt from meeting the requirements to have fire sprinklers systems installed, the buildings
or structures per legal lot or contiguous lots under common ownership, must be separated by twenty (20) feet and have 1-hour rated exterior
walls on both buildings or structures so as not to have the combined total of their gross square footage applied to this section of the code.
Note, the square footage used for calculating total gross square footage of a building or structure shall be measured using the outside
dimensions of the total building or structure to include attached or detached buildings or structures meeting the above requirement.
Open corridors/hallways shall be required to have fire sprinklers installed in them when the building they are constructed in is required by this
Code to have a fire sprinkler system.
An approved complete automatic fire extinguishing system shall be installed on all levels (including wood attics and wood cocklofts, but not
wood attics and wood cocklofts in one- and two-family dwellings) in all buildings and structures erected from and after the effective date of the
ordinance codified by this chapter, in which the gross square floor area exceeds the amounts specified in the following tables. An "approved
automatic fire extinguishing system" includes, but is not limited to, a complete automatic fire sprinkler system. The following sections requiring
complete automatic fire sprinkler systems shall install the fire sprinkler system following NFPA 13 standards unless otherwise noted.
Alternative automatic extinguishing systems may be used if in the opinion of the Code Official the same life safety and property conservation
measures are equivalent to the NFPA standard listed in this Code.
Delete sections 903.2.1, 903.2.1.1, 903.2.1.2, 903.2.1.3, 903.2.1.4, 903.2.1.5, 903.2.2, 903.2.3, 903.2.4, 903.2.4.1, 903.2.5, 903.2.5.1, 903.2.5.2,
903.2.5.3, 903.2.6, 903.2.7, 903.2.9, 903.2.9.1, 903.2.9.2, 903.2.10, 903.2.10.1, 903.2.11.
Add section 903.2.1 Group A to read as follows:
(Suppression Type)
Group A:
NFPA
13
A-1. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an assembly use, usually with fixed seating, intended for the production
and viewing of the performing arts or motion pictures including, but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification definition
A-1.
1. Occupant load of 299 or less 4,500
s.f.
2. Occupant load of 300 or more. 0 s.f.
NFPA
13
A-2. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an assembly use intended for food and/or drink consumption, including,
but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification definition A-2.
1. Occupant load of 49 or less 1,500
s.f.
2. Occupant load of 50 or more 0 s.f.
NFPA
13
A-3. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an assembly use intended for worship, recreation or amusement and
other assembly uses not classified elsewhere in group A, including, but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification
definition A-3.
1. Occupant load of 299 or less 4,500
s.f.
2. Occupant load of 300 or more 4,500
s.f.
NFPA
13
A-4. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an assembly use intended for viewing of indoor sporting events and
activities with spectator seating, including, but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification definition A-4.
1. Occupant load of 299 or less 6,000
s.f.
2. Occupant load of 300 or more 4,500
s.f.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 315/439
NFPA
13
A-5. Building or structures or portions thereof, an assembly use intended for participation in or viewing outdoor activities
including, but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification Definition A-5 and IFC section 903.2.1.5 for areas to be provided
with protection.
1,000
s.f.
Add section 903.2.2 Group B to read as follows:
Group B:
NFPA
13
B. Building or structures or portions thereof, used for office, professional or service type transactions, including storage of
records and accounts. Business occupancies shall include, but not be limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification definition B.
4,500
s.f.
Add section 903.2.3 Group E to read as follows:
Group E:
NFPA
13
E. Building or structures or portions thereof, used by six or more persons at any one time for educational purposes. 0
s.f.
NFPA
13
A licensed daycare is any buildings or structures, or portions thereof, used for educational, supervision or personal care services
for more than five children older than 21/2 years of age shall be classified as an E occupancy.
0
s.f.
Add section 903.2.4 Group F to read as follows:
Group F:
NFPA
13
F-1. Moderate-hazard factory and industrial occupancies including factory and industrial uses not classified as group F, division
2 occupancies shall include, but not be limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification definition F-1.
2,500
s.f.
NFPA
13
F-1.1. Woodworking operations which generate finely divided combustible waste or uses finely divided combustible materials. 2,500
s.f.
NFPA
13
F-2. Low-hazard factory and industrial occupancy uses that involve the fabrication or manufacturing of noncombustible
materials which during finishing, packing or processing do not involve a significant fire hazard shall include, but not be limited to:
See IFC Occupancy Classification definition F-1.
4,500
s.f.
Add section 903.2.5 Group H to read as follows:
Group H:
NFPA
13
H-1. Building or structures or portions thereof, that pose a detonation hazard in excess of those listed in table 5003.1.1 (See 2015
IBC) shall include, but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification definition H-1.
0
s.f.
NFPA
13
H-2. Building or structures or portions thereof, which contain materials that pose a deflagration hazard or a hazard from
accelerated burning in excess of those listed in table 5003.1.1 (See 2015 IBC) shall include, but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy
Classification definition H-2.
0
s.f.
NFPA
13
H-3. Building or structures or portions thereof, which contain materials that readily support combustion or pose physical hazard in
excess of those listed in table 5003.1.1 (See 2015 IBC) shall include, but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification
definition H-3.
0
s.f.
NFPA
13
H-4. Building or structures or portions thereof, which contain materials that are health hazards in excess of those listed in table
5003.1.1 (See 2015 IBC) shall include, but not limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification definition H-4.
0
s.f.
NFPA
13
H-5. Semiconductors fabrication facilities and comparable research and development areas in which production materials are
used, and the aggregate quantity of material is in excess of those listed in table 5003.1.1 (See 2015 IBC). Such facilities and areas
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with section 415.10 of IBC. Design of the sprinkler system shall not be less than
table 903.2.5.2.
0
s.f.
NFPA
13
Pyroxylin plastics. Buildings or structures where cellulose nitrate film or pyroxylin plastics are manufactured, stored or handled in
quantities exceeding 100 pounds.
0
s.f.
Add section 903.2.6 Group I to read as follows:
Group I:
NFPA
13D
or
I-1. Building or structures or portions thereof, housing more than 16 persons, on a 24-hour basis, who because of age, mental
disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment but which provides personal care services. The occupants
are capable of responding to an emergency situation without physical assistance from staff. A facility such as the above with five
0
s.f.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 316/439
NFPA
13R
or fewer persons shall be classified as group R-3. A facility such as the above with at least six and not more than 16 persons shall
be classified as group R-4.
NFPA
13
I-2. Building or structures or portions thereof, used for medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or custodial care on a 24-hour basis
of more than five persons who are not capable of self-preservation. A facility such as the above with five or fewer persons shall be
classified as group R-3. Childcare facility is any buildings or structures, or a portion thereof, which provides care on a 24-hour
basis to more than five children 21/2 years of age or less shall be classified as group I-2.
0
s.f.
NFPA
13
I-3. Building or structures or portions thereof, which are inhabited by more than five persons who are under restraint or security.
See IFC Occupancy Classification definition I-3 for type of condition.
0
s.f.
NFPA
13
I-4. Building or structures or portions thereof, which are occupied by persons of any age who receive custodial care for less than
24 hours by individuals other than parents or guardians, relatives by blood, marriage or adoption and in a place other than the
home of the person cared for. A facility such as the above with five or fewer persons shall be classified as group R-3. Places of
worship during religious functions are not included.
0
s.f.
NFPA
13
Adult care facilities provide accommodations for less than 24 hours for more than five unrelated adults and provides supervision
and personal care services. Childcare facilities provide supervision and personal care on less than a 24 hour basis for more than
five children 21/2 years of age or less.
0
s.f.
Add section 903.2.7 Group M to read as follows:
Group M:
NFPA
13
Building or structures or portions thereof, for the display and sale of merchandise, and involving stocks of goods, wares or
merchandise, incidental to such purposes and accessible to the public shall include, but not be limited to: See IFC Occupancy
Classification definition group M. (High-piled storage to refer to chapter 32 IFC)
4,500
s.f.
Add section 903.2.8 Group R to read as follows:
Group R:
NFPA 13R in 4 stories or less, NFPA 13 in more than 4
stories, both systems to include attic space as NFPA 13
R-1. Hotels, motels, boarding houses (transient). (Occupy less than 30
days)
0 s.f.
NFPA 13R in 4 stories or less, NFPA 13 in more than 4
stories, both systems to include attic space as NFPA 13
R-2. Apartment houses, condominiums, boarding houses
(nontransient), convents, dormitories, fraternities and sororities,
monasteries.
0 s.f.
NFPA 13R to include attic space as NFPA 13 Convents, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, monasteries. 0 s.f.
NFPA 13D R-3. Dwellings. 8,000 s.f.
NFPA 13D R-3. Townhouse. Refer to
IFC 2015
Townhouses that are not open on at least two sides are required to install fire sprinkler systems as set forth in the IFC, 2015 edition.
NFPA 13D or NFPA 13R R-4. Residential care/assisted living facilities for more than five but not
more than 16 occupants, excluding staff.
0 s.f.
Add section 903.2.9 Group S to read as follows:
Group S:
NFPA
13
S-1. Moderate hazard storage occupancies including building or portions of buildings used for storage of combustible materials
not classified as group S, division 2 or group H occupancies but not be limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification definition
group S-1.
6,000
s.f.
NFPA
13
Repair garages/service stations. 3,500
s.f.
NFPA
13
Bulk storage of tires. 20,000
cu.f.
NFPA
13
S-2. Low-hazard storage occupancies including buildings or portions of buildings used for storage of noncombustible
materials, but not be limited to: See IFC Occupancy Classification definition group S-2.
15,000
s.f.
Add section 903.2.10.2 Group U to read as:
Group U: Private garages, carports, sheds and agricultural buildings. n/a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 317/439
Amend section 903.2.10.3 delete Exceptions 1, 2 and 3
Add section 903.2.11.7 R-3 Emergency Egress Option. A complete NFPA 13 D sprinkler system may be installed in lieu of the emergency
egress in basements, Division R-3 occupancies.
Add section 903.2.16 Existing Occupancies
Section 903.2.16.1 General. A complete fire extinguishing system shall be installed no more than 5 years after an annexation into the city as per
NFPA 101 for existing occupancies.
Amend section 903.3.1.2.1 Group R Balconies And Decks. Sprinkler protection shall be provided for exterior balconies, decks and ground floor
patios of dwelling units where the building is required to have a fire sprinkler system installed. Sidewall sprinklers that are used to protect the
area shall be permitted to be located so that their deflectors are within one inch to six inches below the structural members and a maximum
distance of 14 inches below the deck of the exterior balconies and decks that are constructed of open wood joist construction.
Amend section 903.3.7 Fire Department Connections.
The location of the fire department connections shall be approved by the fire code official.
Add section 903.3.7.1 Clear Space Around Fire Department Connections. A 5 foot clear space on each side of the connection to include in
front of the connection shall be maintained except as otherwise required or approved by the code official.
Add section 903.3.7.2 Fire Department Connection Identification. A minimum of 110 candela weather proof strobe light suitable for cold
weather use with a minimum of 75 candelas at minus 30° shall be tied into the building fire alarm system and mounted directly above the Fire
Department connection between seven feet and ten feet in height from the ground or as approved by the Code Official.
Add section 903.3.7.3 Fire Sprinkler Riser Room. A fire sprinkler riser room shall be separated from the electrical room. The riser room shall
have no electrical panels, devices or apparatus inside the room other than the outlets or support equipment (lighting) air compressor and heater
required for the use by the fire sprinkler system and/or the fire alarm panel. Access to the fire sprinkler riser room shall not be accessed from the
electrical room, but the electrical room may be accessed from the fire sprinkler riser room.
Add section 903.3.7.4 Fire Sprinkler Riser Signage. Signage as determined by the Code Official shall be placed on the main sprinkler riser
denoting a shunt trip has been installed.
Add section 903.3.7.5 Fire Sprinklers For Canopies. A canopy covering a door that is required to be marked as an exit shall be required to
have fire sprinklers installed outside that door if the canopy extends more than four feet out from the door and is 12 feet or less in height from the
ground regardless if the canopy is combustible or noncombustible. All canopies, regardless of height or construction type, that have vehicle
access under them with door openings shall be required to have fire sprinklers installed under the entire canopy.
Exception. If a building is not required by Code to have a fire sprinkler system, section 903.3.7.5 does not apply.
ALTERNATIVE AUTOMATIC FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS
Add section 904.12.2.1 Ventilation Operation. The ventilation system shall shut down the make-up air to the hood and continue to exhaust
upon activation of the hood fire extinguishing system. Supply air openings other than part of the hood system shall be a minimum of six feet from
any part of a Type I hood. Supply air openings closer than 6 feet must shut down upon activation of the extinguishing system.
Exception. § 904.12.2.1 may be revoked if the fire extinguishing agent will not perform to specifications due to exhausting.
STANDPIPE SYSTEMS
Add section 905.3.9 Additional Standpipe Systems: Additional standpipe systems may be added to new buildings or structures as deemed
necessary by the Code Official.
PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS
Delete section 906.1 Where Required. The exception only.
Amend table 906.3(1) Fire Extinguishers For Class A Fire Hazards to read as follows:
Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in low and moderate hazard occupancies shall be 5lb. ABC in buildings that are covered
throughout with a fire sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in low or moderate hazard occupancy, a 10lb. ABC fire extinguisher
shall be installed. Spacing is based on a 75-foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher. Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in high
hazard occupancies shall be 10lb. ABC in buildings that are covered throughout with a fire sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler system
in a high hazard occupancy, a 20lb. ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed. Spacing is based on a 50-foot travel distance to the fire
extinguisher.
Amend table 906.3(2) Fire Extinguishers For Flammable And Combustible Liquids With Depths Of Less Than Or Equal To 0.25 In. to
read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 318/439
Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in low hazard occupancies shall be 5lb. ABC in buildings that are covered throughout with a fire
sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in a low hazard occupancy, a 10lb. ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed. Spacing is
based on a 50-foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher. Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in moderate hazard occupancies shall
be 10lb. ABC in buildings that are covered throughout with a fire sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in a moderate hazard
occupancy, a 20lb. ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed. Spacing is based on a 50-foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher. Portable fire
extinguishers for fire protection in high hazard occupancies shall be 20lb. ABC in buildings that are covered throughout with a fire sprinkler
system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in a high hazard occupancy, a 20lb. ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed. Spacing is based on a
50-foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher with a fire sprinkler system, 30-foot travel distance with no fire sprinkler system. Other hazardous
occupancies will refer to NFPA 10.
FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
Add section 907.1.4. Fire Alarm Control Panels
Each building shall have no more than one (1) Fire Alarm Control Panel (FACP).
Panel Height. Installation of the fire alarm panels shall not exceed six feet in height measured from the floor to the top of the panel.
Exception 1. Panel height may be altered by the Code Official.
Exception 2. Suppression system releasing panels are not required to meet limitation in the number of panels.
Amend section 907.2 Where Required General to read as follows: An approved addressable fire alarm system meeting provisions of this Code
and NFPA 72 shall be installed when the gross square footage of a building is equal to or greater than the area as specified in sections 903.2.1
through 903.2.11 inclusive, subject to the authority having jurisdiction or by section 907.2, which ever shall be more restrictive.
Exceptions:
1. Buildings with eight (8) or less initiating devices may use zoned systems provided only one device is used per zone. Each device shall have
a plain English LCD (liquid crystal display). This alpha/numeric descriptor location is required to be reported to the WestCom dispatch center
upon activation of the fire alarm system.
2. R-3 dwellings are not required to meet section 907.2 of this Code.
3. Townhouses are required to be monitored only if a single fire sprinkler system is used for multiple units.
Add section 907.2(a) Manual Fire Alarm Pull Boxes. Manual fire alarm pull boxes "pull stations" shall be required where deemed necessary by
the Code Official.
Add section 907.2(b) Monitoring. All fire alarm systems shall be monitored by a UL listed monitoring station.
Add section 907.2(c) Location. Each address point ID shall have an alpha/numeric descriptor location for the fire alarm system. This
alpha/numeric descriptor location is required to be reported to the City Fire Department dispatch center upon activation of the fire alarm system.
Add section 907.2(d) Where Required. Where corridors and/or hallways are protected by fire sprinkler systems they shall also be protected by
smoke detection. Smoke detection shall be of the photoelectric type or as approved by the Code Official.
Amend section 907.2.3 General to read as follows: Educational occupancies shall have a monitored fire alarm system. Upon notification,
existing educational occupancies having existing fire alarm systems shall comply within two years to meet the monitoring of the fire alarm
system.
Delete section 907.2.8 and 907.2.9
Add section 907.2.8 Group R General. Group R-1; Group R-2 apartment houses, condominiums and boarding houses (non-transient)
convents, dormitories, fraternities, sororities and monasteries; and Group R-4 shall have a monitored addressable fire alarm system. Upon
adoption of this Fire Code, Group R-1; Group R-2 apartment houses, condominiums and boarding houses (non-transient) convents, dormitories,
fraternities, sororities and monasteries that have existing automatic fire alarm systems shall comply within five years to have that fire alarm
system monitored.
Amend section 907.2.11 Single And Multi-Station Smoke Alarms to read as follows:
Listed single- and multiple-station smoke alarms complying with UL 217 shall be installed in accordance with provisions of this Code and the
household fire warning equipment provision of NFPA 72. Smoke alarms shall be addressable with sounder bases and tied into the building fire
alarm system as a supervisory signal only. Mini horns are not required if notification from a building fire alarm system is through the smoke
alarms with sounder bases.
Note: section 907.2.11 only applies to R-1, R-2, R-4 and I-1 occupancies
Add section 907.6.4.1 Zone And Address Location Labeling. Fire alarm panels shall have all zones and address points plainly and
permanently labeled as to their location on the outside of the panel or on an easily readable map of the building if no display screen is present.
Amend section 907.6.6 Monitoring General to read as follows: When required by this chapter, or the Code Official, an approved UL listed
remote station in accordance with NFPA 72 shall monitor fire alarm systems to provide for the immediate and automatic notification of the Fire
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 319/439
Department.
Exception. Supervisory service is not required in one- and two-family dwellings.
Add section 910.1 Exception 1. The Code Official may require smoke removal equipment be installed if it is deemed necessary by the Code
Official for the protection of life and property.
Add section 912.1.1 Fire Department Connection Height. The Fire Department connection shall be located not less than 18 inches from the
bottom of the cap(s) and not more than three feet from the top of the cap(s) above the level of the adjacent grade or access level. The Code
Official for just cause may grant deviation to this height.
Amend section 912.4 Access around Fire Department Connections to read as follows: Immediate access to Fire Department connect shall be
maintained at all times and without obstruction by fences, bushes, trees, walls or any other objects for a minimum of a five-foot clear space on
each side of the connection to include in front of and above the connection.
Section 1008 MEANS OF EGRESS ILLUMINATION
Amend section 1008.3.1 General
In the event of the power supply failure in rooms and spaces that requires two or more means of egress or are 400 square feet or greater, an
emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas as approved by the Code Official:
1. Aisles
2. Corridors
3. Exit access stairways and ramps
Amend section 1008.3.2 Buildings
In the event of the power supply failure in rooms and spaces that require two or more means of egress or are 400 square feet or greater, an
emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
1. Interior exit access stairways and ramps
2. Interior and exterior stairways and ramps
3. Exit passageways
4. Vestibules and areas of the level of exit discharge used for the exit discharge in accordance with Section 1028.1.
5. Exterior landings as required by section 1010.1.6 for exit doorways that lead directly to the exit discharge.
Section 1009 ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS
Add to section 1009.2 Continuity and Components item #11
11. Components of exterior walking surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or other approved hard surface.
Section 1010 DOORS, GATES AND TURNSTILES
Add the following language to section 1010.1.9.1 Hardware
Thumb turn locks shall not be allowed.
Amend section 1010.1.9.8(#3) Sensor release of electrically locked egress doors. Replace with: The doors shall be arranged to unlock from
a manually operated lighted emergency exit button located 40 inches to 48 inches vertically above the floor and within five feet of the secured
doors. When operated, the manual unlocking device (emergency exit button) shall result in direct interruption of power to the lock; independent of
the access control system electronics and the doors shall remain unlocked for a minimum of 30 seconds. Ready access shall be provided to the
emergency button and shall be clearly identified by a sign. All doors controlled by an emergency exit button shall have signage as required in
section 1008.1.9.8 criteria 3. Only one locking system is allowed per door. Doors must retain positive latching of door at all times if installed in a
required rated corridor system.
Add section 1010.1.9.8(#3a) Access-Controlled Egress Doors Criteria 3a to read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 320/439
Emergency exit sign to read as follows: "EMERGENCY DOOR OPERATION, PUSH BUTTON" (Need arrow pointing from sign to lighted
button) minimum height letters three-fourths inch with contrasting color to the door and affixed to door between 48 to 60 inches.
Section 1013 EXIT SIGNS
Add section 1013.1.1 Additional Exit Signs. Exit signs may be required at the discretion of the Code Official to clarify an exit or exit access.
Amend section 1013.2 Floor-Level Exit Signs In Group R-1. Low-level exits signs meeting illumination requirements of section 1013.3 shall be
provided in all interior exit corridors serving guest rooms of hotels/motels in Group R, Division 1 occupancies.
The bottom of the sign shall not be less than six inches (152mm) or more than eight inches (203mm) above the floor level. For exit doors, the
signs shall be on the door or adjacent to the door with the closest edge of the sign within four inches (102mm) of the door frame. Fixtures shall
be constructed to withstand abuse from foot traffic and luggage (metal frame work is preferred but not required).
Amend section 1013.3 Exit Sign Illumination to read as follows: Exit signs shall use an LED lighting system and be illuminated internally. Exit
signs to have battery backup unless an on-site generator set is used. Luminance on the face of an exit sign shall have an intensity of not less
than 5.0 foot-candles (53.82 lux).
Add section 1013.3.1 Combination Lights: Combination exit sign/emergency light lights shall not be allowed.
Add section 1013.3.2 Separation Of Emergency Lighting. Emergency lighting shall be separated from exit sign a minimum of six feet.
Add section 1013.3.3 Self-Luminous Exit Signs. Self-luminous exit signs installed after July 1, 2004 are not allowed throughout the entire city.
Exceptions.
1. Approved self-luminous exit signs may be allowed in tents by the Code Official.
2. Tactile Exit signs required by Section 1013.4 need not be provided with illumination.
Delete sections 1013.5, 1013.6, 1013.6.1, 1013.6.2 and 1013.6.3
Chapter 33 FIRE SAFETY DURING CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
Amend section 3301.2 Purpose. Replace with: This chapter prescribes minimum safeguards for construction, alteration and demolition
operations to provide reasonable safety to life safety and property from fire and emergencies during these operations.
Add section 3310.1.1 Construction Site Access. Construction sites shall have approved access roads as noted on the approved site plan to all
areas of building or structure being constructed prior to actual construction taking place. Access roads to buildings or structures shall be
constructed to provide vehicular access to within 50 feet of the building or structure with the middle of the building or structure no further than
150 feet from the access road. If the middle of the building or structure is more than 150 feet from the access road, temporary access roads shall
be constructed around the building or structure where topography allows. It is highly recommended to install parking lots if planned for, prior to
the beginning of construction, for storage of construction material and easier access to the site. Access road surface material shall be of
aggregate or a base layer of asphalt capable of meeting load limits as outlined in Appendix D § D102 of this Code for fire apparatus imposed
loads unless otherwise approved by the Code Official.
Chapter 50 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Add section 5003.13 Hazardous Substances, Notification And Cleanup.
(a) Scope. This section shall apply to the release of hazardous substances and the notification, cleanup and recovery of costs associated with
the mitigation of hazardous conditions.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, these words have the following Meaning:
1. "Cleanup" means the removal of the hazardous substances to a place where the waste will not cause any danger to persons or the
environment, in accordance with the state statutes, rules and regulations therefore, or the treatment of the material as defined herein to
eliminate the hazardous condition, including the restoration of the area to a general good appearance without noticeable odor as far as
practicable. "Cleanup" includes all actions necessary to contain, collect, identify, analyze, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a hazardous
substance and to restore the sites from which the hazardous substance was cleaned up.
2. "Hazardous condition" means any situation involving the actual, imminent or probable spillage, leakage or release of a hazardous
substance:
(i) Within the city or onto city property located outside the city which, because of the quantity, strength and toxicity of the hazardous
substance, its mobility in the environment and its persistence, creates an immediate potential danger to the public health or safety; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 321/439
(ii) Onto land, into the waters within the state or into the atmosphere, but outside the city, which, because of the quantity, strength and
toxicity of the hazardous substance, its mobility in the environment and its persistence, creates an immediate potential danger to the
public health or safety of persons or property within the city.
Hazardous conditions include any accident involving hazardous materials required to be reported under section 321.266(4) of the Code of
Iowa.
3. "Hazardous Substance" means any substance or mixture of substance that presents a danger to the public health or safety or
environment and includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive or flammable, or that is an irritant or that, in confinement,
generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means. The following are examples of substances which, in sufficient quantity,
may be hazardous: acids; alkalis; explosives; fertilizers; heavy metals such as chromium, arsenic, mercury, lead and cadmium; industrial
chemicals; paint thinners; paints; pesticides; petroleum products; poisons; radioactive materials; sludges; and organic solvents. "Hazardous
substance" includes any hazardous waste identified or listed by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under
§ 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1976 as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous material designated under § 311
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977 or any hazardous materials designated by the secretary of
transportation under the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act, or any hazardous substance listed under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980.
4. "Person" is a natural person, his or her heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its
or their successors or assigns, or any other similar legal entity or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
5. "Responsible Person" means the person, whether the owner, agent, lessor or tenant, in charge of the hazardous substance being stored,
processed or handled, or the owner or bailee transporting hazardous wastes or substances whether on public ways or grounds or on private
property where the spill would cause danger to the public or to any persons or to the environment.
6. "Treatment" means a method, technique or process, including neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or biological
character or composition of a hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to render the substance non-hazardous, safer for transport,
amenable for recovery, amenable for storage or to reduce it in volume.
Treatment includes any activity or processing designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of hazardous substance to
render it nonhazardous.
(c) Notifications. When a hazardous condition is created, the responsible person shall notify WestCom 911 Dispatch Center and the Fire
Department immediately upon discovery of the condition but in no instance later than 30 minutes after the discovery of the hazardous
condition.
(d) Cleanup Required. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a
hazardous substance, so that the hazardous substance, or a constituent of the hazardous substance, may enter the environment or be emitted
into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground waters, the Fire Chief or the Chief's designee may remove or provide for removal
and the disposal of the hazardous substance at any time, unless the Fire Chief or the Chief's designee determines the removal will be properly
and promptly accomplished by the responsible person. If the responsible party does not initiate and complete cleanup within the time
designated by the Fire Department, the city may proceed to remedy the hazardous condition by performing the necessary cleanup services.
(e) Loss, Burden Or Costs. A responsible person shall be liable to the city for all mitigation costs incurred by the city or other contract
agencies, including, but not limited to, chemical damage, contamination of equipment, and the use of consumable materials. If charges for
cleanup costs are not paid within 30 days after invoice, the city shall proceed to obtain payment by all legal means.
Chapter 56 EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS
Amend section 5601.1 Scope to read as follows:
Add (a) The City of Clive deems the use of first-class and second-class consumer fireworks as a threat to public safety or a nuisance to
landowners or persons with certain health conditions and therefore prohibits the use of first-class and second-class consumer fireworks in the
city. It shall be unlawful without a permit for any person to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any explosives,
explosive materials, first-class and second-class consumer fireworks within the corporate limits of the city of Clive.
Add (b) The sale of consumer fireworks shall be regulated by the State Fire Marshal (SFM) who shall establish dates of permitted sales, the
minimum requirements for obtaining a consumer fireworks seller license and registration by wholesalers, and shall issue such licenses and as
otherwise provided by state law and the SFM rules.
Add (c) Exceptions:
1. The Armed Forces of the United States, Coast Guard or National Guard;
2. Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopoeia.
3. The possession, storage and use of small ammunition when packaged in accordance with DOTn packaging requirements.
4. The possession, storage and use of not more than one pound (0.454 kg.) of commercially manufactured sporting black powder, 20
pounds (9 kg.) of smokeless powder and 10,000 small arms primers for hand loading of small arms ammunition for personal consumption.
5. The use of explosive materials by federal, state and local regulatory, law enforcement and fire agencies in their official capacities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 322/439
6. Special industrial explosive devices which in the aggregate contain less than 50 pounds (23 kg.) of explosive materials.
7. The possession, storage and use of blank industrial power load cartridges when packaged in accordance with DOTn packaging
regulations.
8. Transportation in accordance with DOT 49 C.F.R. parts 100 through 178.
9. Items preempted by federal regulations.
Add 10. Items considered as "Novelties" under state law.
Amend section 5601.2.4 Financial Responsibility to read as follows: The applicant shall, at the time he or she makes his or her application for
a permit, attach thereto a bond or certificate of insurance naming the applicant and the city as insured, in the sum of not less than $1,000,000,
provided that the Code Official or the City Council may at their discretion require a greater amount. The bond and insurance shall inure to the use
and benefit of the city and/or any person who suffers damage either to person or property by reason of the display of fireworks.
Amend section 5601.4 Qualifications to read as follows: Persons in charge of magazines, blasting, fireworks display or pyrotechnic special
effect operations shall not be under the influence of alcohol or drugs which impair sensory or motor skills, shall be at least 21 years of age, and
shall demonstrate knowledge of all safety precautions related to the storage, handling or use of explosives, explosive materials or fireworks.
Exception: Persons in charge of fireworks display or pyrotechnic special effect operations shall possess a valid PGI display fireworks operator
certification or equivalent certification approved by the Code Official.
Amend section 5601.7 Seizure. Replace with: The Code Official is authorized to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed or disposed of in
an approved manner, at the expense of the owner, explosives, explosive materials and all stocks of illegal fireworks (not state approved), offered
or exposed for sale, possess, stored and held to be in violation of this section.
Amend section 5605.1 Manufacture, Assembly And Testing Of Explosives, Explosive Materials And Fireworks to read as follows:
General: It shall be unlawful to manufacture, assemble and test explosives, explosive materials and fireworks within the corporate limits of the
City of Clive.
Exceptions.
1. The hand loading of small arms ammunition prepared for personal use and not offered for sale;
2. The mixing and loading of blasting agents at blasting sites in accordance with NFPA 495.
3. The use of binary explosives or phosphoric materials in blasting or pyrotechnic special effects applications in accordance with NFPA 495
or NFPA 1126.
Chapter 57 FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS
Add section 5704.2.9.7.11 Alternative Containment And Protection. All tanks that have a secondary tank of steel, concrete or approved
materials shall be capable of holding 110% of the product stored. A non-combustible roof and roof framework shall cover all open top secondary
tanks exposed to weather.
Chapter 61 LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES
Amend section 6104.2 Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits to read as follows: Within the limits established by law in the adopting
ordinance restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of
any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 1,000 gallons. Within the limits established by law in the adopting ordinance restricting
the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of M-1 Light Industrial Districts or M-2 Heavy Industrial District, the aggregate capacity of
any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 5,000 gallons.
REFERENCED STANDARDS
NFPA 10 2010 Edition
NFPA 13 2010 Edition
NFPA 13D 2010 Edition
NFPA 13R 2010 Edition
NFPA 20 2010 Edition
NFPA 30 2012 Edition
NFPA 30A 2012 Edition
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 323/439
NFPA 58 2014 Edition
NFPA 70 2011 Edition
NFPA 72 2010 Edition
NFPA 96 2010 Edition
NFPA 101 2012 Edition
NFPA 1123 2012 Edition
NFPA 1124 2006 Edition
NFPA 2001 2012 Edition
APPENDIX D. FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS.
Amend section D101.1 Scope to read as follows: Fire apparatus access roads shall be in accordance with this appendix and all other applicable
requirements of the International Fire Code. Public streets are regulated using the State Wide urban design and specifications for public
improvements as amended by the city of Clive. Private streets are regulated using the statewide urban design and specifications for public
improvements as amended by the City of Clive.
Section D103 Minimum Specifications
Amend D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed statewide urban design and specifications for public improvements as
amended by the city.
Amend D103.3 Turning Radius. The minimum turning radii shall be determined by the Code Official.
Amend D103.4 Dead Ends. Replace with: Dead-end fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed statewide urban design and specifications for
public improvements or as approved by City Engineer.
Amend D103.5 Fire Apparatus Access Road Gates. Replace with: Gates securing fire apparatus access roads shall comply with all of the
following criteria:
1. The minimum gate width shall accommodate a 14' clear drive lane width.
2. Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type;
3. Construction of the gate shall be of materials that allow for manual operation by one person;
4. Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and replaced or repaired when defective;
5. Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by Fire Department personnel for emergency access. Emergency
opening devices shall be approved by the Code Official;
6. Manual opening gates shall not be locked with a padlock or chain unless they are capable of being opened by means of forcible entry tools;
and
7. Locking device specifications shall be submitted for approval by the Code Official.
Amend D103.6 Signs. Replace with: Where required by the Code Official, fire apparatus access roads shall conform to section 511.4. Signs shall
be posted on one or both sides of the fire apparatus road as required by § D103.6.1 or D103.6.2.
Amend D103.6.1 Roads 20 To 26 Feet In Width to read as follows: Fire apparatus access roads 20 to 26 feet wide shall be posted on both sides
as a fire lane when required by the Code Official.
Amend D103.6.2 Roads More Than 26 Feet In Width to read as follows: Fire apparatus access roads more than 26 feet wide shall be posted on
one side of the road as a fire lane when required by the Code Official.
Amend section D104 Commercial And Industrial Developments.
Amend D104.1 Access. All buildings shall have at a minimum two fire apparatus accesses as approved by the Code Official. Based on the
building occupancy hazard the Code Official may require more than two fire apparatus accesses. The Code Official may reduce this requirement
for just cause as long as safety to the buildings/occupants is not jeopardized.
Amend D104.3 Remoteness. Where two access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half the
length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses. The Code
Official may reduce the separation distance between accesses for just cause as long as safety to the buildings/occupants is not jeopardized.
(Ord. 1042, 6-22-2017)
10-8-5: APPEALS:
Whenever the Chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the International
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 324/439
Fire Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of said Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal
from the decision of the Chief to the Fire Code Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (Ord. 1042, 6-22-2017)
10-8-6: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS:
The building official and the Code official of the Fire Department shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies for which permits are required in addition to those now enumerated in the Code.
The Code official shall post the list in a conspicuous place at the administrative offices of the Fire Department and distribute copies thereof to
interested persons. (Ord. 1042, 6-22-2017)
10-8-7: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
A. This Code is enacted only for the purpose of securing to individuals the enjoyment of rights and privileges to which they are entitled as members of
the public, rather than for the purpose of protecting any individual from harm.
B. The City, its officers, employees or agents make no representations or warranties of any kind whatsoever, expressed or implied, with respect to the
completeness or thoroughness of the inspections and examinations performed under this Code, but the inspections are made solely to assist the
owner of the building, structure, equipment and premises to meet certain minimum requirements of this Code and to compel, if necessary, the
owner to meet the minimum requirements for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of persons and property. Nothing herein contained in
this Code shall alleviate the owner of any building, structure, equipment and premises to make an independent inspection in order to fulfill the
requirements of this Code nor shall this Code be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any
building, structure, equipment or premises regulated herein from any damages to any person or property caused by defects or Code violations. The
City, its officers, employees or agents shall not be held as assuming any liability for damages to any person or property by reason of any
inspections authorized by this Code or investigations, or any approvals issued herein, or for any act or failure to act in the enforcement of this
Code. (Ord. 1042, 6-22-2017)
10-8-8: OUTSTANDING PERMITS:
If a building permit is outstanding on the effective date of this chapter and the Fire Code adopted hereby, the provisions of this chapter, and the Fire
Code adopted hereby shall apply to the work authorized by such permit, except to the extent that the Fire Chief and building official shall determine
that the application of such provisions to such work would be unreasonable. The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the
unreasonableness of such provisions. (Ord. 1042, 6-22-2017)
10-8-9: INDEMNITY:
The applicant for any permit under the Fire Code, by making application, assumes and agrees to pay all loss or damage to property whatsoever, and
injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in connection with
or related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of
such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Fire Code or any other ordinance of the City; and such applicant by making
such application, forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees, and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though acts or omissions of
the City, its officers or employees, may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of the permit issued
under the Fire Code whether or not expressly recited therein. (Ord. 1042, 6-22-2017)
10-8-10: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING STANDARDS:
In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the Fire Code adopted hereby, are found to be in conflict with any provision of Iowa Code or
regulations of the State Fire Marshal, or any provision of any zoning, building, fire, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, safety or health ordinance or Code
of the City, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the safety of persons and property shall prevail.
(Ord. 1042, 6-22-2017)
10-8-11: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided by law, violations of this chapter are simple misdemeanors and are punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) and/or a term of imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. Pursuant to Iowa Code section 100.41, the officials of the Fire Prevention
Bureau shall have the authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter or report the violation to the Clive Police Department for citation.
Violations of this chapter are also declared to be Municipal infractions and may be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. Officials of
the Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the discretion to enforce this chapter either as a Municipal infraction or a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 1042, 6-22-
2017)
10-8-12: FIREWORKS:
A. Definitions: The sale, use or exploding of fireworks within the City is subject to the definitions enumerated in Iowa Code section 727.2 and Iowa
Code section 100.19, which definitions are incorporated herein by reference.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 325/439
B. Sales - General Requirements: Prior to any person engaging in the sale of first-class or second-class consumer fireworks the person must provide
the following to the City Clerk or their designee who may issue the fireworks sales permit:
1. License: State license issued by the Iowa State Fire Marshal.
2. Site Plan: A site plan of the location where sales are requested. One paper or one electronic copy shall be provided.
3. Building Or Structure Floor Plan: A building or structure floor plan of the location where sales are requested. One paper copy or one electronic
copy shall be provided.
4. Approval Of Property Owner: Except where the person is the owner of the property, a copy of a lease agreement or letter of approval from the
property owner of the location where sales are requested.
5. Fire Inspection: Any property, building, or premises whether it be permanent or temporary, intended for the sale of first-class or second-class
consumer fireworks shall have an inspection completed by the Fire Chief or their designee prior to engaging in the sale of first-class or secondclass
consumer fireworks for each sales period set forth in Iowa Code section 727.2. The Fire Chief, or their designee, shall cause an inspection
to occur meeting the requirements of the current Fire Code adopted by the City of Clive, State law and regulations, and NFPA 1124.
C. Dates Of Sale: First-class and second-class consumer fireworks sales shall only be conducted in accordance with dates and times designated by
Iowa Code section 727.2. It shall be unlawful to sell consumer fireworks without meeting the requirements specified in this Code, or to sell
consumer fireworks outside of the dates specified.
1. Approved consumer fireworks sales meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be allowed from an approved permanent structure or building
between June 1 and July 8 and from December 10 until January 3.
2. Approved consumer fireworks sales meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be allowed from an approved temporary structure between
June 13 and July 8 and from December 10 until January 3.
D. Safety Requirements: The following safety requirements shall be adopted for all locations where consumer fireworks are sold:
1. All retailers and community groups shall remain compliant with all applicable laws and rules throughout the duration of their selling period.
2. Consumer fireworks sales shall only be allowed in areas properly zoned for such use.
3. No person shall sell consumer fireworks to a person under the age of eighteen (18).
4. Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to an intoxicated person or to any person whom a reasonable person would believe may be impaired by
other substances.
E. Declaration Of Emergency And Suspension Of The Discharge Of Fireworks:
1. Whenever drought, high winds, or other natural phenomena create, or are likely to create, hazardous conditions and increased chance of fire
danger and the Fire Chief determines that adverse conditions exist for the use and exploding of consumer fireworks, the Fire Chief, or their
designee, may issue a temporary ban on the use of consumer fireworks within the City of Clive. The Fire Chief, or their designee, shall have the
authority to declare an emergency and temporarily halt the use of all fireworks.
2. The Fire Chief, or their designee, shall inform the area radio and television stations and the local press of the emergency declaration and when
the emergency will be in effect and ask that public service announcements be made. The City Manager, or their designee, shall post information
concerning the emergency declaration and summarizing the regulations on the City website.
F. Manufacture Of Fireworks: It shall be unlawful for a person to manufacture consumer fireworks within the City limits without a permit as may be
required by local, State, or Federal laws and regulations.
G. Revocation Of Fireworks Sales Permit: The Fire Chief may, for cause, revoke the permit of any fireworks sales permit holder. An appeal of the
decision may be taken to the City Manager by filing a written notice with the City Clerk. The appeal must be filed within ten (10) days from the date
of the decision. The City Manager shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within seven (7) days from the receipt of the notice. The appeal shall stay
the decision of the Fire Chief unless the City Manager directs otherwise. A hearing on the appeal shall be scheduled before the City Manager or
the City Manager's designee within fourteen (14) days. At the public hearing, the applicant shall have the opportunity to present evidence or
arguments the applicant may have as to why the action of Fire Chief appealed from should not be approved by the City Manager. The City
Manager shall render a written decision on the appeal within seven (7) days after the hearing. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. The
parties may extend the time limits set forth herein by mutual agreement.
H. Violations: Unless otherwise provided by law or this Code, violations of any provisions of this section are hereby declared simple misdemeanors.
Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be fined a minimum amount of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and
punished as further provided in section 1-4A-2 of this Code and pursuant to Iowa Code section 727.2. Violations of this chapter shall be reported to
the State Fire Marshal.
I. Exceptions: This section does not prohibit the sale by a resident, dealer, manufacturer or jobber of such consumer fireworks as are not prohibited; or
the sale of any kind of fireworks if they are to be shipped out of State; or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal
purposes in athletic sports or by railroads or trucks for signal purposes, or by a recognized military organization. This section does not apply to any
substance or composition prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation purposes. (Ord. 1048, 10-12-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 326/439
Chapter 9
BUILDING NUMBERING
10-9-1: BUILDING NUMBERING MAP:
The community development director shall be responsible for preparing a building numbering map. A unique building address shall be assigned for
every principal residential building and every occupiable commercial building. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
10-9-2: PROPERTY OWNER REQUIREMENTS:
Every owner shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Display Number: The property owner shall place or cause to be installed, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and maintained on the
principal residential building or occupiable commercial building the assigned number in a conspicuous place visible to the street in figures not less
than four inches (4") in height and of a contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
B. Failure To Comply: If an owner refuses to install or maintain the building number as herein provided, or fails to do so for a period of thirty (30) days
following written notice, the city may proceed to install the assigned building number on the principal residential building or occupiable commercial
building and assess the costs against the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
10-9-3: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this code. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the city seeks court intervention
for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the city may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations. (Ord. 998, 1-8-2015)
Chapter 10
SWIMMING POOLS
10-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
BACKWASH: The process of cleansing the filter medium and/or elements by the reverse flow of water through the filter.
BARRIER: A permanent fence, wall, building wall, or combination thereof that completely surrounds the swimming pool and restricts access to the
swimming pool from the outside of the barrier. For the purpose of this definition, "permanent" shall mean not being able to be removed, lifted, or
relocated without the use of a tool.
IMMEDIATE VICINITY: Within ten feet (10') in any direction of an object while still being able to make eye contact with that same object.
PERMANENT SWIMMING POOL: A swimming pool in which the sides and bottom are primarily located in the ground and that by its construction
cannot be removed or disassembled on a seasonal basis.
POTABLE WATER: Water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes and that meets the requirements of the health authority
having jurisdiction.
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL: A swimming pool or spa owned or operated by a local or state government, or commercial interests or private entities
including, but not limited to, public or private schools, corporations, hotels, motels, camps, apartments, condominiums, health clubs, and country clubs.
RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL: Any swimming pool that is used, or intended for use, which is accessory to a one- or two-family residential dwelling
and is available only to the household and its private guests. A residential swimming pool used for any commercial purpose, including, but not limited
to, swimming lessons or exercise classes, shall comply with the requirements set forth by the Iowa department of public health swimming pool rules.
SPAS: A product with a water surface area that is less than one hundred (100) square feet intended for the immersion of persons in a temperature
controlled environment where water is circulated in a closed system such as a hot tub or whirlpool, and not intended to be drained and filled with each
use. A spa/hot tub usually includes a filter, a heater, a pump or pumps, and a control, and may also include other equipment, such as lights, blowers,
and water sanitizing equipment.
STORABLE SWIMMING POOL: A swimming pool in which the sides and bottom are primarily located aboveground and that may be removed or
disassembled on a seasonal basis.
SWIMMING POOL: A structure, chamber, tank, or area constructed of manmade material, whether permanent, storable, private or public, that is
intended for swimming, bathing, or wading. For the purpose of this definition, the following shall not be considered swimming pools:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 327/439
Landscape features such as fountains, fishponds, and garden ponds provided that the water surface area is less than fifty (50) square feet.
Ponds, lakes, and detention/retention facilities shall not be considered a swimming pool.
Storable swimming pools with a designed water depth of twelve inches (12") or less and which are drained and filled daily. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to require architects, builders, contractors, pool suppliers, property owners, their agents and others, to meet their
responsibilities with respect to proper construction, construction techniques, and premises safety, and to provide for inspection as a means of
compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any duty on the part of the city, its officers, agents, or employees, owing
to any individual member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this chapter to
create any duty or liability by the city, its officers, agents, or employees, to premises occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person. (Ord. 977, 5-30-
2013)
10-10-3: WARNING:
No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed, or certificates of occupancy issued pursuant to this chapter, as indicating
the safety of or quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter, nor inspections made pursuant thereto, nor certificates issued,
are intended to assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate
a decrease in the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a premises has been inspected pursuant to this
chapter shall not, in any way, constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-4: INTERPRETATION:
The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take precedence over any other language contained in this chapter. (Ord. 977, 5-30-
2013)
10-10-5: SCOPE:
A. New Construction: The general design, placement, construction, and barrier requirements for swimming pools and spas.
B. Existing Facilities: Additions to, alterations of, or repairs to any existing swimming pools and spas. The construction services administrator may,
when such additions, alterations, or repairs are made, order other reasonable additions or alterations within the facilities or barriers not currently in
compliance with this code.
C. Public Swimming Pools: All public swimming pools shall follow the rules set forth by the Iowa department of public health. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-6: INDEMNIFICATION:
The applicant for a permit for any swimming pool, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property
whatsoever, an injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in
connection with or related to the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents,
employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city; and such
applicant, by making such application, forever indemnifies the city, its officers and employees, and agrees to save it and hold them harmless from any
and all claims, demands, lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even
though acts or omissions of the city, its officers or employees, may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to
be part of any permit issued under this chapter whether expressly recited therein or not. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-7: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS AND FEES:
A. Required: Any owner, or authorized agent who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, or demolish any swimming pool or spa or to erect,
install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, mechanical or plumbing component of any swimming pool or spa which is
regulated by this chapter, or to cause any such work to be done, shall not do so without first securing a permit from the Clive community
development department.
In the case of a public swimming pool, the owner or authorized agent must also obtain a permit from the Iowa department of public health.
B. Issuance: After proper application on forms provided by the Clive community development department, permits shall be issued in the name of the
property owner or of a firm or corporation registered with the Iowa division of labor services, according to their rules and regulations. The property
owner or authorized representative of the firm or corporation named on the registration shall sign all applications for permits. Permits are not
transferable. No permits shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation who has fees outstanding or who has outstanding violations of any
ordinance of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 328/439
C. Fees: There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit fees and fees for other inspections shall be set forth in a fee schedule
established and approved from time to time by the city council. Fees on all buildings or structures constructed by any unit of government or
nonprofit organization may be waived by the city council. No fees shall be collected on necessary permits for any city project.
D. Expiration:
1. Every permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such
permit is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended
or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of sixty (60) days. Before such work can be commenced, a new permit shall
be first obtained, and a fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) of the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided, that such suspension
or abandonment has not exceeded one hundred twenty (120) days.
2. All building permits shall expire after three hundred sixty five (365) days unless an extension is requested in writing to the construction services
administrator fourteen (14) days prior to expiration of said permit. The construction services administrator may refuse any extension, but shall do
so in writing within seven (7) days of receipt of the extension request.
3. In addition, any time work is suspended or abandoned for more than sixty (60) days the permit shall expire due to neglect if the site is not
properly secured, including:
a. Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc., that makes the area unsightly and creates a public nuisance.
b. A fence to protect any excavation, including partially constructed swimming pools, in order to prevent the creation of an attractive nuisance in
the neighborhood.
c. Ground cover, silt fencing, etc., shall be provided to help prevent erosion and damage to surrounding properties. Consideration may be given
to proximity of the construction site, as described in chapter 11 of this title.
E. Revocation: Any permit required by the provisions of this code may be summarily revoked by the construction services administrator upon the
violation of any provision of this chapter.
F. Outstanding Permits: If a permit is outstanding on the effective date hereof, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the work authorized by such
permit, except to the extent that the construction services administrator shall determine that the application of such provisions to said work would
be unreasonable. The burden shall be upon the holder of such permit to show the unreasonableness of such provisions.
G. Work Without A Permit: If any repairs, additions, alterations, or demolitions to any swimming pool, swimming pool barrier, portions of any swimming
pool or any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, where regulated by this chapter, without first obtaining a permit, the owner shall have
the responsibility to certify that the work has been completed in accordance with the applicable codes. The construction services administrator shall
determine the appropriate level of special inspection necessary to ensure that the work was completed in accordance with the applicable codes.
Special inspections shall be performed by an approved inspector that is qualified and/or licensed to work similar to that which is being performed.
Any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-8: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
For the purposes of this chapter the construction services administrator may also be referred to as the building official. It shall be the duty of the
construction services administrator, appointed under provisions of the community development director, to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons may be appointed as assistants or agents of the construction services
administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise discharging
his/her official duties, the construction services administrator or an appointed assistant or agent shall have the right to enter at any time any building,
area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of the
construction services administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the
premises shall be in such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers or the general public, the construction services
administrator shall at once order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-9: INSPECTIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person shall cover or conceal or cause to be covered or concealed any new construction, electrical,
plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus for which a permit has been issued, until such new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
systems or apparatus have been inspected and approved as required by this code. The construction services administrator shall have the authority to
remove or cause the removal of any obstructions, which may prevent the proper inspection of new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
systems or apparatus. Upon the completion of the new construction, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical systems or apparatus, it shall be the duty of
the company, firm, or individual doing the same to notify the construction services administrator, who shall inspect the same on receipt of such notice
for conformance to the provisions of this code. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless the new construction, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical systems or apparatus are in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this code.
All public swimming pools shall also be inspected by the Iowa department of public health. It shall be the responsibility of the company, firm, or
individual doing the work to coordinate with the Iowa department of public health regarding their specific inspection process. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-10: MAINTENANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 329/439
A. It shall be the property owner's duty to ensure that the swimming pool and/or spa are safely operated and maintained, including compliance with the
provisions for constructed barriers. Any swimming pool and/or spa not safely operated and not properly maintained, may be deemed a nuisance
and abated as described in title 5, chapter 6 of this code.
B. The property owner of any swimming pool and/or spa shall be deemed to consent to periodic inspections of the swimming pool and/or spa and its
components for compliance with this chapter. All inspections shall be scheduled at reasonable times by the construction services administrator.
(Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-11: WATER SUPPLY AND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
A. The water supply to all swimming pools shall be from a water supply source meeting the requirements for potable water. Cross connection between
any swimming pool and the potable water source shall not be permitted. Cross connection, backflow prevention assemblies, and backflow testing
shall be in conformance with title 8, chapter 1, article C, "Cross Connection Control And Containment", of this code.
B. Wastewater disposal shall include all draining and backwashing activities associated with swimming pools. All draining and backwashing activities
shall be done in accordance with city policy. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-12: STANDARDS FOR POOL DESIGN, EQUIPMENT, OPERATION, AND INSTALLATION:
A. Permanent Swimming Pools: Permanent swimming pools shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-5 (standard for
residential inground swimming pools).
B. Spas: Spas shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-6 (standard for portable spas).
C. Storable Swimming Pools: Aboveground swimming pools shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-4 (standard for
aboveground/onground swimming pools).
D. Public Swimming Pools: All public swimming pools shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the Iowa department of public health
swimming pool rules.
E. Compliance With Adopted Codes: Compliance with the city's adopted electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fuel gas, and energy codes shall be
required. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-13: BARRIER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Spas: Compliance with this section may be accomplished with a lockable safety cover in accordance with ASTM F 1346 or by the construction of a
barrier as described in this section.
B. Swimming Pools: The provisions of this section shall apply to the required barriers for all swimming pools.
1. Barrier Height: The top of the barrier shall be not less than seventy two inches (72") above grade where measured on the side of the barrier that
faces away from the swimming pool. Such height shall exist around the entire perimeter of the swimming pool and for a distance of three feet (3')
where measured horizontally from the required barrier.
2. Clearances:
a. The vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall not exceed two inches (2") for grade surfaces that are not solid, such
as grass or gravel, where measured on the side of the required barrier that faces away from the swimming pool.
b. The vertical clearance between a surface below the barrier to a solid surface, such as concrete, and the bottom of the required barrier shall
not exceed four inches (4") where measured on the side of the required barrier that faces away from the swimming pool.
c. There shall be a clear zone of not less than thirty six inches (36") around the exterior of the barrier and around any permanent or temporary
structures or equipment such as pumps, filters, heaters, landscape features, etc., that can be used to climb the barrier. All trees, bushes, or
other landscaping installed within this thirty six inch (36") clear zone shall be trimmed or manicured as to not allow these items as an aid to
climb the barrier. See figure 10-10-13B.2d of this section.
FIGURE 10-10-13B.2d
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 330/439
d. The swimming pool side of the required barrier shall be not less than twenty four inches (24") from the water's edge. Required setbacks from
property lines shall be in accordance with title 11, chapter 4 of this code.
e. In the case where the swimming pool area abuts the edge of a private pond or lake located on the property, a barrier along the edge of the
pond or lake shall not be required provided that the barrier running perpendicular or angling away from the shoreline shall extend beyond the
water's edge twenty four inches (24").
3. Barrier Design:
a. Barriers Constructed With Horizontal And Vertical Members: Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the
distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than forty five inches (45"), the horizontal members shall be located on the
swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed one and three-fourths inches (1.75") in width. Where
there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed one and three-fourths inches (1.75") in width.
See figure 10-10-13B.3.a1 of this section.
FIGURE 10-10-13B.3.a1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 331/439
Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal member is forty five inches
(45") or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed four inches (4"). Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members,
spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed one and three-fourths inches (1.75") in width. See figure 10-10-13B.3.a2 of this section.
FIGURE 10-10-13B.3.a2
As approved by the construction services administrator, the top twelve inches (12") of the required seventy two inch (72") fence may be utilized for a
design outside the parameters of this section provided that it is determined that the design would provide a similar measure of safety. See figure 10-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 332/439
10-13B.3.a3 of this section.
FIGURE 10-10-13B.3.a3
b. Solid Barriers: Solid barriers that do not have openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions that form handholds and footholds, except
for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
c. Chainlink, Wire, And Wire Mesh Barriers: Chainlink, wire, and wire mesh fences shall not be considered an acceptable barrier.
d. Dwelling Wall As A Barrier: Where a wall of a dwelling or structure serves as part of the barrier, all doors and operable windows with a sill
height of less than seventy two inches (72") that provide direct access to the swimming pool through the wall, shall be equipped with one or
more of the following:
(1) A swimming pool with a safety cover that is listed and labeled in accordance with ASTM F 1346.
(2) An alarm that produces an audible warning when the door or window is opened. The alarm shall be listed and labeled as a water hazard
entrance alarm in accordance with UL 2017. The deactivation switch shall be located fifty four inches (54") or more above the threshold of
the door.
(3) A means, approved by the construction services administrator, of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices.
e. Temporary Barrier: During the installation or construction of a swimming pool, the swimming pool shall be enclosed by a barrier, whether
temporary or permanent.
If a temporary barrier is utilized during construction, it shall be at least forty eight inches (48") high and all of its components shall be sufficient
to prevent access to the swimming pool by any persons not engaged in the installation or construction process.
4. Gates: All pedestrian gates and utility or service gates shall comply with the following:
a. Pedestrian Gates: All pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the swimming pool and shall be self-closing, self-latching and
equipped to accommodate a locking device. Additionally, all pedestrian access gates shall comply with the following:
(1) The self-latching and release mechanism shall be located at least fifty four inches (54") above grade if it is located on the side of the gate
away from the swimming pool. See figure 10-10-13B.4a of this section.
FIGURE 10-10-13B.4a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 333/439
(2) The self-latching and release mechanism may be located below fifty four inches (54") if it is located on the swimming pool side of the gate
and the gate and barrier have no openings greater than three-eighths inch (3/8") within eighteen inches (18") of the self-latching and release
mechanism.
b. Utility Or Service Gates: All utility and service gates shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Utility and service gates shall remain
locked when not in use or when an adult is not within the immediate vicinity of the gate. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-14: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where the provisions of this chapter, are found to be in conflict with a provision of the code of Iowa or a provision of any zoning, building,
fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the city of Clive, Iowa, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection
of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-15: SITE MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be the permit holder's responsibility to inspect the construction site on a daily basis to ensure that the site is clean and free of excess debris.
In no case shall debris, refuse, and/or junk be permitted to blow, drift or otherwise be deposited upon an adjacent street or property.
B. Similarly, the permit holder shall be solely responsible for controlling erosion on site throughout the duration of the construction project. Erosion
control shall be managed in accordance with chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-16: STREET PROTECTION:
No person performing construction of any nature or furnishing materials or performing services within the city shall drive across or cause any vehicle,
trailer, implement, equipment, materials, or supplies to cross any street curbing without adequately protecting the street curbing from damage thereby.
(Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-17: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this code. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the city seeks court intervention
for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the city may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
10-10-18: APPEALS:
Any person affected by a decision of the construction services administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision, as described
in title 2, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 977, 5-30-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 334/439
Chapter 11
EROSION CONTROL
10-11-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CLIVE EROSION CONTROL ORDINANCE, may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this chapter".
(Ord. 861, 10-5-2006)
10-11-2: PURPOSE:
A. The U.S. EPA's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") Permit Program ("program") administered by the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources ("IDNR") requires that cities meeting certain demographic and environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES
permit for the discharge of stormwater from a Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) (MS4 permit). The City of Clive ("City") is subject to
the program and is required to obtain, and has obtained, an MS4 permit. The City's MS4 permit is on file at the Office of the City Clerk and is
available for public inspection during regular office hours.
As a condition of the City's MS4 permit, the City is obligated to undertake primary responsibility for administration and enforcement of the program
by adopting regulations to effectively manage construction site erosion and sediment controls and to require compliance with the IDNR NPDES
General Permit No. 2. (Ord. 1010, 2-25-2016)
B. The purpose of this chapter is to comply with the MS4 permit requirements and care for and control the City streets, sidewalks and sewers to
prevent the despoliation of the environment and to promote and preserve the rights, privileges, property, safety, health, welfare, comfort and
convenience of the residents of, and visitors to, the City by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of material and use and
maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of soil in the City, and
by requiring property owners to abate certain accumulations of soil. (Ord. 861, 10-5-2006)
10-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have or include the following meanings:
APPROVAL: Formal, written consent by the City Council, or authorized representative of the City.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practice, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce pollution of waters of the United States. Common BMPs are described in the "Clive Stormwater Manual", "Iowa
Stormwater Management Manual", and the "Statewide Urban Design And Specifications Manual" ("SUDAS"). Those BMPs covered within those
manuals are not meant to be a comprehensive list of acceptable BMPs.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Any clearing, excavation, filling or grading activity affecting more than five hundred (500) square feet of land.
EROSION: The wearing away of ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice.
EXCAVATE: The mechanical removal of soil or ground cover, by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, trees, vegetation or other ground
cover is cleared, graded, cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or moved, and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
FILL: The depositing of soil by artificial means.
FINAL STABILIZATION: All construction activity at the site has been completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least
seventy percent (70%) has been established.
HORTICULTURAL ACTIVITY: The cultivation of a garden, orchard or nursery.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The program for issuing, modifying, revoking, terminating, monitoring and
enforcing permits under the clean water act (sections 301, 318, 402 and 405) and United States code of federal regulations title 33, sections 1317,
1328, 1342 and 1345.
PERMIT HOLDER: A person holding a grading permit which has neither expired nor been revoked.
PROPERTY: Land located in the city, whether or not improved with buildings or other structures.
PROPERTY OWNER: A person who, alone or with another person or other persons, holds the legal title to property; except, however, where property
has been sold on contract to a person who has the present right to possess the property and the contract has been filed for record in the office of the
county recorder, the person so purchasing the property, whether alone or with another person or other persons, is the "property owner" and the person
retaining bare legal title to the property as security for the balance of the purchase price.
SEDIMENT CONTROL: Methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving the site. Sediment control practices include, but are not limited to: silt
fences, sediment traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm drain inlet protection and
temporary/permanent sediment basins.
SEWER OR CITY SEWER: Includes all pipes, culverts, channels, manholes, curb gutters, ditches and other structures or courses, manmade or
natural, forming a part of the storm sewer system of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 335/439
SIDEWALK OR CITY SIDEWALK: That portion of a public street or thoroughfare in the city intended for the use of pedestrians.
SOIL: Includes dirt, sand, loam, gravel, rock and other naturally occurring surficial deposits overlying bedrock.
STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff and surface runoff and drainage.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A plan as defined in the Iowa NPDES stormwater general permit.
STREET OR CITY STREET: All of a public street or thoroughfare in the city, including the unpaved portions of a public right of way generally referred
to as "public parking" but exclusive of sidewalks. (Ord. 861, 10-5-2006; amd. Ord. 1010, 2-25-2016)
10-11-4: WARNING:
No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter, as indicating the safety of
or quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in
the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in
any way constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises. (Ord. 861, 10-5-2006)
10-11-5: INTERPRETATION:
The foregoing statements of legislative intent shall govern and take precedence over any other language contained in this chapter. (Ord. 861, 10-5-
2006)
10-11-6: GRADING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEE:
A. Permit Required: Unless permitted by subsection B of this section, it is unlawful for any person to undertake any construction activity within any
property in the City unless the owner of such property, or general contractor, if any, responsible for the work, holds for the property a current
grading permit issued by the Community Development Department permitting such work to be done.
If the construction activity requires an NPDES General Permit No. 2, the Community Development Department shall not issue the grading permit
until such time as the NPDES General Permit No. 2 has been issued by the IDNR. (Ord. 1010, 2-25-2016)
B. Exceptions: Any language in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, a grading permit is not necessary when excavating or filling is done: 1) to
further a farming or horticultural activity; 2) by a public utility company for the purpose of installing underground utilities; 3) by City employees on
City business or contractors under City's hire; 4) by or under the direction of a soil engineer or engineering geologist to investigate, test or evaluate
earth materials in conjunction with the designing and engineering of buildings or other improvements; and 5) on property then occupied as the
residence of the property owner and no more than five hundred (500) square feet of existing ground cover will be disturbed. (Ord. 861, 10-5-2006)
C. Permit Review: An SWPPP, prepared in accordance with all current NPDES General Permit No. 2 minimum requirements, shall be submitted for
review prior to the issuance of a grading permit. The SWPPP shall be site specific and identify all construction site sources, including building
materials, concrete washout, chemicals, solid waste and sanitary waste, that may impact water quality. Additionally, the SWPPP shall identify all
BMPs intended to be utilized to mitigate the potential adverse impacts to water quality from all construction site sources. (Ord. 1010, 2-25-2016)
D. Issuance: After proper application on forms provided by the Clive Community Development Department, permits shall be issued in the name of a
registered contractor or property owner. Permits are not transferable. No permits shall be issued to any person or company who has fees
outstanding or who has outstanding violations of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of this City.
E. Fee: There shall be a fee paid for the issuance of permits. Permit fees shall be set forth in a fee schedule established and approved from time to
time by the City Council. Fees on all buildings or structures constructed by any unit of the government or nonprofit organization may be waived by
the City Council. No fees shall be collected on buildings or structures constructed by or for the City of Clive.
F. Expiration: Every permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by
such permit is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of sixty (60) days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new
permit shall be first obtained, and the fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided that such
suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one hundred twenty (120) days.
G. Revocation: Any permit required by the provisions of this chapter may be summarily revoked by the Construction Services Administrator or
Engineering Services Administrator upon the violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 861, 10-5-2006; amd. Ord. 1010, 2-25-2016)
10-11-7: INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Monitor Site For Compliance: It shall be the property owner or permit holder's duty to monitor the site daily to assure compliance with the grading
permit. (Ord. 861, 10-5-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 336/439
B. City Inspection: With the issuance of a grading permit, the permit holder acknowledges that the City may conduct site visits at any time to determine
compliance with the grading permit. In the event that a site is found not to be in compliance with the grading permit, the City will communicate,
verbally or in writing, with the property owner or permit holder as outlined in the Clive Erosion and Sediment Control Enforcement Response Plan
chapter of the Clive Stormwater Management Manual.
C. Enforcement: Following notice from the City that the site is not in compliance with the grading permit, the property owner or permit holder shall
immediately commence corrective action and shall complete corrective action within the timeframe identified by the City. (Ord. 1040, 6-22-2017)
10-11-8: ABATEMENT OF SOIL ACCUMULATIONS:
A. Cleanup Required: If, by erosion, vehicle tire or otherwise, soil shall be carried from private property in the City and shall accumulate on the City
streets or sidewalks or in the City sewers or established streams and drainage ditches located in the City, and if such accumulation of soil is by its
presence dangerous to the persons or properties of others or interferes with the safe use or efficient operation or maintenance of said streets,
sidewalks, sewers, streams and drainage ditches, the owner of such property, and the permit holder for such property, if there be one, shall cause
such accumulation of soil to be cleaned from said streets, sidewalks, sewers, streams and drainage ditches as directed by the City. Failure to take
corrective action shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
Anytime the Construction Services Administrator, Code Enforcement Officer, or Engineering Services Administrator determines that the presence of
such accumulation of soil is hazardous to life and limb or materially disruptive of the normal use of such streets, sidewalks, sewers, streams or
drainage ditches, they may authorize the immediate cleanup by the City as outlined in section 10-11-9 of this chapter.
B. Serving Of Cleanup Orders: Cleanup orders issued pursuant to this section shall be in writing and shall be served in a manner prescribed for the
service of civil process by the Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure; except, however, such an order to a permit holder for the property may also be given
verbally by the Construction Services Administrator, Code Enforcement Officer or Engineering Services Administrator, either in person or by
telephone call, to the permit holder or to a person designated by the permit holder to receive such notices from the building official, or to a family
member, employee or associate of such permit holder or designee as is found at the addresses or phone numbers of the permit holder or designee
listed on the excavation permit. (Ord. 1040, 6-22-2017)
C. Each Day A Separate Offense: Each day a property owner or permit holder remains in violation of a cleanup order given pursuant to this section
shall constitute a new and separate violation of this chapter. (Ord. 861, 10-5-2006)
10-11-9: CLEANUP BY CITY; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
If the property owner or permit holder fails to clean accumulations of soil from the City streets and sidewalks, City sewers or established streams and
drainage ditches in the City within the time period described by the Construction Services Administrator, Code Enforcement Officer or Engineering
Services Administrator in the order given pursuant to the Clive Erosion and Sediment Control Enforcement Response Plan chapter of the Clive
Stormwater Management Manual, the City may do so by its own crews or by persons under its hire, and assess against the property owner and permit
holder the City's costs therefor. Said costs shall include the salaries earned by City employees during such cleanup operations, a charge for City
machinery used and such other costs and expenses as the City actually incurred. To the extent allowed by Iowa law, such costs and expenses may be
assessed against the property and collected in the same manner as a Property Tax. (Ord. 1040, 6-22-2017)
10-11-10: RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS OR PERMITTEES:
The failure of City officials to observe or foresee hazardous or unsightly conditions, or to impose other or additional conditions or requirements on
permit holders, or to deny or revoke a grading permit, or to stop work in violation of this chapter shall not relieve the property owners or permit holders
of the consequences of their actions or inactions or result in the City, its officers or agents being liable therefor or on account thereof. Notwithstanding
any provision of this chapter, every applicant bears final and complete responsibility for compliance with a State NPDES General Permit No. 2 and any
other requirements of State or Federal law or administrative rule. (Ord. 861, 10-5-2006)
10-11-11: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties in title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this Code. Each day that a Municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 861, 10-5-2006;
amd. Ord. 1040, 6-22-2017)
Chapter 12
RENTAL HOUSING CODE
10-12-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CLIVE RENTAL HOUSING CODE, and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "Rental Housing
Code". (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 337/439
10-12-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to ensure that property owners, their agents and others, to meet their responsibilities with respect to proper operation
and maintenance of rental housing facilities and to provide for inspection as a means of compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose of this
chapter to create any duty on the part of the City, its officers, agents, or employees, owing to any individual member of the public or to protect any
particular or circumscribed class of persons. Specifically, it is not the intent of this chapter to create any duty or liability by the City, its officers, agents,
or employees, to premises' occupants, owners, tenants, or any other person. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-3: WARNING:
No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter, as indicating the safety of
or quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor inspections made pursuant thereto nor certificates issued are intended to
assume the duty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in
the risk associated with the use or occupancy of any premises. A certification that a premises has been inspected pursuant to this chapter shall not in
any way constitute a warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-4: INTERPRETATION:
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, such provisions shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, and welfare. These regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted.
B. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, private covenants or other
provision of law except as provided in these regulations. If a conflict between requirements appears within this chapter, the most restrictive
requirement shall prevail.
C. Information erroneously presented by any official or employee of the City does not negate or diminish the provisions of this chapter pertaining
thereto.
D. Whenever a number of days is specified in this chapter, or in any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as set forth in this chapter,
such number of days shall be deemed to be consecutive calendar days, unless otherwise specified.
E. Whenever application of this chapter results in standards being expressed in fractions of whole numbers, such fractions are to be rounded to the
next higher whole number.
F. No action of the City, its City Council, Community Development Department staff or the Building Code Appeals Board shall be deemed invalid by
reason of failure to comply with or conform to the provisions of this chapter, provided that the procedural requirements of the Code of Iowa have
been met.
G. It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Construction Services Administrator,
and that such questions shall be presented to the Building Code Appeals Board only on appeal from the decision of the Construction Services
Administrator and that recourse from the decision of the Building Code Appeals Board shall be as provided by law. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-5: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted in full except for such portions as may be hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, and shall constitute
the "Rental Housing Code" of the City of Clive, Iowa. An official copy of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 edition, as adopted, and a
certified copy of this chapter can be viewed in the Community Development Department. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-6: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the maintenance, repair, equipment, use and occupancy of all rental housing units and accessory
structures now in existence or hereafter constructed, habilitated, renovated or converted to residential use within the corporate limits, including, but not
limited to single and two family dwellings, multiple family dwellings and rooming/sleeping units.
Exceptions:
A. Single family dwellings occupied by the owner, or members of that owner's immediate family. Such members are defined as spouse, child, parent,
step-parent, stepchild, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother, sister, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, grandchild, and grandparent.
B. A duplex, at least one of the units of which is occupied by the owner, and the other unit is occupied by a member of that owner's immediate family.
Such members are defined as spouse, child, parent, step-parent, stepchild, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother, sister, daughter-in-law, son-in-law,
grandchild, and grandparent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 338/439
C. Transient shelters and group homes subject to State licensing.
D. Hotels, motels, extended stay hotels, and other similar uses subject to State licensing. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
The applicant for any rental certificate under this chapter, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to property
whatsoever, and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in
connection with or related to the issuance of such rental certificate or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents,
employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the City; and such
applicant, by making such application, forever indemnifies the City, its officers and employees and agrees to save it and them harmless from any and
all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even though
acts or omissions of the City, its officers or employees may have caused or contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part
of any certificate issued under this chapter whether expressly recited therein or not. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-8: RENTAL REGISTRATION, CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONS AND FEES:
A. Required Registration: After the effective date of this chapter, no person shall rent, lease, let, operate or otherwise allow the occupancy of any
dwelling unit or any portion of any dwelling unit (including sleeping rooms) unless they hold a valid rental inspection certificate issued by the
Community Development Department.
B. Certificate Issuance: Following submission of a proper registration application, on forms provided by the Community Development Department,
payment of associated rental fees, performance of a self-inspection of the unit being registered and signing a rental owner acknowledgement form
the Community Development Department shall issue a Rental Certificate to the owner.
C. Rental Certificate: The owner of a single family dwelling, condo, apartment, or duplex must be able to show a copy of a valid rental certificate upon
request. Apartment buildings will only be issued one certificate that lists all the individual units within said building. Failure to maintain all units
within an apartment may jeopardize the rental certificate for the entire said building.
D. Expiration: Prior to the expiration date of the Rental Certificate, the Community Development Department shall mail a renewal notice to the owner
advising of the requirements for renewal of the Rental Certificate. Failure of the owner to complete the requirements for renewal will result in a late
payment penalty being applied to the balance owed. If the renewal is not completed within thirty (30) days following expiration of the Rental
Certificate, a notice of violation will be issued to the property owner.
E. Revocation: Any Rental Certificate may be summarily revoked by the Building Code Appeals Board upon the review of a notice of violation of any
provision of this chapter.
If, at the discretion of the Construction Service Administrator, an emergency exists which threatens the immediate health, safety or general welfare
of the occupant or general public, the Construction Services Administrator may immediately issue an order suspending the Rental Certificate. Upon
issuance of the order, the occupant of the unit shall immediately vacate the premises until the Rental Certificate is reinstated.
F. Transfer: Rental certificates shall not be transferable to succeeding owners. Rental certificates shall automatically terminate and become null and
void, without further action of the City, upon transfer of property ownership or upon execution of an agreement to purchase property on contract.
Every seller of a rental property shall give notice to the Community Development Department within two (2) days after closing or execution of a
contract for sale. This notice shall include the name and address of the buyer.
Every buyer of a rental property, including contract buyer, shall give notice to the Community Development Department within two (2) days after
closing. This notice shall include the name and address of the buyer and his/her agent.
G. Outstanding Issues: If an owner has outstanding fees, fines or violations on any property within the City of Clive, the issuance of a Rental Certificate
may be withheld by the Community Development Department.
H. Fees: The fees for activities and services performed by the Community Development Department in carrying out its responsibilities under this Code
shall be as indicated in a fee schedule adopted from time to time by the City Council. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-9: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
For the purposes of this Code, the Construction Services Administrator may also be referred to as the building official. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Services Administrator, appointed under provisions of the Community Development Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. A person or persons may be appointed as assistants or agents of the Construction
Services Administrator as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making inspections, tests, or otherwise
discharging his/her official duties, the Construction Services Administrator or an appointed assistant or agent shall have the right to enter at any time
any building, area, or manhole upon notifying the company or individual owning or having charge or control of the same. Whenever, in the judgment of
the Construction Services Administrator, any structure is suspected of being or found to be defective or dangerous, or whenever from any cause the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 339/439
premises shall be in such defective condition as to be in danger of fires, or accident to workers, or the general public, the Construction Services
Administrator shall at once order the removal of such defects and the remedying of such improper condition. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-10: AUDIT INSPECTION:
The Community Development Department shall seek to conduct an audit inspection of every rental unit within the corporate limits of the City every six
(6) years. As part of the inspection process, the City may determine to extend or shorten the timeframe to the next scheduled inspection. Factors that
may influence the City to inspect more or less frequently include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Age and condition of building or unit;
B. Inspection history;
C. Tenant/management/resident complaints;
D. Natural disasters such as flooding;
E. Delayed maintenance/repairs, follow-up, or fee payments by the owner. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-11: COMPLAINT BY TENANT:
Unless there are significant health, safety or general welfare issues, a tenant must first complain to the owner or agent. Complaints must be submitted
in writing and if desired, forms for that purpose will be available from the Community Development Department.
A. An owner or agent shall have seven (7) days to address the complaint. If the complaint is not remedied to the tenant's satisfaction within twenty (20)
days the Community Development Department will schedule an inspection with the tenant and owner. If violations are found, an inspection fee shall
be charged to the owner.
B. No person shall pursue an action for eviction because the occupant has reported a violation of this chapter to the Community Development
Department.
C. No person shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility required under this chapter to be removed, shut off or discontinued in retaliation for a
complaint. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-12: DELETIONS:
The following sections are deleted from the Property Maintenance Code and are of no force or effect in this chapter.
Section 101 General
Section 103 Department of Property Maintenance Inspection
Section 106 Violations
Section 111 Means of Appeal
(Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-13: AMENDMENTS:
The paragraphs in this section represent amendments to the requirements contained in the Property Maintenance Code.
Section 202 General Definitions add the following:
"Agent" means an individual of legal majority who has been designated by the Owner as the agent of the Owner or manager of the Property
under the provisions of this chapter.
"Apartment house or multi-family residence" means any building or portion thereof which is designed, rented, leased, or hired out to be occupied,
or which is occupied as a dwelling or residence of two (2) or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in said
building.
"Bedroom" is defined as a space primarily designed and intended for use as a sleeping room which shall include all of the following
characteristics:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 340/439
1. A room with a minimum floor area of seventy (70) square feet of area that is capable of being secured by a door.
2. A room with an enclosed closet space of a minimum floor area of six (6) square feet.
3. A room with the provisions for emergency escape and natural light in accordance with the adopted version of the international residential
code or international building code as applicable for the dwelling type.
"Dwelling unit" means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for a family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation. For the purposes of this definition, a bed, day bed, couch, futon or other similar multipurpose sleeping furniture
shall constitute the provisions for sleeping. Similarly, a hotplate, microwave, toaster oven or similar cooking appliance shall constitute the
provisions for cooking.
"Family" means a person living alone or in a group living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking,
and eating facilities up to a maximum occupant dwelling load as provided in title 11, chapter 6 of the city code. For the purposes of this definition,
anyone who spends more than ninety (90) nights within a twelve (12) month period will be counted as an occupant.
The definition of family does not include, and is not intended to provide an exclusion for, any of the following:
A. More than eight (8) people who are:
1. Residents of a "family home" as defined in section 414.22 of the Iowa Code; or
2. "Handicap" as defined in the fair housing act, 42 USC section 3602(h).
B. Any group of individuals who are in a group living arrangement as a result of criminal offenses;
C. Any group of individuals whose association is temporary, seasonal in nature or limited to the duration of an educational school year cycle;
D. Any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge or like organization.
"Family, Immediate" defined as spouse, child, parent, step-parent, stepchild, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother, sister, daughter-in-law, son-inlaw,
grandchild, and grandparent.
"Hotel" means one or more buildings containing six (6) or more guest rooms, with such rooms being designed, intended to be used, or are used
as temporary or overnight accommodations for guests in which daily services of linen change, central telephone switchboard, towel change,
general cleaning, and a registration lobby staffed on a twenty-four (24) hour daily basis are provided by the management. Access to all rooms
shall be provided through one (1) or more common entrance(s). All hotels shall be licensed and inspected by the State of Iowa in accordance
with Chapter 137C of the Iowa Code.
"Hotel, Extended Stay" means one or more buildings containing six (6) or more guest rooms with the provisions necessary for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation, with such guest rooms being designed, intended to be used, or are used as a temporary residence not exceeding
six (6) months, which weekly services of linen change, central telephone switchboard, towel change, general cleaning, and a registration lobby
staffed on a twenty-four (24) hour daily basis are provided by the management. Access to all rooms shall be provided through one (1) or more
common entrance(s). All extended stay hotels shall be licensed and inspected by the State of Iowa in accordance with Chapter 137C of the Iowa
Code.
"Kitchen" means any room or portion of rooms which are occupied or are intended and designed to be used for cooking and preparation of food,
including any room having a sink and provisions for either a gas or electric stove.
In addition to the above definitions, the following criteria shall be utilized to determine if the intent of a single family dwelling unit has been met:
1. There shall not be more than one kitchen for each single family zoned property address with the following exception: additional sinks, wetbars,
or kitchen areas will not be considered an additional kitchen provided walls, floors, and locking doors, as specified below, do not separate
the dwelling into multiple tenant use.
2. There shall not be more than one electric meter, gas meter, or water meter for each single family zoned property address.
3. There shall not be any walls or floor/ceiling assemblies in any single family zoned property address, which separates the one-family dwelling
into more than one unit. Determining factors shall include locked or locking interior doors and separate entrances, which make portions of the
unit inaccessible to all "family" members.
"Motel" means one or more buildings containing six (6) or more guest rooms, with such rooms being designed, intended to be used, or are used
as temporary or overnight accommodations for guests in which daily services of linen change, central telephone switchboard, towel change,
general cleaning, and a registration lobby staffed on a twenty-four (24) hour daily basis are provided by the management. Individual access to
each room shall be provided from outside of the building. Each room may be equipped with cooking facilities. All motels shall be licensed and
inspected by the State of Iowa in accordance with Chapter 137C of the Iowa Code.
"Rental certificate" means a certificate that is issued by the Community Development Department after written application if the dwelling unit, at
the date of such application, is entitled thereto. Such a certificate shall thereafter be known as a rental certificate.
"Rental unit" means any house or building or portion thereof which is occupied in whole or part as a home or residence of one or more tenants,
on a rental basis, or when, in return for housing, a tenant agrees to occupy and maintain the premises and pay utilities. A dwelling unit that is
being rented for a period of ninety (90) days or less in a single calendar year or a portion of such dwelling unit shall be exempt from this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 341/439
"Tenant" means: (i) a person occupying a dwelling unit who pays (or has payments made on his or her behalf) a stated payment at fixed intervals
for the use of the dwelling unit; or (ii) a person occupying a dwelling unit owned by another individual, who, in return for housing, agrees to
occupy and maintain the premises and pay utilities.
Section 303.2 Enclosures. Delete this section and insert the following.
Enclosures. Enclosures, covers, and gates protecting swimming pools and hot tubs and spas shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with Title 10, chapter 10 of the city code.
Section 302.4 Weeds. Delete in its entirety and insert the following.
Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from grasses and weeds in accordance with Title 5, Chapter 6
Nuisances; Abatement Procedure, of the City Code.
Section 304.14 Insect Screens. Insert the following dates.
April 1st to November 1st.
Section 307 Handrails and Guardrails. Delete this section and insert the following.
General. Existing handrails and guardrails as constructed in accordance with standards in place at the time of the building's
construction may be maintained. Handrails and guardrails undergoing any change, remodel or replacement shall be installed in
accordance with the Clive Building Code.
Section 404.4.1 Room Area. Delete this section and insert the following.
Every living room shall contain not less than 120 square feet and every bedroom shall contain not less than 70 square feet.
Section 404.5 Overcrowding. Delete this section in its entirety, including table 404.5, and replace with the following.
Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of the following table.
Room Type Room Area
Maximum
Occupant Load
Bedroom At least 70 sq. ft. but less than 120 sq. ft. 1 per room
Bedroom 120 sq. ft. to 180 sq. ft. 2 per room
Bedroom 180 sq. ft. or more 3 per room
Multipurpose Room At least 70 sq. ft. 1 per room, not more than 2 per dwelling unit
* See section 202 for bedroom definition
* For the purposes of this section, a multi-purpose room may include a living room, den, study, or other similar room that by design
or layout is not primarily intended to be used as a bedroom, but that is otherwise habitable and provides accommodations for
sleeping such as a bed, daybed, couch, futon or similar multipurpose sleeping furniture.
Section 602.3 Heat Supply. Insert the following dates.
September 1st to May 30th.
Section 602.4. Occupiable Work Spaces. Insert the following dates.
September 1st to May 30th.
Add section 603.7 Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing (CSST)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 342/439
Corrugated stainless steel tubing shall be bonded to the electrical grounding system or panelboard utilized by the existing electrical service. This
shall be done in accordance with the tubing manufacturer's recommendations.
Add section 605.2.1 Kitchen Receptacles
All 15 and 20 amp receptacle outlets that serve kitchen countertop areas shall be ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protected.
Add section 605.2.2 Bathroom Receptacles
All 15 and 20 amp receptacle outlets located within bathrooms shall be ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protected.
Add section 605.2.3 Other Receptacle Outlets
All 15 and 20 amp receptacle outlets located within 6' of a sink shall be ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protected.
Add section 605.2.4 Garage/Accessory Building Receptacles
All 15 and 20 amp receptacle outlets located within garages/accessory buildings shall be ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI)
protected.
Add section 605.2.5 Outdoor Receptacles
All 15 and 20 amp receptacle outlets located outdoors shall be ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protected.
(Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-14: COLLECTION OF FEES, FINES, PENALTIES AND COSTS:
All fees, fines, penalties and costs imposed upon an owner in the enforcement of this chapter shall be due when notice of the amount of such fees,
fines, penalties and costs is mailed to the owner.
A. If notice containing the information required by Iowa Code 364.17 is given and the total amount of such fees, fines, penalties and costs is not paid
within thirty (30) days of when due, or within ten (10) days of the final action of the Building Code Appeals Board, then:
1. The owner shall be charged a late payment penalty in the amount set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the City Council from time to time;
2. Interest shall thereafter accrue on the unpaid balance at the rate of one and a half (1.5) percent per month; and
3. The City may certify the unpaid balance, interest and late payment penalty to the County auditor as a lien upon the rental property for collection
in the same manner as a Property Tax. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-15: APPEALS:
Any person affected by a decision of the Construction Services Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on the decision before the
Building Code Appeals Board as set forth in title 2, chapter 2, "Building Codes Appeal Board", of this Code. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10)
days by filing an application request on the forms provided by the Community Development Department. Additionally, the application must be
accompanied with the appropriate fee as determined in the fee schedule adopted from time to time by the City Council. An appeal stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Construction Services Administrator certifies to the Building Code Appeals Board
after notice of appeal shall have been filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the Construction Services
Administrator cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Building Code Appeals Board or by a court of record on application, on due cause shown. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
10-12-16: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a Municipal infraction as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the City seeks court intervention
for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and additional costs. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy violations. (Ord. 1060, 9-13-2018)
Title 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 343/439
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be officially known, cited and referred to as the ZONING REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF CLIVE, IOWA. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
This zoning title is adopted in order to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; to promote health
and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewer systems, schools, parks, and other public improvements; and to encourage orderly development
and the most appropriate use of land throughout the city; all in accordance with the comprehensive plan. The provisions established by this title for the
development of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to the development of land are an exercise of valid police power delegated by the
state. A developer has the duty of compliance with conditions laid down by the city for design, dedication, improvements, and restrictive use of land to
conform to the physical and economic development of the city for the health, safety and welfare of the community at large. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-1-3: POLICY:
A. The regulations of this title apply to development of any parcel of land located within the corporate limits of the city or outside the corporate limits of
the city as provided by law.
B. The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the requirements shown in the comprehensive plan,
official map, state "Urban Standard Specifications For Public Improvements Manual" (SUDAS), state "Urban Design Standards For Public
Improvements Manual", the "Development Standards Manual", and it is intended that these regulations supplement and facilitate the enforcement
of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes and subdivision regulations.
C. Land that has been developed before the effective date hereof shall, whenever possible, be brought within the scope of these regulations to further
the purposes of regulations identified in section 11-1-2 of this chapter.
D. An entitlement to construct a structure on any land shall only be issued for a legal platted lot of record.
E. No certificates of zoning compliance or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel of land or development not in substantial conformity
with the provisions of this title. No excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced
except in conformity with this title.
F. No building permit shall be issued until a final plat, site plan, site plan amendment or administratively approved site plan amendment has been
approved. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
G. It being essential to the proper government and administration of the city and to protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, the city council
has determined that it is necessary to enact a temporary moratorium on certain zoning and development activities within the Emerald Isle area, as
defined in exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein ("Emerald Isle area"). The purpose of this moratorium is to allow sufficient time for
land use planning in order to facilitate development of the Emerald Isle area.
1. A moratorium is hereby imposed, effective August 7, 2008, until April 1, 2009, upon the modification of any property in the Emerald Isle area
which would require development review and approval under section 175.42 of the city of Clive zoning regulations site plan requirements.
2. During the effective period of this moratorium, no official, officer or agency of the city of Clive shall accept development applications, plans or
permits for any property modification requiring development review or approval.
3. Those provisions of the city of Clive zoning ordinance that are inconsistent or conflicting with the provisions of this subsection G are hereby
repealed for the duration of the moratorium hereby ordained and any extension thereof, but not otherwise. (Ord. 894, 8-7-2008)
11-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, such provisions shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, and welfare. The regulations of this title shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted.
B. The regulations of this title are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, private covenants or
other provision of law except as provided in these regulations. If a conflict between requirements appears within this title, the most restrictive
requirement shall prevail.
C. Information erroneously presented by any official or employee of the city does not negate or diminish the provisions of this title pertaining thereto.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 344/439
D. Whenever a number of days are specified in this title, or in any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as set forth in this title, such
number of days shall be deemed to be consecutive calendar days, unless otherwise specified.
E. Whenever application of this title results in standards being expressed in fractions of whole numbers, such fractions are to be rounded to the next
higher whole number, except that quantities expressing units per acre shall not be rounded.
F. All references to density in this title are based on gross site area unless otherwise specified.
G. Whenever this title refers to setback distances, the setback standard shall be measured from the official property lines, unless noted otherwise.
H. No action of the city, its city council, planning and zoning commission, or the community development director shall be deemed invalid by reason of
failure to comply with or conform to the provisions of this title, provided that the procedural requirements of the code of Iowa have been met.
I. It is the intent of this title that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the community development director, and that
such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the community development director, and that
recourse from the decision of the board of adjustment shall be as provided by law. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-1-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The community development director is hereby designated and ordered to enforce this title. In the case any building or structure is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this title, the community
development director, in addition to other remedies, shall institute any proper action or proceedings in the name of the city to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversions, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the
occupancy of said building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about said premises. All departments, officials
and employees of the city who are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall issue no such permit for any license for any use,
structure or purpose if the same would not conform to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-1-6: VIOLATION COMPLAINTS:
Whenever a violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint. Such complaint must be written, stating fully
the causes and basis thereof and shall be filed with the community development director. Parties witnessing such alleged violation shall sign such
complaint. The community development director shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate and take action as provided by this title.
(Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-1-7: PENALTIES:
Violation of the provisions of this title, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a municipal infraction as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this code. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the city seeks court intervention
for violation of any provision of this title, the city may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and administrative costs. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
11-2-1: WORDS AND TERMS DEFINED:
As used in this title, the word "or" also means "and/or"; the words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed, or arranged to be" used
or occupied; the word "lot" includes the words "plot or parcel" and all other words or phrases used to denote an individual site that complies with the
minimum provisions of this title. For the purpose of this title, the following terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
ABUT OR ABUTTING: Contiguous; having a common boundary, wall or property line.
ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS: Living quarters within an accessory building for the sole use of persons fully employed on the premises or for the
temporary use by guests of the occupants of the premises.
ACCESSORY USE: A use subordinate to the principal permitted use of a premises serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal permitted
use and which is located on the same lot as the principal building except for such accessory parking facilities as are specifically authorized by this title.
ADDITION: An extension or increase in floor area, size, or height, number, or capacity of a building or structure.
ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION: A decision made by the community development director.
ADULT ARTIST, BODY PAINTING AND/OR BODY PIERCING STUDIO: An establishment or business which provides the services of piercing,
applying paint, or other substance whether transparent or nontransparent to or on the human body distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined in this section).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 345/439
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, videos, and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" (as defined in this section); or an establishment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
ADULT CABARET: Any place holding a liquor license or beer permit, or combination for consumption of beer or liquor, or both, on the premises
wherein entertainment is characterized by emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" (as defined in this section).
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Any other establishment not otherwise defined herein, but of the same general classification as the
other establishments herein defined, having as a substantial or significant portion of its business the offering of entertainment, stocks in trade of
materials, scenes or other presentations characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" (as defined in this section).
ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR: Any place of business wherein any method of pressure on or friction against, or rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping,
pounding or vibrating the external parts of the body with the hand or any body parts, or by a mechanical or electrical instrument, under such
circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the individual to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay
money or give other consideration or gratuity therefor, wherein the massage is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual
activities", or involving "specified anatomical areas" (as defined in this section).
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"
(as defined in this section), for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined in
this section), for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT THEATER: A motion picture theater or stage show theater or combination thereof used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined in this section),
for observation by patrons therein.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including agriculture, farming, floriculture, forestry, horticulture, and necessary accessory
uses for treating, packing, or sorting produce; however, the operation of the accessory uses shall be subordinate to that of the normal agricultural
activities.
AIR ANIMATED DISPLAY: A temporary sign, typically constructed out of a flexible fabric and inflated to allow movement and animation. All air
animated displays must be properly secured to the ground to prevent a change in location.
AMENDMENT: A change in the wording, context or substance of this title, or a change in the zoning or district boundaries of the official zoning map, a
part of this title, when adopted by ordinance passed by the proper authoritative body in the manner prescribed by law.
ANIMATION: Rotation or any other movement or appearance thereof, or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene, whether
by atmospheric movement, mechanical, or electrical means, or any combination thereof.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms intended or designed for use as a dwelling unit typically made available for lease.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See definition of dwelling, multiple-family.
APPEAL: A request that another authority reviews or reconsiders a decision that an interested party believes to have been made in error.
APPLICANT: The owner or lessee of property, or said person's agent, or a person who has contracted to purchase the property contingent upon such
person's ability to acquire the necessary permits under this title or the agent of such person.
APPRAISAL: An estimate or opinion of the value of real or personal property or an interest or estate in that property as determined by a qualified
appraisal.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: A building consisting of individual dwelling units where meals and assistance for daily living activities are
provided for residents, who are primarily elderly persons. Such facility must be licensed as a residential care facility or skilled nursing facility under
chapter 135C, Code of Iowa.
AUTOMOBILE SALES AND DISPLAY: The use of land or building for the display, sale, or lease of new or preowned passenger vehicles with a gross
vehicle weight rating of less than nine thousand (9,000) pounds. The servicing or repair of vehicles may be conducted as an accessory use.
AUTOMOBILE SUPPLY: An establishment for the retail sales of motor vehicle parts, supplies and other similar products. It may also include minor
installation of parts or accessories such as batteries, windshields, tires, wheels, electronic components and other similar products. Automotive repair
and the sale of vehicles are expressly prohibited.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: The dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked
vehicles or their parts. The presence on any lot, parcel, or tract of land, of five (5) or more vehicles or trailers which for a period exceeding thirty (30)
days have not been capable of operation under their own power, and from which parts have been removed or are to be removed for reuse, salvage, or
sale, shall constitute evidence of an automobile wrecking yard.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR: An establishment used for the repair and maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, trailers, or similar vehicles
including, but not limited to: brake/exhaust/engine repair or work, oil change and lubrication, provided all functions of the business are entirely
contained within the confines of the building and no outdoor storage of vehicles and/or parts is allowed.
AWNING: A rooflike cover typically constructed of fabric, metal, or glass, designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative
feature to the principal structure, which projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walkway, door, or similar.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 346/439
BALCONY: A covered or uncovered platform area projecting from the wall of a building, unenclosed except by a railing, which projects from the outer
wall of a building above ground level without support other than the building.
BAR/LOUNGE: Any place devoted primarily to the selling, serving or dispensing and drinking of malt, vinous, or other alcoholic beverages, or any
place where any sign is exhibited or displayed indicating that alcoholic beverages are obtainable within or thereon, and where such beverages are
consumed on the premises.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (Also commonly referred to as the "100-
year flood".)
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
BASEMENT: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade. A basement shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height
regulation, unless designed or used for habitation or business purposes and provided that the finished floor level directly above is not more than six
feet (6') above grade. (See definition of story.)
BASEMENT (Flood Control): Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see
definition of "lowest floor".
BEER GARDEN: Any establishment that includes any area out of doors or not completely contained within a building in which alcoholic beverages are
served and/or consumed, and may or may not include the serving or consumption of food. The facility shall be duly approved and licensed as required
by applicable State and local regulations.
BIG BOX RETAILER: A single tenant user with a minimum of twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet in gross floor area.
BLADE: An element of a wind turbine which acts as a part of an airfoil assembly, thereby extracting through rotation, mechanical energy directly from
the wind.
BOARD: The Board of Adjustment.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: An Administrative Hearing Board created by the Code of Iowa, as amended, which is authorized to issue special use
permits, interpret and grant variances from this title.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation, meals and/or lodging are provided for four (4) or more persons, but does
not include rest homes.
BREEZEWAY: A covered passageway connecting a primary structure to an accessory structure or two (2) accessory structures.
BUFFER: A landscaped area, identified on a site plan or plat, intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two (2) adjacent land uses or
properties from one another.
BUILDABLE AREA: The area of a lot remaining after the minimum open space and/or yard requirements of this title have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by walls or by columns intended for enclosure, shelter or housing of persons, animals or chattel.
When any portion thereof is entirely separated by walls in which there are no connecting doors or windows or any similar opening, each portion so
separated shall be deemed a separate building, except for townhouses, duplexes and condominiums wherein two (2) or more dwelling units shall
constitute a separate building. "Building" does not include signs or billboards.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A building subordinate to the principal use of a building on the lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of
the principal building. Among other things, the following are considered to be accessory buildings: shed, gazebo, garage.
BUILDING FACE OR WALL: All the window and wall area of a building in one plane or elevation.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: That wall or side of a building containing the main entry that is adjacent and most nearly parallel to a street.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average finished ground grade at the building line to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or
to the deck of a mansard roof, or to mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. On a corner lot, the height is the
mean vertical distance from the average natural grade at the building line from the higher of the two (2) grades.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 347/439
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 348/439
Figure 11-2-1.1
BUILDING MOUNTED WES: A wind turbine that is mounted to any portion of a building, whether attached directly to the building or attached to a
tower structure which is supported by the building.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The city employee designated by the community development director to enforce the city's building and zoning ordinances.
BUILDING PERMIT: Official certification, issued by the building official, that a proposed improvement complies with the provisions of this title and other
applicable ordinances.
BULK STATION: Distributing stations, commonly known as bulk or tank stations, used for the storage and distribution of flammable liquids or liquefied
petroleum products where the aggregate capacity of all storage tanks is more than twelve thousand (12,000) gallons.
CANOPY: A permanent rooflike cover that projects from the wall of a building over a door, entrance, or window; or a freestanding or projecting cover
above an outdoor service area, such as a gasoline service station. Provides shelter to persons from elements of weather.
CARETAKER: A person who is hired on a full time basis to provide home based service to a resident occupant of the dwelling unit, including, but not
limited to, a nurse, nanny, therapist or maid.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: Official certification that a premises conforms to provisions of this title and other applicable ordinances and may be
used or occupied. A certificate of occupancy is granted upon completion of new construction or completion of alterations or additions to existing
structures.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE: A written statement issued by the Community Development Department authorizing building uses,
accessory building and structures, or use consistent with the terms of this title and for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its provisions.
CERTIFIED SURVEY: A sketch, plan, map, or other exhibit bearing a written statement of its accuracy or conformity to specified standards which is
signed and sealed by a registered surveyor.
CHANNEL: Any natural or artificial watercourse exhibiting definite banks, boundaries, and beds, and which contains visible evidence of flow or
occurrence of water.
CHANNEL LETTER: A multi-dimensional letter, number or symbol that is individually formed and mounted to form a sign. For the purpose of this
chapter, all channel letters must be at least one inch (1") in thickness as defined by subsection 11-12-7C of this title.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: A State licensed or registered facility where more than six (6) children are temporarily left with attendants.
CHURCH: Any building, premises or site whose primary use is public religious worship.
CLEAR CUTTING: The indiscriminate removal of trees, shrubs, or undergrowth with the intention of preparing real property for nonagricultural
development purposes. This definition does not include the selective removal of nonnative tree and shrub species when the soil is left relatively
undisturbed.
CLINIC: An office occupied by one or more members of a healing profession.
CLINIC, SMALL ANIMAL: An establishment where a licensed veterinarian carries out the prevention and treatment of diseases and injuries in small
and domestic animals. For purposes of this title, this definition does not include a kennel.
COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT: An establishment that provides facilities for the physical entertainment of patrons for a fee, including batting cages,
billiard parlors, bowling alleys, go-cart racing, ice skating, miniature golf courses.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission.
COMMUNICATION DEVICE: A structure in a fixed location used as an antenna or to support antennas for the primary purpose of transmitting and/or
receiving electronic signals.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR: The City employee designated by the City to administer and enforce this title.
CONSIGNMENT SHOP: An enclosed facility in which used personal items such as clothes, jewelry, or furniture is resold through a broker for the
owner at an agreed upon price. It is understood that the owner retains title to the item at all times and can end the arrangement with the broker at any
time by requesting a return of the item.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS: First class consumer fireworks and second class consumer fireworks that are intended for the retail sale and use by the
general public provided that they are manufactured, labeled, and sold in conformance with the regulations of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety
Commission published in title 16, CFR.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS SALES: An establishment used for the retail display and sales of consumer fireworks.
CONVALESCENT HOMES: See definition of nursing home.
CONVENIENCE STORE: An establishment for retail sale of petroleum products and other supplies for motor vehicles, as well as for the retail sale of a
variety of other items typically sold in grocery stores, not including the repair or sale of vehicles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 349/439
COPY: Words, letters, logos, figures, symbols, statues, illustrations, patterns, decorative panels or inserts that form a message or otherwise call
attention to a business, product, service, or activity, or to the sign itself. Lighting and similar features adding to the architecture element of the building
are not considered as signage but shall be regulated by the site plan.
COURTYARD: A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of
a building.
COVENANTS, RESTRICTIVE: Any contract restricting the manner in which land may be used.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street, one end of which is closed and consists of a circular turnaround.
DECK: An unroofed platform, constructed above grade, unenclosed except by a railing, which projects from the outer wall of a building and is attached
to the ground.
DELAYED DEPOSIT SERVICE PROVIDER: Every person who for a fee does either of the following:
A. Accepts a check dated subsequent to the date it was written.
B. Accepts a check dated on the date it was written and holds the check for a period of time prior to deposit or presentment pursuant to an
agreement with, or any representations made to, the maker of the check, whether express or implied.
DEMISING WALL: A wall used to provide separation between individual tenants located within a multiple-tenant building.
DENSITY, GROSS: The number of dwelling units per unit area of land usually expressed as dwelling units per acre.
DEVELOPMENT: Any humanmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, building or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. "Development" does not include "minor projects"
or "routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities" as defined in this section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling or grading.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A type of plan that becomes part of the zoning for a property. The plan depicts site characteristics and development
information and provides guidance for site plans.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS SALES: An establishment used for the manufacturing, storage or distribution of any firework classified as a 1.3G firework by
the American Pyrotechnics Association.
DISTRICT: A section or sections of the City within which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area of
buildings and premises are uniform.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL BOARDING/KENNEL: Any premises in which meals, exercise, and lodging for four (4) or more domesticated animals, six
(6) months old or older, are provided for compensation, or in which such domesticated animals are raised for the purpose of sale, and are kept under
constant restraint. Domesticated animals shall include dogs, cats, rabbits, and ferrets.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL EXERCISE YARD: An enclosed or open air structure adjacent to or part of a principal structure which is located in a
commercial or industrial district which is utilized for the periodic exercise of domesticated animals.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL RUN: An accessory structure in a residential district that is built or constructed primarily to enclose domesticated animals.
DRINKING PLACES: Those uses that include bars, taverns, saloons, cabarets, and nightclubs; which involve the sale and/or distribution of alcoholic
beverages as a significant portion of business generated.
DRIP LINE: A vertical line extending from the outermost branches of a tree to the ground.
DRIVE-IN/DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: Any portion of a building or structure from which a business is transacted, or is capable of being transacted,
directly with customers located in a motor vehicle during such business transaction.
DUMPSTER ENCLOSURE: Any type of approved screening, which encompasses trash receptacles, grease receptacles, or recycling containers.
DWELLING: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including one-family, duplex, townhome
and multiple-family dwellings, but not including boarding and lodging houses, hotels, mobile homes, nursing homes, or trailer homes.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling having one or more common walls and having independent and separate exterior access in a structure of two (2)
or more dwellings. Floors and ceilings are not considered "walls".
DWELLING, CONDOMINIUM: One or more rooms occupying all or part of a floor or floors in a building of one or more floors or stories, and
notwithstanding whether the rooms are intended for use or used as a residence or office for the operation of any industry or business, or for any other
use not prohibited by law, where ownership of the general common elements of the structure, as defined under chapter 499B of the Code of Iowa, is
shared by one or more persons, corporations or other legal entities capable of holding or owning an interest in real property.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A building containing only one dwelling unit and designed for and occupied exclusively for residence purposes by only one
family within a townhouse development which is characterized by common elements which are specified in or determined under the rules and
regulations set forth by recorded covenants.
DWELLING, DUPLEX: A building containing only two (2) dwelling units and designed for and occupied exclusively by not more than two (2) families
with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof containing more than three (3) dwelling units designed for or occupied by more than
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 350/439
three (3) families with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building containing only one dwelling unit and designed for and occupied exclusively for residence purposes by only
one family.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: A dwelling unit which is detached or attached horizontally, and not vertically, to one or more other dwelling units, wherein
the land or lot beneath each dwelling, may be individually owned by the owner of the dwelling. A townhouse subdivision shall have common elements,
which are specified in or determined under the rules and regulations set forth by recorded covenants. Covenants for townhouse subdivision shall
establish the guidelines for maintenance of common elements and permit free movement through common areas by members of the homeowners'
association to assure access to the structural exterior of each townhouse unit by the individual unit owner.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more habitable rooms which are occupied or which are intended or designed to be occupied by one family with facilities for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EASEMENT: A right given by the owner of land to another person for specific limited use of that land.
EGRESS: An exit.
EMPLOYEE: Any person working, regardless of full time, part time or volunteer status, as an owner, partner, subcontractor, independent contractor of
the business.
ENCLOSED AREA BELOW LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building when all the following criteria are met:
A. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
subsection 11-11-5B4a of this title, and
B. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking
or storage, and
C. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot
(1') above the base flood elevation, and
D. The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
EQUIPMENT SALES AND DISPLAY: The use of land or building for the display, sale or lease of new or preowned trucks with a gross vehicle weight of
greater than nine thousand (9,000) pounds, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, construction equipment, or other similar equipment capable of
traveling upon the roadway. The servicing or repair of vehicles may be conducted as an accessory use.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix, and includes the painting of wall signs.
EVENTS CENTER: A facility: a) with a capacity to seat five hundred (500) or more persons; b) which does not have regular business hours; and c)
which is open exclusively for special events, such as sporting events, musical events, weddings, private parties, banquets and similar activities.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community. For the purposes of this regulation, the effective date of the first floodplain management
regulation is November 1, 1979.
EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted
by the community.
EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FACTORY BUILT HOME: Any structure, designed for residential use, which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site. For the purpose of this title, factory built homes include mobile
homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also include recreational vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or more factory built home lots for rent or sale.
FAMILY: A person living alone or in a group living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, and eating
facilities up to a maximum occupant dwelling load as provided in chapter 6 of this title. For the purposes of this definition, anyone who spends more
than ninety (90) nights within a twelve (12) month period will be counted as an occupant.
The definition of family does not include, and is not intended to provide an exclusion for, any of the following:
A. More than eight (8) people who are:
1. Residents of a "family home" as defined in section 414.22 of the Iowa Code; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 351/439
2. "Handicap" as defined in the Fair Housing Act, 42 USC section 3602(h).
B. Any group of individuals who are in a group living arrangement as a result of criminal offenses;
C. Any group of individuals whose association is temporary, seasonal in nature or limited to the duration of an educational school year cycle;
D. Any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge or like organization.
FENCE: An enclosure or barrier constructed of wood and/or other material(s) used to delineate boundary, provide screening, or prevent access to or
from the area enclosed.
FENCE, ORNAMENTAL: All fencing which is ornamental or embellished and includes, but is not limited to, the following types of fencing: post and rail
or split rail, but not chainlink.
FIRST CLASS CONSUMER FIREWORKS: The following consumer fireworks, as described in American Pyrotechnics Association standard 87-1,
chapter 3:
A. Aerial shell kits and reloadable spinners.
B. Chasers.
C. Helicopters and aerial spinners.
D. Firecrackers.
E. Mine and shell devices.
F. Missile type rockets.
G. Roman candles.
H. Sky rockets and bottle rockets.
I. Multiple tube devices with a similar nature as the above described devices provided that they are manufactured in accordance with the American
Pyrotechnics Association standard 87-1, chapter 3, section 3.5.
500-YEAR FLOOD: A flood, the magnitude of which has a two-tenths percent (0.2%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which,
on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every five hundred (500) years.
FLAG: Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, lettering, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political
subdivision or other entity.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers
or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map prepared as part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): A report published by FEMA for a community issued study along with the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map(s). The study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: An overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel, which must be reserved in order to discharge
flood flows and so that confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by
more than one foot (1').
FLOODWAY FRINGE: The portion of the special flood hazard area outside of the floodway.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from
the centerline of common walls separating two (2) attached buildings. For determining off street parking and loading requirements for any specific use,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 352/439
the "floor area" is the total amount of "floor area", as described above, which is devoted to such specific use, including accessory storage areas such
as counters, racks or closets when located within selling or working areas.
FOUNDATION PLANTINGS: Landscaping material designed to hide structure foundations from view at eye level from the adjacent rights-of-way.
FRONTAGE: The dimension of a front lot line as measured along the public street (see definition of lot lines, subsection A).
GARAGE, MECHANICAL: A structure in which major mechanical repair or rebuilding of motor powered vehicles is performed for commercial gain and
in which the storage, care and minor servicing are accessory uses.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building, or an accessory portion of the main building, designed and/or used for the shelter or storage of vehicles
owned or operated by the occupants of the main building.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building or premises, other than a private garage, used for equipping, refueling, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling or storing
motor driven vehicles.
GARAGE SALE RESELLER: The act of selling or offering for sale of personal property on residential premises to the general public in excess of two
(2) events per year. Such sales include, but are not limited to, a porch sale, yard sale, moving sale or auction.
GENERAL FARMING OR AGRICULTURE: The use of land for crop production, including corn, soybeans, alfalfa, pumpkins, hay, but excluding swine,
poultry, and bovine production and breeding.
GRADE: The average elevation of the finished ground at the exterior walls of the main building.
GREENHOUSE: A building or accessory building constructed chiefly of glass or other translucent material, which is devoted to the protection or
cultivation of flowers or other plants.
GROUP HOME FOR THE HANDICAPPED: A dwelling shared by four (4) or more handicapped persons, including resident staff, who live together as
a single housekeeping unit and in a long term, familylike environment in which the staff provide care, education, and participation in community
activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the resident to live as independently as possible.
HALF STORY: A story with at least two (2) of its opposite sides situated in a sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the
floor area of the floor immediately below it.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any item or agent (biological, chemical, radiological, and/or physical), which has the potential to cause harm to humans,
animals, or the environment, either by itself or through interaction with other factors.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: A facility or institution, whether public or private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis
or treatment of human diseases, pain, injury, deformity or physical condition, including, but not limited to, a general hospital, diagnostic center,
treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended care center or intermediate care facility.
HEDGE: A landscape barrier that consists of a continuous, dense planting of shrubs.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING: See definition of building height.
HEIGHT, TOTAL WES: The height above grade of the wind energy system, including the tower, generating unit, and the highest vertical extension of
any blades. Height shall be measured from the adjacent grade of the tower/building to the tip of the turbine (blade) at its highest point.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing in the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or
a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or,
D. Individually listed on a local Inventory of Historic Places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either: 1)
an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or 2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
HOME, MANUFACTURED: A factory built structure built under authority of 42 USC section 5403, is required by Federal law to display a seal from the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and was constructed on or after June 15, 1976. If a manufactured home is placed in a
mobile home park, the home must be titled and is subject to the Mobile Home Square Foot Tax. If a manufactured home is placed outside a mobile
home park, the home must be titled and is assessed and taxed as real estate.
HOME, MOBILE: A vehicle without automotive power used or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the
public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by
one or more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with automotive power not registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home is not built to
a mandatory Building Code, contains no Federal or State seals, and was built before June 15, 1976.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 353/439
HOME, MODULAR: A factory built structure which is manufactured to be used as a place of human habitation, is constructed to comply with the Iowa
State Building Code for modular factory built structures, and must display the seal issued by the State Building Code Commissioner.
HOME OCCUPATION: A business, profession, occupation or trade conducted for gain or support within a residential building, accessory building or
accessory structure thereto, which is incidental and secondary to the use of such building for dwelling purposes and which does not change the
essential residential character of such building.
HORIZONTAL AXIS WES: Traditional wind turbine design, in which the rotating shaft is parallel to the ground, and the blades rotate through a vertical
plane.
HOSPITAL: An institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary and emergency service of a medical or surgical nature to injured persons and
patients, other than persons suffering from a lingering mental sickness, disease, disorder or ailment.
HOTEL: Any building containing six (6) or more guestrooms intended or designed to be used or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or
which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land.
Impervious surfaces include graveled driveways and parking areas.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE, PERMANENT: A concrete or asphalt surface. Temporary or movable concrete blocks, two foot by two foot (2' x 2') concrete
pads, mats, pavers, or similar nonpermanent surfacing are not considered permanent impervious surfaces.
INDEPENDENT LIVING RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: A development providing individual dwelling units designed specifically for the needs of elderly
persons who are able to function and live independently. In addition to housing, this type of facility may provide convenience services such as meals,
housekeeping and transportation.
INGRESS: An entrance.
JUNK: All old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other nonferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or
used lumber, or salvaged wood, dismantled vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel, or
other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discharged glass, concrete, tinware, plastic or old or discharged household goods or hardware, mattresses,
beds or bedding, or any other kind of scrap or waste material which is stored, kept, handled or displayed for barter, resale, reuse, salvage, stripping, or
trade. Neatly stacked firewood located in a side yard or rear yard is not considered junk.
JUNKYARD: Any area where junk is bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packaged, disassembled or handled, including house wrecking yards, used
lumberyards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking or structural steel material and equipment; but not including areas where
such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials
necessary as a part of manufacturing operations.
LANDSCAPING: Any combination of living plants, such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees, and nonliving landscape material,
such as rocks, pebbles, mulch, walls, fences, and/or decorative fountains.
LARGE WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (LWECS): A wind energy system consisting of at least one of the following: a wind turbine, tower,
and associated controls or conversion electronics, and is intended for the production of electricity in excess of the needed on site consumption of
supplied utility power. Wind energy systems having a nameplate rated capacity of greater than fifteen kilowatts (15 kW) for residential uses or one
hundred kilowatts (100 kW) for commercial or industrial uses shall be considered a large LWECS. Large LWECS are not permitted on any parcel in the
City.
LOADING SPACE: Any off street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking (less
than 24 hours) of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise.
LODGING HOUSE: Any building or portion thereof, containing not more than four (4) guestrooms which are used by not more than four (4) guests
where rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. A lodging house shall comply with all the requirements of this title for dwellings.
LOGO: The graphical content of a sign surface in pictographic or symbolic form.
LOT: Any parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and
other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on a dedicated or private street and may consist of:
A. A single lot of record;
B. A portion of a lot of record;
C. A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record;
D. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this title.
LOT LINES: All lots shall be in compliance with code of Iowa with respect to the subdivision of land.
A. Front: The line separating the front of the lot from the street. In the case of a corner and double frontage lots, all lots fronting on a public or
private street are deemed front lot line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 354/439
B. Rear: The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a corner lot, the line opposite the
shorter street frontage dimension shall be construed as the rear lot line. In case of an interior triangular or irregular shaped lot, it means a straight
line ten feet (10') in length which:
1. Is parallel to the front lot line or its chord.
2. Intersects the two (2) other lot lines at points most distant from the front lot line.
C. Side: Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT MEASUREMENTS:
Lot Area: The gross area, exclusive streets or other public right of way, within the boundary lines of lots.
Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines as measured perpendicular to the midpoint of the mean front lot
line. In the case of an interior triangular or gore shaped lot, the depth is the horizontal distance between the midpoints at the front and rear lot
lines.
Lot Width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as measured perpendicular to the line comprising the lot depth at its point of
intersection with the required minimum front setback. When the lot width is decreasing from front to rear, the horizontal distance between the
side lot lines as described above shall be measured at its point of intersection with the required minimum rear setback.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot that is part of subdivision, the deed of which is recorded in the office of the county recorder, or a lot or parcel described by
metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
LOT TYPES:
Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, with the street right of way abutting the front and one or more side lines of
the lot. See figure 11-2-1.2 of this section.
Double Frontage Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street or public thoroughfare which do not intersect one
another. See figure 11-2-1.2 of this section.
Key Lot: A lot so subdivided as to have its side lines coincide with the rear lot lines of adjacent lots on either or both sides of the aforesaid lots.
See figure 11-2-1.2 of this definition.
Reversed Frontage Lot: A corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first interior lot to its rear.
See figure 11-2-1.2 of this definition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 355/439
Figure 11-2-1.2
LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a basement except when the criteria listed in the definition of enclosed
area below lowest floor are met.
MASSAGE: Any method of treating the external parts of the human body by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating with the hand or any
instrument for any form of consideration or gratuity.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having a fixed place of business where massage is administered for any form of consideration or
gratuity, including, but not limited to, massage parlors, health clubs, sauna baths, and steam baths. This definition shall not be construed to include:
A. Persons licensed in the State of Iowa under the provisions of chapters 148, 148A, 148B, 150, 150A, 151, 152, 157 or 158 of the Iowa Code,
when performing massage, when performing massage therapy or massage services as part of the profession or trade for which licensed;
B. Persons performing massage therapy or massage services under the direction of a person licensed as described in subsection A of this
definition;
C. Persons performing massage therapy or massage services upon a person pursuant to the written instruction or order of a licensed physician;
D. Nurses aids, technicians and attendants at any hospital or healthcare facility licensed pursuant to chapter 135B, 135C or 145A of the Iowa
Code, in the course of their employment and under the supervision of the administrator thereof or of a person licensed as described subsection A
of this definition;
E. An athletic coach or trainer in any accredited public or private secondary school, junior college, college or university, or employed by
professional or semiprofessional athletic team or organization, in the course of his or her employment as such coach or trainer. This definition
shall not be construed to include a volunteer Fire Department, a volunteer rescue squad or a nonprofit organization operating a community
center, swimming pool, tennis court, or other educational, cultural, recreational, and athletic facilities, and facilities for the welfare of the residents
of the area.
MAXIMUM DAMAGE POTENTIAL USES: Hospitals and like institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or instruments
of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; electrical power
installations; buildings or building complexes that provide emergency services to the general public; buildings or building complexes that house
students and are used for education purposes; buildings or building complexes that provide long and short term care, convalescent care or assisted
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 356/439
living operations; or other buildings or building complexes similar in nature or use.
MEETING HALL: A facility providing space for lectures, social functions, exhibitions, entertainment, instruction and similar purposes as well as
customary ancillary space, such as restrooms, kitchens, foyers, work and dressing rooms and storage areas.
MENTAL INSTITUTION, HOSPITAL OR HOME: An institution specializing in giving clinical and psychiatric aid and treatment to and in conjunction with
the housing of persons and patients suffering from temporary, lingering, or chronic mental ailment, disorder or sickness.
MINI-WAREHOUSE FACILITIES: A building or group of buildings, which are rented and designed, through individual compartments or controlled
stalls, for self-storage purposes.
MINOR PROJECTS: Small development activities (except for filling, grading and excavating) valued at less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
MOTEL, MOTOR LODGE: A building or group of two (2) or more buildings designed to provide sleeping accommodation for transient or overnight
guests, with garage attached or parking facilities conveniently located to each such unit.
MOTOR VEHICLE: A motorized conveyance for transporting people, goods, etc., especially over land.
MULCH: An organic or synthetic material placed on the soil to prevent erosion, control weeds, and enrich the soil.
MULTIPLE TENANT BUILDING, HORIZONTAL: A single story building designed for the collocation of two (2) or more tenants located side by side with
each tenant separated by demising walls.
MULTIPLE TENANT BUILDING, VERTICAL: A multiple story building designed for the collocation of two (2) or more tenants located side by side
and/or on separate floors of the building.
NEON, EXPOSED: Any neon type lighting used as or in a sign, not encased in a solid colored light diffusing lens, so as to limit the visible appearance
of the illuminated light source.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the first
floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
NEW FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by
the community.
NIGHTCLUB: Any place of business located within any building or establishment, operated for the purpose of supplying entertainment or music, or
both, and providing meals and refreshments prepared on the premises, having a seating capacity of not less than forty (40) people at tables; providing
a dance floor containing not less than three hundred eight (308) square feet, and serving beer, wine or liquor for consumption on the premises.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot which does not conform to the provisions of this title relative to lot frontage, width or area for the district in which it is
located, by reason of the adoption of this title or subsequent amendments hereto.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure or portion thereof which does not conform to the provisions of this title relative to the height, structures,
yards or building coverage for the district in which it is located, by reason of the adoption of this title or subsequent amendments hereto.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any use not allowed in the zone in which it is located or use of land or a building that does not comply with the provisions of
this title, by reason of the adoption of this title or subsequent amendments hereto.
NONPROFIT INSTITUTION: A nonprofit establishment maintained and operated by a society, corporation, individual, foundation or public agency for
the purpose of providing charitable, social, educational or similar services to the public, groups or individuals. Cooperative nonprofit associations,
performing a service normally associated with retail sales or trade such as cooperative groceries, granaries, equipment sales, etc., are not considered
nonprofit institutions under this title.
NUISANCE: A situation which is injurious to health, indecent, offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of the property so as to interfere
essentially with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property.
NURSING HOME: A building or structure having accommodations and where care is provided for invalid, infirm, aged, convalescent, memory disabled
or physically disabled persons, not including insane, inebriate or contagious persons.
OBSCENE: Matter which is offensively or repulsively indecent.
OCCUPANT: A person recorded as such on official records and including duly authorized agent or notary, a purchaser, devisee, judiciary; any person
having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question.
OFF GRID: An electrical system that is not connected to a utility distribution facility or to any building or structure that is connected to a utility
distribution facility.
100-YEAR FLOOD: A flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the
average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100) years.
OPEN SPACE: A developed area that is intended to provide light and designed for resource protection, scenic, and/or amenity purposes. Open space
may include, but is not limited to, lawns, decorative plantings, walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, wooded areas
and watercourses. Open space shall not be deemed to include buildings, driveways, parking lots, or other hard surfaces designed or intended for
vehicular travel.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Open space within or related to a development, not in individually owned lots or dedicated for public use, but which is
designed and intended for the common use and enjoyment of the residents of the development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 357/439
OUTDOOR EATING ESTABLISHMENT: Picnic tables, benches, counters and similar facilities, or area, provided in conjunction with a restaurant for the
serving and/or consumption of food out of doors, and not contained within a building.
OUTDOOR SOUND SYSTEM: Any sound equipment, stereo equipment or amplification equipment that is permanently or temporarily placed
outdoors, or which directs sound outdoors.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: A district which overlays and acts in conjunction with the underlying zoning district or districts.
PARAPET OR PARAPET WALL: That portion of a building wall that rises above the roof level.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: A permanent hard surfaced area, other than a street, reserved for the parking of automobiles, plus such additional
area as is necessary to afford adequate ingress and egress.
PATIO: A level surface constructed at grade directly adjacent to the principal building.
PAWNBROKER: Every person who makes loans or advancements upon pawn, pledge or deposit of personal property or who receives actual
possession of personal property as security for loans, with or without a mortgage or bill of sale thereon, or who by advertisement, sign or otherwise
holds himself out as a pawnbroker.
PENNANT AND/OR STREAMER: A long, narrow ribbonlike flag or tapering flag used individually or attached to a rope or structure of any length in a
series.
PLAT: A map recorded in final form, which represents a tract of land showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and streets.
PORCH: An unenclosed or enclosed roofed projection from a building. A porch shall be considered as part of the principal building for all yard
requirements.
PREMISES: Any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land, building or buildings, structure or structures, used publicly or privately as a place of business, dwelling
or meeting place.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The building situated or to be placed nearest the front property line and the use of which conforms to the primary use
permitted by the zoning classification in which it is located.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or structures, as distinguished from a secondary or accessory use.
PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE: Any right-of-way under the jurisdiction and maintenance of the governmental agencies of the Federal, State and
Municipal government; which may be used by the public in general; and which serves as the frontage street to the abutting property.
QUEUE SPACE: A temporary waiting area for motor vehicles obtaining a service or other activity.
RACEWAY: An enclosed channel designed expressly for holding wires, cables, or bus bars. In no case shall a raceway width be greater than the
attached letters. A raceway width greater than the attached letters shall be considered a panel sign for the purposes of this title.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
RESIDENTIAL OR RESIDENCE: Any lot, plot, parcel, tract, area, or piece of land or any building used exclusively for family dwelling purposes or
intended to be used, including concomitant uses specified herein.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: An establishment, located within a multi-tenant building, whose principal business is the sale of food and beverages to
the public, provided the food and beverages are generally served "ready to consume" or "carry out" in a cafeteria style, such as cafes, coffee shops
and delicatessens.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD, DRIVE-THROUGH: Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food, frozen desserts, or beverages in
ready to consume individual servings, for consumption either within the restaurant building or for carryout. The establishment may also include a driveup
or drive-through services facility or offer curb service.
RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE, SIT DOWN: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and beverages, where customers are
generally served on demand from a menu during stated business hours, served by an employee of the business, served on reusable containers and
dinnerware, to be consumed on the premises primarily inside the building at tables.
RETAIL: A business that provides goods and/or services directly to the consumer where goods are available for immediate purchase and removal from
the premises by the purchaser and includes, but is not limited to, apparel and clothing stores, bookstores, department stores, drugstores, etc.
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR ROW: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road,
trail, water line, sanitary sewer and/or public uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 358/439
ROOFLINE: The point at which the roof meets the building walls.
ROOM, UTILITY: A room used in a dwelling that primarily houses the furnace, water heater, heat pump, boiler, etc.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES: Repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that
do not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such
repairs include:
A. Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing roofing tiles and replacing siding;
B. Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;
C. Basement sealing;
D. Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
E. Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
SECOND CLASS CONSUMER FIREWORKS: The following consumer fireworks, as described in American Pyrotechnics Association standard 87-1,
chapter 3:
A. Cone fountains.
B. Cylindrical fountains.
C. Flitter sparklers.
D. Ground and handheld sparking devices, including multiple tube ground and handheld devices provided that they are manufactured in
accordance with American Pyrotechnics Association standard 87-1, chapter 3, section 3.5.
E. Ground spinners.
F. Illuminating torches.
G. Toy smoke devices that are not classified as novelties pursuant to American Pyrotechnic Association standard 87-1, chapter 3, section 3.2.
H. Wheels.
I. Wire or dipped sparklers that are not classified as novelties pursuant to American Pyrotechnic Association standard 87-1, chapter 3, section 3.2.
For the purposes of this title, a retail operation in which less than fifty percent (50%) of the retail floor space is devoted to the sale or display of
second class consumer fireworks shall not be considered a consumer fireworks sales use.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the front, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building or structure,
respectively.
SHADOW FLICKER: Alternating changes in light intensity caused by the moving blade of a wind energy system casting shadows on stationary objects
such as the ground or facade of an adjacent structure.
SHRUB: A self-supporting woody perennial plant of low to medium height characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from the base,
usually not more than eight feet (8') in height.
SIGN: Every sign or advertisement as defined herein, including any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, or insignia used to
advertise, promote, or draw attention to the interests of any person or firm when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public.
SIGN, A-FRAME: A temporary sign, constructed of wood, cardboard, plastic, or other lightweight and rigid material having the capability to stand on its
own supports and being portable.
SIGN AREA: The area of a sign as determined by the Community Development Director in accordance with section 11-12-7 of this title.
SIGN, AWNING: A nonilluminated sign that is either attached to, affixed to, or painted on an awning or canopy.
SIGN, BAG: A temporary cover made of a cloth or canvas material, used to alter the message of an obsolete sign until such time as it is replaced with
a new sign.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 359/439
SIGN, BANNER: A temporary sign composed of lightweight material either enclosed in a rigid frame or not enclosed, secured or mounted to a
structure or post on two (2) or more edges. A national, State or Municipal flag, or the official flag of any institution or business is not considered a
banner.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: An off premises sign, displayed out of doors or visible from a public way.
SIGN, BUILDING MOUNTED: Any sign attached to or erected against the wall or painted on the surface of the wall of a building, with the exposed
face of the sign in a plane parallel with a plane of said wall. This definition includes fascia signs.
SIGN, CAPSULE: A sign fabricated from metal, aluminum or some other material with a face constructed out of a panel product. For the purpose of
this chapter, capsule signs may not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total sign area as defined by subsection 11-12-7C of this title.
SIGN, COMMERCIAL ABANDONED: Any sign face remaining in place for a period of thirty (30) days or more which no longer advertises an activity,
business, product, or service available on the premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, DETACHED RIGID: A temporary sign, typically constructed out of a stiff or non-flexible material and mounted to poles/posts or a similar style
support structure.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign, other than warning and regulatory signs, which is located on private property for the purposes of controlling all modes of
traffic.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY: The graphical content, in letter or alphabetical form, of a sign, which can be changed or altered
automatically through electrical or electronic means.
SIGN FACE OR SURFACE: The copy area, background area, and the peripheral encasement, structural elements, or trim, which forms the outer
perimeter of the sign.
SIGN, GROUND MOUNTED: A ground sign that does not have any exposed pole or pylon, and is attached to a single columnar base. Ground
mounted signs shall be constructed with materials chosen for their consistency with the principal building, as well as their durability and strength, in
addition to the aesthetic values.
SIGN HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average finished road grade at the sign location to the highest point of the sign.
SIGN, INTERSTATE GROUND MOUNTED: A sign on a property abutting an interstate right-of-way that is oriented to the interstate, or is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the interstate right-of-way as shown on section 11-12-8, figure 11-12-8A of this title.
SIGN, MANUAL CHANGEABLE COPY: The graphical content, in letter or alphabetical form, of a sign, which can be changed or altered by manual
placement of letters or symbols.
SIGN, NON-COMMERCIAL: A temporary or permanent sign which contains no message, statement or expression related to commercial interests.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING: A sign that does not conform to the regulations provided herein.
SIGN, NUMBER OF: For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign is considered to be a single display surface or displaying device
containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of
elements, each element is considered a single sign.
SIGN, OBSOLETE: A sign that no longer advertises or identifies a legitimate business conducted on the property.
SIGN, OFF SITE: Any sign advertising any interest of any person or firm, products, accommodations, services or activities not provided on the
premises in which the sign is placed.
SIGN, PANEL: A sign consisting of a frame which may be covered by a translucent material, which may be internally illuminated. The placement of
individual letters at least one inch (1") thick on a metal, stone, or Dryvit surface is not considered a panel sign.
SIGN, PERSON: Any form of signage that may be accomplished through gestures, signals, costumes, or carrying of "signs, temporary" (as defined in
this section) by persons affiliated with a business to advertise, promote or draw attention to such business.
SIGN, POLE: A sign which is erected upon one or more posts or pylons directly in or upon the ground and not attached to, or braced by, any other
structure.
SIGN, POLITICAL: A temporary sign erected for the purpose of soliciting votes or support for or in opposition to any candidate or any political party
under whose designation any candidate is seeking nomination or election or any public question on the ballot in an election held under the laws of the
State of Iowa.
SIGN, PORTABLE: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but
not limited to, the following: signs designed to be transported by the means of wheels, trailers or chassis, whether or not the wheels are presently
attached; signs constructed as or converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons or other hot air or gas filled figures; and signs
attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way and not being used in the normal day to day operations of the
business excluding storage.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign erected on or above the roof of a building.
SIGN, SERVICE: A sign identifying parking and handicapped parking, restrooms, public telephone facilities, first aid stations, fallout shelters and other
similar public service facilities.
SIGN, SUBDIVISION: A sign identifying the name of a residential complex, or neighborhood development included on a landscape feature including
planter beds, fountains, decorative walls or fences.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 360/439
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any commercial or residential sign (as defined in this section), not permanently attached to a building, post, or ground, including,
but not limited to, banners, sandwich boards, sign persons, balloons, streamers, and air filled figures, not to be continued after the expiration of the
allowed time period.
SIGN, TRAFFIC CONTROL: A public or private sign, permanently installed to inform, guide and control vehicles, pedestrians and bicyclists.
SIGN, VEHICLE: Any sign, logo, or advertisement placed, painted, attached, or displayed on a vehicle advertising a company, store or service.
SIGN, YARD: A small temporary sign, typically constructed out of corrugated plastic, or similar light weight material.
SITE: See definition of lot.
SITE PLAN: A plan prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings,
structures, uses and principal site development features proposed for a specific parcel of land.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (SWECS): A wind energy system consisting of at least one of the following: a wind turbine, tower,
and associated controls or conversion electronics, and is intended to solely reduce on site consumption of supplied utility power, is incidental and
subordinate to a permitted use on the same parcel. Small wind energy systems shall not have a nameplate rated capacity of greater than fifteen
kilowatts (15 kW) for residential uses or one hundred kilowatts (100 kW) for commercial or industrial uses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): The land within a community subject to the base flood. This land is identified on the community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, and/or A99.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: A permit issued by the Board of Adjustment that authorizes the recipient to make use of the property in accordance with the
requirements of this title as well as any additional requirements imposed by the Board of Adjustment, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the City
Council. A special use permit may be issued only for those uses listed under the "special uses" of this title.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, mature human buttocks, mature human female
breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy, fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast, minors engaged in a prohibited sexual act or simulation
of a prohibited sexual act.
STABLES:
Private Stable: A building or structure used or intended to be used for housing horses belonging to the owner of the property and for
noncommercial purposes.
Public Stable Or Riding Academy: A building or structure used or intended to be used for the housing of horses on a fee basis. Riding
instructions may be given in connection with a public stable or riding stable.
Riding Club: A building or structure used or intended to be used for the housing only of horses by a group of persons for noncommercial
purposes.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STORY: A portion of the building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling above, not including unfinished
attics. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet (6') above, such basement or cellar is considered a story.
STREET: Any thoroughfare or public space that has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use, primarily to provide principal means of
access to abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any replacement or change in the shape or size of any portion of a building or of the supporting members of a building
or structure such as walls, columns, beams, arches, girders, floor joist, roof joist, or roof trusses, beyond ordinary repairs and maintenance.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds,
cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities and/or other similar uses.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY: Any structure that is not considered a building, including, but not limited to: decks, fences, landscaping, signs, pools,
walls, temporary/permanent domesticated animal runs.
SUBDIVISION: A division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots, plats, sites or other subdivision of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, building development, anchorage, right-of-way dedication or other use.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 361/439
shall be included in the estimated cost of repair.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any improvement to a structure which satisfies either of the following criteria:
A. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure either: 1) before the improvement or repair is started; or 2) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not,
however, include either: 1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 2) any alterations of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
B. Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by twenty five percent (25%) or more. All additions constructed after the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be added to any proposed addition in determining
whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed twenty five percent (25%).
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points as specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change
in form or content of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA: Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting disks, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of
electromagnetic waves when such system is either external to or attached to the exterior of a structure.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: Any antenna in the shape of a shallow dish, and the appurtenant equipment, used for the
reception of communications (television or otherwise) from orbiting satellites of ground transmitters. This definition includes those satellite dishes less
than one meter (1 m) in diameter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER: A tower, pole or similar structure that supports a telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purposes
aboveground in a fixed location, freestanding, guyed, or on a building or other structure.
TENANT FRONTAGE: In the case of determining permitted sign area, the dimension between the tenant separation walls along the side of the
building containing the main business entry.
THRIFT SHOP: An enclosed facility in which used personal items such as clothes, jewelry, or furniture is donated to a nonprofit business or
organization that engages in the resale of the items. A retail store that sells used merchandise not donated for sale, including, but not limited to, used
record stores, used book stores, used furniture stores, used sporting goods, and used sports trading card stores, shall not be considered a thrift store
for the purpose of this title.
TOPSOIL: A medium composed of naturally occurring mineral particles and organic matter, which provides physical, chemical and biological properties
necessary for plant growth.
TOWER MOUNTED WES: A wind turbine that is mounted to a freestanding tower.
TRAILER: Any structure used for sleeping, business or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, sawhorses, or
skirting, or being attached to a permanent foundation, and which is, has been, or reasonably may be, equipped with wheels or other devices for
transporting the structure from place to place, whether by automotive power or other means.
TREE, EVERGREEN: Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which at maturity attains a trunk diameter of at least three inches (3") or more
when measured at a point two feet (2') above ground level and which normally displays green leaves or needles throughout the year.
TREE, OVERSTORY: Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which at maturity attains a trunk diameter of at least three inches (3") or more
when measured at a point two feet (2') above ground level and which normally attains an overall height of at least fifteen feet (15'), usually with one
main stem or trunk and many branches.
TREE, UNDERSTORY: Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant, which at maturity normally attains an overall height of ten feet (10'). Trees
with multiple trunk growth characteristics shall have no more than five (5) main trunks. These trees will provide the midlevel landscaping within the
specified height range.
USE: The purpose or activity, for which the land, or building thereon, is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE: A modification of the specific regulations of this title granted by resolution of the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the terms of this
title for the purpose of assuring that no property, because of special circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed
by other properties in the same vicinity and zone.
VEHICLE: A conveyance for transporting people, goods, etc., especially over land.
VERTICAL AXIS WES: A wind turbine design where the rotating shaft is perpendicular to the ground and the blades rotate through a vertical plane.
VIDEO MESSAGE BOARD: A sign that displays an electronic video, or collection of images and text on a screen or screen(s).
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the regulations contained within the chapters of this title.
VISION CLEARANCE: An open, unoccupied triangular space at the street corner or a corner lot, the space being defined as a setback line extending
across the corner between points established twenty five feet (25') along the right-of-way lines by measurement from the corner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 362/439
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (WES): An electrical generating facility comprised of an aggregation of parts such as a wind turbine, tower, transformer,
power lines, or battery banks, used in a manner to convert wind into mechanical or electrical energy.
WIND TURBINE: Any piece of electrical generating equipment that converts the mechanical energy of wind into electrical energy.
YARD, CORNER INTERIOR: On a corner lot, a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and measured between the side lot line (adjacent
lot) and the building or any projections thereof.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the front lot line and the building. See figure 11-2-1.3 of this
section.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured perpendicularly between the rear lot line or its extension and the building
or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies, porches or decks. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard is at the opposite end
of the lot from the front yard. See figure 11-2-1.3 of this section.
YARD, REQUIRED: Any yard as required by the setback regulations of this title.
YARD, SECONDARY FRONT: On a corner lot, the yard having frontage on a public street not having the main entrance to the principal building. See
figure 11-2-1.3 of this section.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and measured between the side lot lines and the building or any projections thereof.
See figure 11-2-1.3 of this definition.
Figure 11-2-1.3
ZONE: Any one of the classes of districts established by this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008; amd. Ord. 897, 11-20-2008, eff. 6-1-2009; Ord. 917, 9-3-2009;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 363/439
Ord. 925, 4-1-2010; Ord. 941, 12-16-2010; Ord. 967, 9-6-2012; Ord. 969, 9-6-2012; Ord. 997, 3-12-2015; Ord. 1006, 9-10-2015; Ord. 1037, 5-25-
2017; Ord. 1051, 1-11-2018; Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018; Ord. 1067, 1-24-2019)
Chapter 3
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
11-3-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERS; TERMS:
A board of adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of five (5) members. The terms of office of the members of the board of adjustment
and the manner of their appointment shall be as provided by state law and the board of adjustment procedure manual. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-3-2: PURPOSE:
It shall be the purpose of the board of adjustment:
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the community
development department in the enforcement of this title;
B. To hear and decide only such other special use permits and variances as the board of adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms
of this title;
C. To decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special use permits or variances should be granted; and
D. To grant special use permits or variances with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this title, or to deny special use permits and
variances when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-3-3: MEETINGS; GENERAL DUTIES:
A. Meetings: Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson, and at such other times as the board of adjustment may
determine.
B. Duties Generally; Open Meetings; Quorum: Such chairperson, or in the absence of the chairperson the acting chairperson, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board of adjustment and hearings shall be open to the public. The board of adjustment
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions all of which shall be immediately filed in the community development department
and shall be a public record. The presence of three (3) members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-3-4: APPEALS:
Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by a person aggrieved or by any official, department, and board of the city affected by any decision
of the community development department. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days by filing application request on forms provided by the
community development department. Additionally, the application must be accompanied with the appropriate fees in an amount determined by
resolution of the council from time to time. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the community
development department certifies to the board of adjustment after notice of appeal shall have been filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate
a stay would in the opinion of the department cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on due cause shown. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-3-5: HEARINGS NOTICE:
After the community development department has set the board of adjustment meeting date, surrounding property owners within three hundred ten
feet (310'), exclusive of intervening right of way, shall be notified. Notice shall be sent not less than seven (7) days and not more than twenty (20) days
before the board of adjustment meeting. The notice shall follow the format established by the community development department and be sent by first
class mail. Notice shall contain date, time, location, and subject of the board of adjustment meeting. The community development department shall
post at least one notification sign at least seven (7) days and not more than twenty (20) days prior to the board of adjustment meeting. At least one
sign must be placed so that it may be seen from a public street, and in cases of through lots and or corner lots, a sign may be posted at both
frontages. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-3-6: SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
A. Review; Board Determination: The board of adjustment shall review, before issuing any special use permit, the conformity of the proposed building
or use with the standards of the comprehensive plan and recognized principals of land use planning. The board of adjustment may approve the
special use permit as submitted, or before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter, adjust, or amend the proposal as the board of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 364/439
adjustment deems necessary to preserve the intent and purpose of this title in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
community.
B. Site Plan Review; Amendment: Following approval of the special use permit, the planning and zoning commission shall review a site plan/site plan
amendment as required in chapter 15 of this title.
C. Resubmission After Changes: In the event a special use permit is granted under the terms of this section, any changes thereafter in the approved
use or site plan shall be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as the original proposal.
D. Conditions For Issuance Of Permit: A special use permit shall not be granted by the board unless and until:
1. A written application, on forms provided by the community development department, is submitted indicating the section of this title under which
the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested.
2. Notice of public hearing shall be given at least seven (7) and not more than twenty (20) days in advance of public hearing. Notice of public
hearing shall occur in the same manner as required by law for variances.
3. The board shall look specifically upon the following criteria in granting or denying a special use permit, plus any additional criteria the board finds
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare in accordance with the intent of this title:
a. That the proposed location, design, construction and operation of the particular use adequately safeguards the health, safety, and general
welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding property;
b. That such use shall not impair an adequate supply of light and air to surrounding property;
c. That such use shall not unduly increase congestion in the streets or public danger of fire and safety;
d. That such use shall not diminish or impair established property values in adjoining or surrounding property; and
e. That such use will not unduly burden public utilities.
E. Conditions And Safeguards: In granting any special use permit, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this title. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the special use permit is granted,
shall be deemed a violation of this title and punishable under section 11-1-7 of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-3-7: VARIANCES:
A. Application Requirements: Application for variance from the terms of this title will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this title shall be
observed and substantial justice done. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered
grounds for the issuance of a variance.
B. Resubmittal After Changes: In the event a variance is granted under the terms of this title, any changes thereafter in the approved use or site plan
shall be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as the original proposal. Before granting a variance, the board of adjustment shall make
findings that the applicant has met the requirements of this title, and the board of adjustment shall further find that the reasons set forth in the
application justify the granting of variance. The burden shall be upon those seeking the variance to establish their entitlement to the requested
variance.
C. Conditions For Granting: Variances shall only be granted upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause; and
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in an substantial hardship to the applicant; and
3. A determination that the hardship is not self-imposed; and
4. A determination that the granting of the variance will not be contrary to the public interest or neighborhood integrity; and
5. A determination that the granting of a variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief from this title while preserving the spirit of the zoning
ordinance.
D. Conditions And Safeguards: In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity
with this title. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this title and punishable under section 11-1-7 of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-3-8: INTERPRETIVE REVIEW:
The board shall review appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the community
development director in the administration and enforcement of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 365/439
11-3-9: DECISIONS:
A. Authority Of Board: In exercising the above mentioned powers, the board of adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms
of this title, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make such
order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end, shall have powers of the community development department
from whom the appeal is taken.
B. Vote Of Members: The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order requirement,
decision, or determination of community development department, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to
pass under this title, or to grant any special use permit or variance.
C. Written Testimony Or Evidence: Every decision granted or denied by the board of adjustment shall be supported by a written testimony or evidence
submitted in connection therewith.
D. Denial Of Application: If any application has been denied by the board of adjustment, then no new application for the same relief shall be
considered by the board of adjustment unless the board shall find conditions have changed.
E. Council Review: Any decision made by the board of adjustment shall not be deemed effective until reviewed and accepted by the city council, at the
next regularly scheduled meeting, no more than twenty (20) days from the date of such deciding vote. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-3-10: CITY COUNCIL REMAND:
The city council, may, at its discretion, review any affirmative decision of the board of adjustment at any time before the effective date of the decision.
After such review, but prior to the effective date of the variance, the city council may remand any such decision to the board of adjustment for further
review. Upon remand, the board of adjustment may reconsider its decision and issue its final decision on the request within thirty (30) days after the
date of such remand. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-3-11: APPEALS FROM BOARD:
Any person or persons, any officer, department, or board of the city severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may present to a
court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board of adjustment. The court may reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the decision brought up for review. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-3-12: EXPIRATION OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT AND VARIANCE:
All special use permits and variances shall expire and terminate ninety (90) days after the date of the granting of such special use permit or variance
unless a building permit has been issued for the construction authorized by such special use permit or variance, or if no construction is authorized,
then unless a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued for such authorized use. The board of adjustment may, upon written request of the
affected person, extend the time for the issuance of a building permit or certificate of zoning compliance for sixty (60) days. In the event the building
permit for the construction so authorized is canceled, such special use permit or variance shall thereupon expire and terminate. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
Chapter 4
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
11-4-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of general zoning regulations and shall be known and may be cited and referred to as
the GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF CLIVE, IOWA. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-4-2: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this title imposes a greater restriction
than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules, regulations, or ordinances, the provisions of this title shall control. Where, for a
specific land use, the requirements of any other ordinance of the city are more stringent or restrictive than the requirements set forth herein, nothing
herein shall be construed to waive compliance with the provisions of such other ordinances. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-4-3: JURISDICTION; NONCONFORMITIES:
The lawful use of facilities existing at the time of the enactment of this title may be continued although such use may not conform to the regulations
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 366/439
herein. For those facilities permitted before the adoption of this title, such facilities shall be classified as "permitted nonconforming" facilities. It is the
intent of this title to permit these "nonconforming" facilities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such facilities are
declared by this title to be incompatible with the permitted facilities in the districts involved. No permit shall be issued for any lot, tenant or development
after the effective date hereof which is not in substantial conformity with the provisions of this title, nor shall any facility, except as herein specified, be
substantially improved, converted, enlarged, or otherwise altered without conforming to the provisions of this title. On any building devoted in whole or
in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing;
provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of the zoning ordinance is not increased. This title
shall not be construed to prohibit the improvement of any building or structure from a state of disrepair or neglect causing or potentially causing a
harmful condition to the owner, resident, passersby, or emergency and public officials to a minimum level of safety as determined by the building
official. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-4-4: SCOPE:
A. Conformance Required: Except as hereinafter specified, no land use and no building or structure shall be erected, extended, converted, enlarged,
moved or structurally altered which does not comply with all the district regulations established by this title for the district in which the building or
land is located.
B. Continuing Existing Nonconforming Uses: The lawful use of land, a building or structure existing at the time of the enactment of the zoning
ordinance may be continued even though such use may not conform with the regulations of this title for the district in which it is located. Any use in
existence at the adoption of the zoning ordinance which was not an authorized "nonconforming use" under previous zoning ordinances, shall not
be authorized to continue as a nonconforming use pursuant to this title, or amendments hereto. If no structural alterations are made, any
nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted classification.
Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restrictive use or to another conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be
changed to a less restrictive use. When a nonconforming use of land, building or structure is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) months, the
building, structure, and premises in combination shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations in the district in which it is
located. Where nonconforming use status applies to a building, structure and premises in combination, removal of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land. Any nonconforming building or structure damaged more than sixty percent (60%) of its replacement cost
exclusive of the foundations at the time of damage by any means shall not be restored or reconstructed, except in conformity with the provisions of
this title. If the structure is less than sixty percent (60%) damaged above the foundation, it may be restored, reconstructed or used as before,
provided that reconstruction is completed within six (6) months of such happening, and is built of like or similar materials as appropriate to the
zoning district.
C. Existing Building Permits:
1. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any building or part
thereof, for which approval and required building permits have been granted before the effective date hereof. The construction in conformance
with such plans shall have been started prior to the effective date hereof and completion thereof carried on in a normal manner and not
discontinued for any reason other than those beyond the builder's control.
2. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent
manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding. Such demolition
or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that such work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building
involved.
D. Yard, Open Space And Parking: No part of a yard or other open space, off street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any
building for the purpose of complying with this title shall be included as such required for any other building unless otherwise permitted through the
development review and approval process.
E. Reduction In Yard Or Lot Requirements: No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the zoning ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or
area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet the minimum requirements
established by this title.
F. Buildings And Structures: No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
1. To exceed the height;
2. To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
3. To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or
4. To have narrower or smaller rear, front, side yards or other open spaces than herein required, or in any other manner contrary to the provisions
of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-4-5: VISION CLEARANCE:
A. On a corner lot in any district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to impede vision between a height
of two and one-half (21/2) and ten feet (10') above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the ROW lines of such
corner lots and a line adjoining points along said ROW lines twenty five feet (25') from the point of intersection of right of way lines. See figure 11-4-
5.1 of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 367/439
B. In the case of private streets or drives, the vision clearance triangle shall be measured from the back of curb or edge of road surface.
C. Greater dimensions may be required on streets with higher traffic volumes, based upon the standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers or
the Association of American State Highway Officials.
Figure 11-4-5.1
(Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-4-6: STREET FRONTAGE:
Except as herein provided, no lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for any residence purposes unless such lot abuts for at least forty
feet (40') on at least one public street. An exclusive unobstructed ingress/egress easement of access or right of way of at least twenty four feet (24')
wide to a public street may be used to satisfy this requirement in unique circumstances. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-4-7: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings, regardless of height, which are constructed above the normal ground surface in any yard area shall not occupy more than thirty
percent (30%) of the yard area in which it is located; however, this regulation shall not be interpreted to prohibit the construction of a two (2) car garage
not to exceed four hundred fifty (450) square feet of gross building area. The thirty percent (30%) maximum shall include the total of all accessory
buildings and structures. Accessory buildings require a permit and a fee in an amount determined from time to time by resolution of the city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 368/439
Figure 11-4-7.2
A. Location:
1. Accessory building shall be erected in rear yards only.
2. Accessory buildings shall be built no less than ten feet (10') from a principal building or any other accessory building. See figure 11-4-7.2 of this
section.
3. Accessory buildings shall not be constructed in such a way as to impede drainageways or interfere with overland flowage easements.
B. Setback: Accessory buildings shall be at least five feet (5') from side lot lines, and five feet (5') from rear lot lines. See figure 11-4-7.2 of this section.
C. Corner Lots Or Double Frontage: In case of a corner lot or a double frontage lot, accessory buildings with floor area greater than one hundred
twenty (120) square feet shall not be located in the primary or secondary front yards. Accessory buildings with floor area less than or equal to one
hundred twenty (120) square feet are permitted to encroach into the secondary front yard. In this case, the "secondary front yard" is defined as that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 369/439
yard that fronts on a public street or ROW, but does not contain the main entrance to the principal structure. See figure 11-4-8.3 in section 11-4-8 of
this chapter.
D. Principal Building Relationship: Accessory buildings, except buildings housing animals or fowl, may be erected as part of the principal building or
may be connected thereto by a breezeway or similar structure, and such accessory building shall be considered as part of the principal building for
all yard requirements and building codes.
E. Design Characteristics: In all cases, accessory buildings shall be constructed of materials similar to the principal structure, and in character with the
surrounding built environment, as determined by the community development director.
F. Height: No accessory building shall exceed one story or twelve feet (12') in height.
G. Principal Building Constructed: No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has actually been
commenced, and no accessory building shall be used unless the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy for the principal building.
(Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-4-8: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Accessory structures that are constructed in any required yard area shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the yard area in which it is
located. The thirty percent (30%) maximum shall include the total of all accessory structures and accessory buildings. Accessory structures require a
permit and a fee in an amount determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. Accessory structures may be erected with the following
provisions:
A. Location:
1. Accessory structures shall be permitted in any yard, unless specified herein.
2. Accessory structures shall not be constructed in such a way to impede drainageways or interfere with overland flowage easements.
3. A minimum rear yard setback of five feet (5') and a minimum side yard setback of two feet (2') shall be maintained for accessory structures
unless specified elsewhere in this title.
B. Decks:
1. Decks not exceeding fifty (50) square feet in area shall be permitted in any yard, provided a minimum side yard setback of five feet (5') is
maintained.
2. Decks larger than fifty (50) square feet shall be permitted only in rear yards.
C. Fences And Walls:
1. Ornamental Fences: Ornamental fences not exceeding thirty six inches (36") in height are permitted within the limits of any yard in all districts.
However, in no event shall a fence be permitted that interferes with vision clearance triangle.
2. Barbed Wire Or Electric Fences: The use of barbed wire and/or electric fences to enclose land is prohibited within the corporate limits without
prior approval of the city council.
3. Residential Districts:
a. Requirements For Fences And Walls: Fences and walls not exceeding six feet (6') in height are permitted within the limits of side and rear
yards in all residential districts except corner and double frontage lots as permitted in subsections C3c and C3d of this section. The face of the
fence shall be equally attractive on both sides. However, if one side of the fence is considered less attractive because of structural members,
etc., the less desirable side of the fence shall be directed toward the developing property or away from the public thoroughfare. In all cases,
access shall be provided to the unenclosed property or ROW for maintenance purposes.
b. Safety Or Physical Handicap Issues: In a circumstance in which a fence, ramp, or similar structure is required for safety or access due to a
bona fide personal physical handicap, an accessory structure may be permitted to encroach up to ten feet (10') within the required front yard,
provided such accessory structure is approved by the city council. The council may condition its approval upon an agreement that the
accessory structure be removed if the person with disability no longer resides at the dwelling.
c. Double Frontage Lots: In the case of double frontage lots with an arterial street forming the rear property line, fences may be permitted up to
the property line in the secondary front yard, provided no landscaping buffer exists. See figure 11-4-8.3 of this section. Such fences may be up
to six feet (6') in height. The finished surface of the fence shall face outside the property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 370/439
Figure 11-4-8.3
(1) Arterial streets within the city are defined for the purposes of this chapter as N.W. 86th Street, N.W. 100th Street, N.W. 114th Street, N.W.
128th Street, N.W. 142nd Street, N.W. 156th Street, R-30, University Avenue, University Boulevard, Hickman Road, Douglas Parkway,
Meredith Drive, Warrior Lane and other streets as determined from time to time by the city council.
(2) For double frontage lots backing to a street other than an arterial, fences up to six feet (6') in height may be permitted, provided a twenty
foot (20') setback is preserved in the secondary front yard, and no landscape buffer exists. See figure 11-4-8.3 of this section.
d. Corner Lots: In the case of fences in corner lots, fences not exceeding six feet (6') in height are permitted in the secondary front yard provided
a minimum setback of twenty feet (20') from the property line is maintained. See figure 11-4-8.4 of this section. In the case of corner lots with
an arterial street forming the secondary front property line, fences may be permitted up to the property line in the secondary front yard,
provided no landscaping buffer exists. Such fences may be up to six feet (6') in height.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 371/439
Figure 11-4-8.4
e. Ornamental Fence Restrictions: In the following streets, as determined by the city council from time to time, and in accordance with the
comprehensive plan, no fences other than three feet (3') high ornamental may be constructed in a front or secondary front yard, regardless of
regulations above:
(1) Boston Parkway, west of N.W. 156th Street to the west corporate limits.
(2) Berkshire Parkway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 372/439
f. R-3 And R-4 Districts: Following site plan approval, fences may be constructed within the setback lines determined above, for developments in
R-3 and R-4 zoning districts.
4. Commercial And Industrial Districts: Fences and walls not exceeding eight feet (8') in height are permitted within the limits of any side or rear
yard. Fences and walls exceeding eight feet (8') in height require site approval by the city council. Fences may be constructed within the building
setback lines for commercial and industrial districts, following site plan approval by the city council.
5. Retaining Walls: In the case of retaining walls supporting embankments in all districts, the above requirements shall apply only to that part of the
wall above the ground surface of the retained embankment. Additionally, such wall retaining embankments of a vertical distance greater than
thirty inches (30") shall require either a handrail, guardrail, or landscaping to minimize the possibility of an accidental fall from the upper surface
to the lower level as determined by the community development director.
D. Miscellaneous Structures: Permanent uses, including, but not limited to, sport courts, tennis courts, and metal batting cages shall maintain a
setback consistent with subsection A3 of this section (minimum setbacks for accessory structures). (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
E. Domesticated Animal Runs: In residential districts, domesticated animal runs are permitted within the limits of rear yards. A five foot (5') setback is
required from all lot lines and adequate screening (landscaping and/or opaque fencing) shall be provided to reduce visibility and noise to the
adjoining property owners. Pet runs/kennels shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008; amd. Ord. 897, 11-20-2008, eff. 6-1-
2009)
F. Domesticated Animal Exercise Yard: In commercial or industrial districts, a domesticated animal exercise yard, a structure for the exercise of
domesticated animals, may be constructed adjacent to or as part of the principal structure, may be indoors or outdoors, and need not be climate
controlled. Such structure shall not be utilized as the primary enclosure for any animal. If outdoors, such structure shall be screened with solid
fencing, eight feet (8') in height, and shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from any adjacent property. (Ord. 897, 11-20-2008, eff. 6-1-2009)
G. Dumpster Enclosures: Dumpster enclosures shall be constructed of permanent materials of a like or similar nature to the principal structure, such
as brick, block, poured concrete, or similarly approved material with a metal framed gate with opaque screening. Adequate landscape screening
shall be provided to reduce visibility to the adjoining property owners. Dumpster enclosures shall be required for trash dumpsters, grease bins,
cardboard bins for all uses except single and duplex and townhome residences.
H. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools, hot tubs and saunas are permitted in any rear or side yard, provided a five foot (5') setback shall be maintained
from all side and rear yard property lines. In addition, regulations in title 10, chapter 10, of this code shall apply.
I. Cart Corrals: Cart corrals shall be constructed of permanent materials of a like or similar nature to the principal structure, such as brick, block,
poured concrete, or similarly approved material. Cart corrals shall be significantly landscaped and/or screened to minimize the visual impact on the
surrounding area. Concrete curbing shall define the area of landscaping and cart storage. "Pole" or "tube" type cart corrals are expressly
prohibited. A low screening wall, constructed of materials of a like or similar nature to the principal building shall be utilized to completely screen the
carts, provided such wall does not disrupt pedestrian and motor vehicle movements. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008; amd. Ord. 897, 11-20-2008, eff. 6-1-
2009)
11-4-9: OUTDOOR AREAS AND ACTIVITIES:
A. Storage Areas: Outdoor storage areas, where permitted, shall provide an effective screen, completely obscuring the enclosed material. Adequate
landscaping, and/or walls, shall be provided to reduce visibility to the adjoining property owners and public view. Storage screening shall require
site plan approval. Slats in chainlink fencing shall not be deemed an acceptable alternative to privacy fencing.
B. Service Areas: A restaurant or drinking place may utilize an outdoor service area, provided the following conditions are met and a site plan/site plan
amendment has been approved:
1. Outdoor service area associated with the serving and/or dispensing of alcohol:
a. A minimum forty two inch (42") tall continuous enclosure with code compliant pedestrian ingress and egress shall be required. Such enclosure
shall be constructed of materials chosen for their strength and permanency, as well as compatibility with the principal structure. Proper panic
hardware will be required for all exits.
b. A minimum aisle width as shown below must be maintained if the outdoor service area is adjacent to a sidewalk.
2. Outdoor service area not associated with the serving and/or dispensing of alcohol:
a. A minimum aisle width as shown below must be maintained if the outdoor service area is adjacent to a sidewalk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 373/439
3. A restaurant or drinking place shall not be required to provide parking for the first three hundred (300) square feet of outdoor service area,
provided the following conditions are met:
a. If existing parking stalls are removed for the construction of the outdoor service area, a like number of parking stalls shall be added or
compensated for elsewhere on the site.
b. Stated occupancy for the establishment shall not increase as the result of additional outdoor service area, unless required parking as outlined
in section 11-13-8 of this title is provided.
c. Any outdoor service area over the initial three hundred (300) square feet shall provide the required parking as outlined in section 11-13-8 of
this title.
C. Sound Systems: A restaurant or drinking place may contain an outdoor sound system subject to the following conditions:
1. No source of the sound created by the outdoor sound system is within three hundred feet (300') of a dwelling or a building that contains a
dwelling.
2. The sound emanating from the outdoor sound system is not plainly audible from any property or lot located within a residential zoning district.
This requirement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other ordinances or regulations relating to noise as set forth in this code and/or
this title. (Ord. 970, 11-1-2012)
11-4-10: YARDS:
A. Corner Lots:
1. For corner lots, platted after the effective date hereof, the minimum required lot width shall be increased by an amount not less than twenty feet
(20') so as to allow for the additional required street secondary front yard; i.e., for a minimum required lot width of sixty feet (60'), the minimum
width of a corner lot shall be not less than eighty feet (80').
2. On corner lots platted and of record at the time of the effective date hereof, the same regulations shall apply except that these regulations shall
not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of the corner lot facing an intersecting street or as shown by existing contract of purchase
at the time of the effective date hereof, to less than twenty eight feet (28') or to prohibit the erection of an accessory building.
3. On corner lots platted and of record as of March 1, 1972, the side yard regulations shall apply to the longer street side of the lot except in the
case of reverse frontage where the corner lot faces an intersecting street. In this case, there shall be a side yard of not less than fifty percent
(50%) of the setback required on lots to the rear of such corner lot, and no accessory building or structure on said corner lot shall project beyond
the setback line of the lots in the rear; provided further, this regulation shall not be interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of the corner lot
facing an intersecting street and of record or as shown by existing contract or purchase on March 1, 1972, to less than twenty eight feet (28') or
to prohibit the erection of an accessory building.
B. Building Lines On Approved Plats: Whenever the plat of a land subdivision approved by the city council and on record in the office of the county
recorder shows a setback building line along any frontage for the purpose of creating a front yard or side street yard line, the building line thus
shown shall apply along such frontage in place of any other yard line required in this title unless specific yard requirements in this title require a
greater setback. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-4-11: SPECIAL EVENTS:
The city recognizes that in certain instances, some flexibility to allow special events out of the confines of a building can be beneficial to business
interests, as well as the consumers and the city alike, provided such events continue to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. The
following special event applications shall require a fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council from time to time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 374/439
A. Outdoor Sales: The community development director shall permit outdoor sales events for two (2) events per year for a maximum duration of seven
(7) days per event, subject to approval. "Outdoor sales events" shall be defined as those sales events that incorporate one or more twenty four (24)
hour periods and do not involve the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages. Outdoor sales shall not create a burden on parking and access
facilities. Outdoor sales events shall maintain fire and emergency access at all times.
B. Seasonal Sales: Seasonal sales events shall be permitted for two (2) events per year for a maximum duration of sixty (60) days per event subject to
approval by the community development director. Seasonal sales events shall maintain fire and emergency access at all times. "Seasonal sales
events" shall be defined as those events that, due to the nature of the product being sold or the time of year that such product is for sale, are best
accomplished out of doors, including, but not limited to, temporary or portable greenhouses or similar structure, pumpkin patches, holiday tree
farms, etc. Seasonal sales events shall not include the sale of equipment or motor vehicles or the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages. The
sales of farm produce or similar is not permitted within city limits at any time.
C. Other Events, Temporary Site Plan: Temporary site plans for events other than those mentioned above shall be approved by city council. Such
events shall require the appropriate permits, including, but not limited to: noise, outdoor liquor license, and temporary signs. Temporary site plans
shall show that the event will not impact the neighboring properties due to noise, congestion, lighting, or additional factors. Temporary site plans
shall be submitted on forms supplied by the community development department. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-4-12: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
The city recognizes that certain types of home based businesses may be carried on without an adverse impact on the residential property or
surrounding neighborhood, but that limitations are necessary to preclude the business activities that are of a scale or type which may be incompatible
in a residential context. It is the intent of this section to provide flexibility in conducting a home based business provided that the operations of the
home based business do not impact the quality of life or character of the surrounding residential neighborhood.
A. Accessory Use: Home occupations shall be permitted as an accessory use in all residential zoning districts subject to compliance with the
regulations within this section and any other applicable law. Any permit issued for a home occupation may be summarily revoked for failure to
conduct the home occupation in accordance with the standards set forth herein.
B. Classification: Home occupations shall be classified by the community development director as either a level 1: no impact home occupation, level 2:
minor impact home occupation or level 3: major impact home occupation. The distinction between the three levels of home occupations shall be
based primarily upon the degree of impact that the home occupation operations may result in on the surrounding residential neighborhood.
C. Performance Standards: The classification level shall be determined based on the performance standards below:
1. Level 1 No Impact Home Occupation: No permit shall be required for level 1 home occupation use.
a. The home occupation shall be conducted solely within the dwelling. No storage of goods, materials, equipment, trailers or products connected
with the home occupation shall be allowed outdoors or in an accessory building.
b. There shall be no nonoccupant employees conducting work on the premises.
c. There shall be no face to face customer or client interaction at the property.
d. Deliveries to or from the property shall be limited to the services provided by routine residential carriers.
e. There shall be no signage or window displays.
2. Level 2 Minor Impact Home Occupation: A permit must be obtained for any level 2 home occupation prior to commencement of the business
activity. An application for permit shall be made on forms provided by the community development department. A fee in an amount determined by
resolution of the city council shall accompany such application.
a. The home occupation may be conducted within the dwelling, approved accessory building or structure. No storage of goods, materials,
equipment, trailers or products connected with the home occupation shall be allowed outdoors.
b. There shall be not more than one nonoccupant employee conducting work on the premises.
c. Customer or client interaction occurring within the dwelling shall be limited to not more than four (4) customers/clients per hour, between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., Monday through Sunday.
d. Customer or client interaction occurring outside of the dwelling shall be limited to not more than four (4) customers/clients per hour, between
the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M., Monday through Friday.
e. Deliveries to or from the property shall be limited to the services provided by routine residential carriers.
f. Employee parking is provided on site.
Special conditions: The following service based uses may be considered level 2 home occupations provided that there are no nonoccupant
employees conducting work on the premises:
(1) Pet sitting, grooming or training (no overnight boarding, no outdoor kenneling and no more animals on site than permitted by section 5-7-12
of this code).
(2) Beauty parlors, barbershops, massage and other similar personal care services.
(3) Daycare services (hours of operation limited to between 6:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M., Monday through Friday).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 375/439
3. Level 3 Major Impact Home Occupation: A special use permit shall be obtained by the board of adjustment for any level 3 home occupation prior
to commencement of the business activity. An application for special use permit shall be made on forms provided by the community development
department. A fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council shall accompany such application.
a. Any use that exceeds the standards set forth for a level 2 home occupation shall be considered a level 3 home occupation.
b. The following uses shall be considered level 3 home occupations:
(1) Garage sale reseller.
(2) Repair and maintenance of automobiles, yard equipment, appliances and other similar products.
(3) Pet kenneling or other similar overnight boarding of animals.
(4) Other similar uses as determined by the community development director.
D. General Standards: The following general standards shall apply to all home occupations:
1. Home occupation permits are valid only for the applicant and use approved, and are not transferable.
2. No dwelling shall be built, altered, furnished or decorated for the purpose of conducting the home occupation in such a manner that would
change the residential character and appearance of the building, or in such a manner as to cause the structure to be recognized as a place
where a business is conducted.
3. There shall be no home occupation activities that are objectionable due to glare, dust, fumes, odor, vibration, noise, or other nuisances that
disturb the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Clive.
4. No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible electrical or mechanical interference in any radio, television receiver or
device outside the dwelling unit structure, or causes fluctuations in the line voltage outside the dwelling unit structure.
5. The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic and/or vehicular parking which degrades or is otherwise detrimental to the residential
nature of the neighborhood and thus becomes objectionable to the neighboring residents.
6. A home occupation permit shall not be required for garage sale events, provided that the number of garage sale events do not exceed two (2)
events per year for a maximum duration of three (3) consecutive days per event.
7. Home occupation signage shall be restricted to a maximum of two (2) square feet of sign area.
8. Noise generated by the home occupation should not exceed sixty five (65) dB between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M., and fifty five (55) dB between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., when measured from the
adjoining property line.
9. All home occupation uses shall be registered, licensed and operated in compliance with all federal, state or county regulations.
10. Failure to comply with any of the requirements therein or conditions of approval of a special use permit may result in revocation of the home
occupation permit. (Ord. 997, 3-12-2015)
11-4-13: COMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting of communication equipment and communication towers. The
goal of this section is to encourage the location of communication towers and equipment in areas of the city which would be least adversely
impacted by the visual, aesthetic, and safety implications of their siting; minimize the total number of communication towers throughout the city;
strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites; and enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunication services to provide
such services to the community quickly, efficiently, and effectively.
B. City Policies And Criteria: The telecommunications act of 1996 prohibits the city from establishing policies that discriminate against one or a group
of telecommunication providers in favor of another group of providers or potential group of providers. The following criteria will be applied
consistently to all telecommunication providers that request a permit:
1. Communication Equipment: Communication equipment shall be permitted in any residential, commercial or manufacturing district.
Communication equipment shall:
a. Be screened from adjoining properties by the use of landscape plantings, screen fences, walls, and/or parapet extensions when located on a
building. The city is aware of the operating needs of these types of structures and acknowledges that it may be impossible to totally screen
communication equipment or a tower; however, every effort must be made by the communication equipment owner to minimize visual impact
of the communication equipment on surrounding properties.
b. Communication equipment larger than thirty six inches (36") in diameter shall be permitted in rear yards only and is permitted a maximum
height of twelve feet (12'). Such communication equipment must be set back at least five feet (5') from all rear and side property lines.
c. Communication towers, including television antennas and amateur radio antennas, not used for commercial purposes, may be utilized in
residential districts, provided they do not exceed ten feet (10') above the height limit determined for principal structures in the applicable district
and are at least one-half (1/2) the total height of the tower from any lot lines. Total height shall be measured as the distance from the average
grade at the base of the supporting structure to the top of the highest point of the tower, including beacons and antennas.
2. Towers Permitted In Certain Districts; Site Plan: Communication towers shall be permitted in any C-5, M-1, M-2 zoning districts and city owned
property. A site plan, consistent with the requirements as outlined in the Clive development standards manual, shall be required for all new
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 376/439
communication tower and equipment facilities, expansion of existing facilities, or major modifications of existing facilities.
3. Required Information: In addition to site plan requirements as set forth herein, the following information must be provided for review of a
communication equipment development request:
a. Map showing the location of the applicant's proposed facility and any existing facilities within three (3) miles of the proposed site location.
b. Report from a structural engineer showing the tower antenna capacity by type and number, and a certification that the tower is designed to
withstand winds in accordance with ANS/EIA/TIA 222, latest revision standards.
c. Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has been issued.
d. A written agreement signed by the communication facility owner and property owner to remove the tower, foundation, and any other accessory
equipment within sixty (60) days after abandonment. As used herein, the term "abandonment" means a communication tower that is not used
for its intended and approved purpose for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
e. Establish that the use of and frequencies emitted from the tower and equipment will not interfere with the transmissions of law enforcement,
fire, emergency response, public works, or other service agencies.
f. Additional information, as required, to determine that all applicable zoning and siting regulations are met.
4. Tower And Equipment Standards: Communication towers and equipment shall meet the following design standards:
a. Communication towers shall be set back from all property lines and all other principal structures a distance of not less than one-half (1/2) of the
tower height, unless a tower is adjacent to a residential district or city park, in which case the tower shall be set back a distance of not less
than the full tower height.
b. Communication towers shall have a maximum height of sixty feet (60') in any permitted zoning district.
c. Communication towers shall be painted a noncontrasting gray or similar color, minimizing its visibility, unless otherwise required by the federal
communications commission or the federal aviation administration.
d. Lights and signage shall not be permitted on any tower unless specifically required and permitted by the federal communications commission,
federal aviation authority, and the city.
e. Security fencing eight feet (8') in height shall surround the communication tower, equipment structure, and any guywires.
f. Communication tower equipment enclosures and accessory structures shall be designed with architectural compatibility with the surrounding
built environment.
g. Communication facilities mounted to a building wall shall be painted to blend with the color and materials of the surface to which it is attached.
All wiring and accessory equipment shall be concealed from view. Communication facilities located above the roof of the structure shall be
appropriately screened from view through the use of panels, walls, fences, or other screening techniques approved by the city.
5. Number Of Towers Limited: In order to minimize the overall number of towers within the city, providers can be required to collocate and enter into
collocation agreements.
a. All new communication towers, and any preexisting communication towers, owned by a licensed carrier, upon which this section permits
collocation of additional communication facilities, shall be made available for use by the owner or initial user thereof, together with as many
other licensed carriers as can be technically collocated thereon. However, nothing in this section shall prevent such licensed carriers from
charging a reasonable fee for the collocation of additional communication facilities upon said tower which does not exceed the fair market
value for the space occupied.
b. All licensed carriers shall cooperate with each other in collocating additional communication facilities upon such towers. All licensed carriers
shall exercise in good faith in collocating with other licensed carriers and in the sharing of towers, including technical information to evaluate
the feasibility of collocation. This covenant of good faith and fair dealing shall be a condition of any permit issued pursuant to this section for a
new communication tower.
6. Compliance With Federal Regulations: Communication towers and equipment shall meet or exceed the current standards and regulations of the
federal aviation administration, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate communication towers and
equipment.
C. Review Of Application By Technical Expert: The community development director is authorized to submit a communication equipment development
application to an independent technical expert to review any technical materials submitted including, but not limited to, those required under this
section. The applicant shall pay all reasonable costs of said review, including any administrative costs incurred by the city. Any proprietary
information disclosed to the city or the technical expert hired shall remain confidential and shall not be disclosed to any third party. (Ord. 994, 10-
16-2014)
11-4-14: SUBDIVISION ASSOCIATIONS:
A. Formation: A subdivision association may be formed to perform services for the development as a whole, per the requirements of the code of Iowa,
chapter 504A.
B. Registration: All subdivision associations within the city shall register on forms provided by the community development department.
C. Covenants; Requirements Of Association:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 377/439
1. Pursuant to covenants formed by such associations, provisions shall provide for the maintenance of uses and structures including, but not
limited to:
a. Walls and fences;
b. Structures such as gatehouses and decorative fountains;
c. Directional signs and signs identifying the development, provided such signs conform to provisions outlined in chapter 12, "Signs", of this title;
d. Monuments;
e. Underground irrigation;
f. Hedges, shrubs and trees;
g. Berms and buffers;
h. Private streets; and
i. Detention ponds/outlet structures.
2. In the event any structure or use outlined above becomes in a state of disrepair as determined by the city, the city may require improvement of
the condition of the structure or use. In the event the structure or use is not improved, then such use shall be construed as a site plan violation
and enforced as such. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-4-15: PROHIBITION ON SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FROM DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOW:
No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made from a drive-through window in any zoning district classification in the city. (Ord. 891, 6-5-2008)
11-4-16: ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
In adopting the zoning ordinance, it is recognized that adult entertainment facilities have certain objectionable side effects which render these facilities
incompatible with residential, public, and other family uses, when the adult facilities are located close to or adjacent to such uses. This section seeks to
ensure that residential, public, family orientated business, and adult entertainment facilities will be located in separate and compatible locations. It is a
subject of legitimate concern for the city to use its zoning power to preserve the quality of life, preserve the city's neighborhoods and to meet effectively
the increasing encroachments upon the quality of life within the city.
A. Location: No person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or
otherwise, shall place, maintain, own or operate any adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult nightclub, adult motel, or adult business in the
following locations:
1. In any zoning district other than C-2 commercial, M-1 light industrial, and M-2 heavy industrial.
2. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any residentially zoned or used property, or any property designated on the city's comprehensive plan as
residentially orientated.
3. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any parcel of real property upon which is located any of the following facilities:
a. A children's daycare, nursery school, preschool, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school.
b. A church which conducts religious programs.
c. Park or recreational facilities operated and improved by the city, Polk or Dallas County, the Polk or Dallas County conservation board or the
state of Iowa.
d. Federal, state, county, city or special district governmental offices.
e. Supermarket or convenience store.
f. Restaurant, fast food or food establishment catering to family trade.
4. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other adult entertainment facility.
B. Measurement Of Distance: The distance between any two (2) adult entertainment facilities shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The distance between any adult entertainment facilities and any
religious institution, school or public park, governmental office, supermarket, restaurant, or any property designated for residential use or used for
residential purposes shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the adult
entertainment facility to the closest property line of the religious institution, school, public park, government office, supermarket, restaurant or the
property designated for residential use or used for residential purposes.
C. Restrictions: All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be located, covered, or screened in such a manner to prevent a view into the interior
from public or semipublic area; and for construction, and whenever else it seems feasible by the city, the building shall be orientated so as to
minimize any possibility of viewing the interior from public or semipublic areas. Adult material advertisements, displays, or other promotional
materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks, or walkways, or from other areas, public or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 378/439
semipublic. In this case, "adult material" shall be defined as material describing or depicting any specified sexual activity or "specified anatomical
areas", as defined in this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-4-17: EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS:
A. Height: The building height limitations of this title shall be modified as follows:
1. Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental
towers and spires, communication towers or necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a height in excess of the building height
limit for any district upon the issuance of a special use permit by the board of adjustment as provided in chapter 3 of this title.
2. Public, semipublic or public service buildings, hospitals, sanitariums or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding sixty feet (60'), and churches and temples, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy five feet
(75') if the building is set back from each property line at least one foot (1'), in addition to the minimum yard requirements, for each two feet (2') of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building is constructed.
B. Other Exceptions To Yard Requirement: Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed with any building or structure, except:
1. A permitted accessory building in a rear yard.
2. Ordinary projections not to exceed thirty six inches (36") including roof overhang, fireplace chases.
3. Unenclosed fuel island canopies may extend from the minimum building setback line into any required yard but not to exceed ten feet (10') into
that yard.
C. Front Yard; Exceptions: In areas where some lots have been developed with a front yard less than the minimum required for the district by this title
or where some lots have been developed with a front yard greater than required by this title, the following rule shall apply. Any new building or
addition in front thereof shall not be closer to the street right of way than the average of the front yards for the first buildings on either side of the
new building or addition, except as follows:
1. Buildings located entirely on the rear half of a lot shall not be counted.
2. No building shall be required to have a front yard greater than fifty feet (50'), except between Harbach Boulevard and Franklin Avenue on the
east side of N.W. 86th Street where no building shall be required to have a front yard greater than sixty five feet (65').
3. If no building exists on one side of a lot within two hundred feet (200') of the lot in question, the minimum front yard shall be the same as the front
yard for the building on the other side. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-4-18: AUTOMOBILE SALES AND DISPLAY LOTS:
A. Site Plan Approval: Prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance or building permit for an automobile sales and display and equipment
sales and display uses, a site plan for the property and proposed use shall be approved.
B. Restrictions: In addition to all other requirements of this title, the following additional restrictions for automobile sales and display and equipment
sales and display uses shall apply and be reviewed during the site plan review process:
1. The property must be a minimum of one acre in size.
2. The property must maintain a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) open space.
3. The property must maintain a minimum two thousand (2,000) gross square foot building dedicated to the office and service needs of the
operations.
4. The property must contain a parking lot capable of displaying a minimum of fifteen (15) vehicles in addition to the required employee/customer
parking for the building.
5. The vehicle display parking areas must maintain a fifteen foot (15') setback from the property line.
6. The display of vehicles shall only occur within the parking lot and other display areas specifically approved on the site plan.
7. The property will be compliant with all other provisions of the current zoning ordinance prior to occupancy unless specific deferments are
approved during the site plan approval process. (Ord. 917, 9-3-2009)
11-4-19: SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the location and operation of wind energy systems and associated
equipment. The goal of this section is to balance the need for clean, renewable energy with the necessity to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
B. City Policies: The following criteria will be applied consistently to all small wind energy conversion system (SWECS) providers that request a permit:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 379/439
1. Special Use Permit Requirements: An SWECS shall only be allowed as an accessory structure to a permitted principal use and shall require
special use permit approval from the board of adjustment prior to construction, installation, and operation.
As a condition of approval of the special use permit, the applicant shall execute an SWECS operations agreement which shall be recorded by the
appropriate county recorder's office. The agreement will memorialize the responsibilities of the property owner and allow the city to access the
property in order to remove the SWECS in the event that the property owner does not comply with this section.
The board of adjustment may review the issuance of a special use permit at any time if a previously approved system does not comply with the
rules set forth in this section and/or the conditions imposed by the board of adjustment. The owner/operator of the SWECS shall obtain all other
permits required by federal, state, and local agencies prior to construction and operation of the system.
2. Construction Permits: Applications for the construction of an SWECS shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine, including
the tower, base, and footings. An engineering analysis, certified by an Iowa licensed professional engineer, shall be provided demonstrating that
the tower is compliant with the applicable building code. For roof mounted structures, an engineering analysis, certified by an Iowa licensed
professional engineer, shall be provided demonstrating that the mounting method is compliant with the applicable building code.
Applications shall also be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the
manner of installation conforms to the electrical code. All electrical components must be listed as meeting code recognized test standards.
3. Restriction On Use Of Electricity Generated: The SWECS shall be used exclusively to supply electrical power for on site consumption, except
that when a parcel on which an SWECS is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power
generated by the SWECS and not presently needed for on site use may be used by the utility company in accordance to state of Iowa and local
utility company requirements.
4. Interconnection: The SWECS shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operations as set forth by MidAmerican Energy and the Iowa
utilities board. No building permits shall be issued until the applicant has provided a copy of an executed interconnection agreement. Off grid
systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
C. Bulk Regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Size:
a. The minimum lot size for a tower mounted SWECS shall be one acre.
b. The minimum lot size for a building mounted SWECS shall be one acre.
2. Setback Requirements:
a. Tower mounted SWECS shall be set back from all property lines a distance of not less than one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the WES total
height.
b. Building mounted SWECS shall be set back in accordance with the applicable building setback requirement for the zoning district. In no case
shall a building mounted SWECS be located closer than fifteen feet (15') from a property line.
3. Maximum Height:
a. Tower mounted SWECS shall have a maximum WES total height of sixty feet (60') for all lots.
b. Building mounted SWECS may be a maximum of ten feet (10') higher than the primary point of attachment to the building on which they are
attached.
4. Number Of Systems Allowed:
a. No more than one SWECS may be installed on any parcel zoned R-1, R-2, R-5 or TC-2.
b. No more than two (2) SWECS may be installed on any parcel zoned C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, M-1, M-2, TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4.
c. Building mounted SWECS shall be prohibited on any parcel zoned R-1, R-2 or R-5.
5. Location:
a. Tower mounted SWECS shall be located entirely in the rear yard on any parcel.
b. No part of an SWECS shall be located within or over a drainage, utility or other established easements, parking, driveway, sidewalk, or on or
over property lines.
D. Tower And Equipment Standards: SWECS and associated equipment shall meet the following design standards:
1. Only monopole towers shall be permitted for tower mounted SWECS. Lattice, guyed or towers of any other type shall not be permitted. The
monopole tower must be designed to prevent climbing within the first ten feet (10').
2. The SWECS shall be painted a noncontrasting gray/sky blue or similar color that would minimize its visibility, unless otherwise required by the
federal aviation administration. The surface shall be nonreflective.
3. Lights shall not be permitted on any SWECS unless specifically required and permitted by the federal aviation authority, and the city.
4. One sign, limited to four (4) square feet, shall be posted at or near the base of any tower. The sign shall include a notice of no trespassing, a
warning of high voltage, and the phone number of the property owner/operator to call in case of emergency. Brand names or advertising
associated with any installation shall not be visible from any public right of way. No temporary signage shall be permitted to be mounted or
otherwise affixed to the WES.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 380/439
5. A privacy screen fence eight feet (8') in height shall surround the SWECS and any equipment structure in commercially or industrially zoned
properties. A six foot (6') privacy fence enclosing the rear yard of a residentially zoned property shall be deemed appropriate to address this
provision.
6. All SWECS shall be equipped with manual and automatic overspeed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design limits of the
wind energy conversion system. The control system shall be capable of stopping all turbine rotation in the event of a power outage in order to
prevent back feeding of the electrical grid.
7. No SWECS shall be installed in any location where its proximity with existing fixed broadcast, retransmission, or reception antenna for radio,
television, or wireless phone or other personal communication systems would produce electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or
reception. If it is determined that the SWECS is causing electromagnetic interference, the operator shall take the necessary corrective action to
eliminate this interference including relocation or removal of the facilities, subject to the city of Clive.
8. The enactment of this section does not constitute the granting of an easement by the city. The owner/operator shall obtain covenants,
easements, or similar documentation to assure sufficient wind to operate the SWECS unless adequate accessibility to the wind is provided by the
site.
9. No SWECS shall be installed and operated in a manner that causes a shadow flicker to fall on any occupied adjacent structure.
E. Owner Responsibilities:
1. The property owner of any SWECS shall maintain such system in a safe and attractive manner, including replacement of defective parts,
painting, cleaning, and other acts that may be required for the maintenance and upkeep of the function and appearance of such a system.
2. At least every twenty four (24) months, every tower mounted SWECS shall be inspected by an expert who is regularly involved in the
maintenance, inspection and/or erection of towers. At a minimum, this inspection shall be conducted in accordance with the tower inspection
checklist provided in the Electronics Industries Association (EIA) standard 222, "Structural Standards For Steel Antenna Towers And Antenna
Support Structures". Inspection record shall provide verifiable proof of ongoing energy production. A copy of the inspection record shall be
provided to the city of Clive.
Any SWECS that is not operated for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed
within thirty (30) days. Removal of the system includes the entire structure including foundations, transmission equipment and fencing from the
property. If the abandoned SWECS is not removed in the specified amount of time, the city may remove it and recover its costs from the property
owner.
Operation of a wind energy system includes, but is not limited to, the actual production of measurable energy. Wind energy systems that function
mechanically but no longer produce energy shall be considered abandoned.
3. The owner/operator of a wind energy conversion system must demonstrate adequate liability insurance. Upon the granting of a permit, applicant
shall assume full responsibility for any and all damages, claims, expenses, liabilities, judgments and costs of any kind, including reasonable
attorney fees related to or caused by the erection, location, use, or removal of a facility, whether on public or private property, and shall agree to
hold the city harmless, indemnify and defend it from all such liabilities incurred or judgments entered against it as a result of the erection,
location, use or removal of the facility.
4. Noise shall not exceed the requirements established in section 5-8-5 of this code. (Ord. 925, 4-1-2010)
11-4-20: PAWNBROKERS AND DELAYED DEPOSIT SERVICES:
In adopting the zoning ordinance, it is recognized that pawnbrokers and delayed deposit service facilities have certain objectionable side effects which
render these facilities incompatible with residential, public and family uses, when the pawnbrokers and delayed deposit service facilities are located
close to or adjacent to such uses. This section seeks to ensure that residential, public, family uses and pawnbrokers and delayed deposit services will
be located in separate and compatible locations. It is a subject of legitimate concern for the city to use its zoning power to preserve the quality of life
and protect the property values and economic vitality of its neighborhoods.
A. Location: No person, whether as principal or agent, clerk, or employee, either himself or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or
otherwise, shall place, maintain, own or operate any pawnbroker or delayed deposit service business in the following locations:
1. In any zoning district other than C-2 commercial, M-1 light industrial, and M-2 heavy industrial.
2. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any residentially zoned or used property, or any property designated on the city's comprehensive plan as
residential oriented.
3. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any parcel of real property upon which is located any of the following facilities:
a. A children's daycare, nursery school, preschool, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school.
b. A church which conducts religious programs.
c. Park or recreational facilities operated and improved by the city, Polk or Dallas County, the Polk or Dallas County conservation board or the
state of Iowa.
4. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any adult oriented business, pawnbroker or delayed deposit service facility.
B. Measurement Of Distance: The distance between any two (2) adult oriented business, pawnbroker or delayed deposit service facilities shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The distance
between any pawnbroker or delayed deposit service facilities and any daycare, school, church, public park, or any property designated for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 381/439
residential use or used for residential purposes shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest
property line of the pawnbroker or delayed deposit service facility to the closest property line of any daycare, school, church, public park or any
property designated for residential use or used for residential purposes.
C. Restrictions: Visibility into the store shall be maintained by utilizing clear, transparent glass on all windows and doors, and by keeping all windows
free of obstructions for at least three feet (3') into the store. Product may be displayed for sale in the window provided that the display, including
signage, does not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the window area. Interior and exterior bars, grills, mesh or similar obstructions, whether
permanently or temporarily affixed, shall not cover any exterior door or window. (Ord. 941, 12-16-2010)
Chapter 5
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
11-5-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
In order to carry out the purpose and intent of this title, the area of the City is hereby divided into zoning district classifications and overlay zoning
district classifications as follows:
RE Residential Estate District
R-1 Single-Family Residence District
R-2 Single-Family and Duplex Family Residence District
R-3 Multiple-Family Residence District
R-4 Townhome Residence District
R-5 Single-Family Residence District
C-1 Convenience Commercial District
C-2 Community Commercial District
C-3 Planned Office Park Commercial District
C-4 Planned Shopping Center Commercial District
C-5 Highway Commercial District
TC-1 Town Center - North End Development Area District
TC-2 Town Center - Alice/Summit Residential Development Area District
TC-3 Town Center - Harbach Commercial Development Area District
TC-4 Town Center - South End Development Area District
PUD Planned Unit Development District
M-1 Light Industrial District
M-2 Heavy Industrial District
FW Floodway Overlay District
FF Floodway Fringe Overlay District
FP-G General Floodplain Overlay District
(Ord. 1067, 1-24-2019)
11-5-2: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
The boundaries of the districts listed in section 11-5-1 of this chapter are indicated upon the official zoning map of the City, which map is made a part
of this title and incorporated herein by this reference. The official zoning map and all the notations, references and other matters shown thereon shall
be as much a part of this title as if the notations, references and other matters set forth by said map were all fully described herein. The official zoning
map shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City, and shall bear the signature of the Mayor attested by the City Clerk under the certification
that this is the official map referred to in this section. If in accordance with the provisions of this title, changes are made in the district boundaries or
other matters portrayed on the official zoning map, the ordinance number and date of said change shall be recorded by the City Clerk on the official
map. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of use, the City Council may correct
drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map; provided, however, that any such adoption shall not have the effect of amending
the original zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-5-3: INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 382/439
A. Rules For Determining Boundaries: In cases where the exact location of the district boundary is not clear as shown on the official zoning map, the
following rules shall be used in determining the location of said district boundary:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following City limits.
4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
5. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines and, in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be
construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries as approximately following centerlines of streams, creeks, lakes or other bodies of
water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
6. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections A1 through A5 of this section shall be so construed. The
scale of the map shall determine distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map.
7. Where physical features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not
covered by subsections A1 through A6 of this section, the Community Development Director shall interpret the district boundaries.
B. Street Vacations: Vacation of public streets shall cause the land vacated to automatically be placed in the same district as the abutting side. Any
land annexed to the City after the effective date hereof shall be zoned R-1 Residential until rezoned in accordance with this title and the
comprehensive plan. Within six (6) months of the annexation of any land into the City, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall study that area
annexed and recommend to the City Council a zoning and land use plan for the area. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
ARTICLE A. ZONING MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS
11-5A-1: AUTHORITY:
The city council may, from time to time on its own action or on petition, after public notice and hearing as provided by law and after report by the
planning and zoning commission, amend, supplement or change the boundaries or regulations herein or subsequently established. Such amendment
shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of the majority of all the members of the city council. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-5A-2: PURPOSE:
The amendment procedure herein established is intended to provide a means for making changes to the text of this title and/or the official zoning map.
(Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-5A-3: INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS:
A. Text: An amendment of text may be initiated by a motion of the city council.
B. Rezoning: An amendment may be initiated by a motion of the city council, or any person, firm or corporation, with a demonstrable ownership
interest in the property in question by the filing of a petition meeting all the requirements required by this title. The petitioner shall obtain a signed
consent to the zoning amendment from the owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of all area located within three hundred ten feet (310') of the
property proposed to be amended. Other public property (i.e., parks, city utilities, etc.) is not included within the fifty percent (50%) consent area.
(Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-5A-4: REZONING AMENDMENT:
A. Filing Petition; Review: A petition for an amendment to the zoning district classification shall be filed with the community development director. Each
rezoning request shall be reviewed by the community development department to ensure that it contains all the information required in this title.
B. Application Fee: A nonrefundable application fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid to the city
with each rezoning request.
C. Accompanying Documents:
1. Each rezoning request shall be accompanied by a written request for a change, a rezoning map, a master plan or development plan as required
herein, all in accordance with the provisions outlined herein.
a. Plans And Plats Required: The community development director may require a development plan, site plan, preliminary plat, or conceptual
master plan for any proposed rezoning.
b. Notification Of Surrounding Property Owners: After the community development director has set the planning and zoning commission meeting
date, notice will be sent to the surrounding property owners within three hundred ten feet (310') of the property to be rezoned. Notice shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 383/439
sent not less than seven (7) days prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting at which the zoning amendment is first considered. The
notice shall contain the date, time and location of the planning and zoning commission meeting and city council public hearing.
c. Notification Signs: The city will post at least one rezoning notification sign containing the time, date, location, and subject of the city planning
and zoning commission meeting and city council public hearing on the property for which a request has been made. Notification signs shall be
posted at least seven (7) days before the planning and zoning commission meeting and shall remain until one day after the city council public
hearing.
2. Any or all of the above mentioned procedures may be waived by the community development director for certain minor rezoning matters such as
the following: rezoning right of way, and/or minor adjustments to zoning boundaries necessitated by minor adjustments to lots or right of way
lines at the time of approval on final plats of a subdivision.
D. Development Plans: Development plans are intended to present basic development information in such a way as to empower area residents,
interested parties, city staff and council to accurately and decisively formulate opinions on the proposed development. Development plans shall be
required for all proposed rezoning of land within the city to a commercial or manufacturing district. The community development director may
require a master plan for the proposed rezoning to residential districts. Similar to development plans, master plans indicate, on a more general
scale, the limits and effect of proposed development.
1. Development plans, as well as master plans, shall show, at a minimum, proposed building footprint, utilities, access, parking, and open space.
Additionally, the plan shall demonstrate how the development enhances the established neighborhood and the character of the city at large. The
community development director may require additional information at his discretion, which he feels will further the intent of the development
plan.
2. The community development director may suspend the requirement of a development plan if:
a. The council initiates the rezoning.
b. The actual development of the property is likely to be delayed for a substantial time period, and the development plan is likely to substantially
change prior to actual development and the rezoning is in accordance with the comprehensive plan.
c. If the rezoning is not in accordance with the comprehensive plan, the community development director may require a comprehensive plan
amendment in addition to the development plan requirement. Such suspension is not a waiver of the requirement. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-5A-5: OFFICIAL ACTION REQUIRED:
A. Initial Action By City Council: When a petition meeting the requirements of this chapter is presented to the city council, or if the city council elects to
initiate an amendment, the city council shall receive and file said petition and refer it to the planning and zoning commission for consideration of
such amendment prior to the date of the public hearing.
B. Action By Planning And Zoning Commission: After receiving the proposed amendment from the city council, the planning and zoning commission
shall review the proposed amendment, and report its recommendations within sixty (60) days to the city council for final action.
C. Action By City Council:
1. After receiving the planning and zoning commission recommendations, the city council, at a public hearing, shall then take final action on the
proposed amendment, after public notice in accordance with applicable state law. The amendment shall become effective by the favorable vote
of a majority of all the members of the city council. However, in the case of a proposed rezoning of property if: a) the planning and zoning
commission disapproves of the amendment; or b) a written protest against an amendment is filed with the community development department,
the proposed amendment shall not become effective, except by the favorable vote of at least four-fifths (4/5) of all the members of the city
council. Such protest must be signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the land included in the proposed amendment, or by the
owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the property which is located within three hundred ten feet (310') of the exterior boundaries of the
proposed amendment (exclusive of public property and intervening right of way).
2. The council may make approval of the development plan contingent upon the completion of construction and improvements within a reasonable
period of time; provided, however, that in the determination of such period, the council shall consider the scope and magnitude of the
development project and any schedule of construction and improvements submitted by the developer. Failure to complete all construction and
improvements within said period of time shall be deemed sufficient cause for the council, in accordance with the provisions of this title, to rezone
the unimproved property to the classification effective at the time of original submission of the development plan, unless an extension is
recommended by the commission and approved by the council for due cause shown. For the purposes of this title, "unimproved" property means
all property situated within the development plan area upon which the installation of improvements has not been commenced. (Ord. 876, 1-17-
2008)
Chapter 6
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
11-6-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The RE, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 residential districts are intended and designed to provide for residential areas of various densities to promote
neighborhood quality of life, and to provide for those areas consistent with the comprehensive plan. It shall be generally recognized that the type of
use is not so important as the manner in which the use is accomplished. It is intended that the district shall not be used indiscriminately to permit any
use that could potentially be detrimental to the public health, welfare, and safety of the community. No temporary buildings, trailers, tents, portable or
potentially portable structures shall be used for dwelling purposes. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 384/439
11-6-2: PURPOSES OF DISTRICTS:
A. RE Residential Estate: RE residential estate district regulations are provided to allow limited agricultural and estate single-family residential
development to occur on the fringe of the developed areas of the city in order to promote the economic and efficient use of nonurbanized land and
to prevent the scattering of subdivisions and over extension of public facilities and services.
B. R-1 Single-Family Residence: R-1 single-family residence district regulations are provided to allow for the development of single-family dwelling
units on individual platted lots with a minimum lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
C. R-2 Single-Family And Duplex Family Residence: Single-family and duplex family residence district regulations are provided to allow for the
development of a combination of single-family dwelling units and duplex dwelling units on individual platted lots with a minimum lot area of eight
thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet for single-family dwelling units and a minimum lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet for duplex
dwelling units.
D. R-3 Multiple-Family Residence: R-3 multiple-family residence district regulations are provided to allow for the development of three (3) or more
dwelling units within one building or two (2) or more dwelling units attached horizontally, on an individually platted lot with a maximum density of
sixteen (16) units per acre, where ownership of the general common elements associated with the building and site are under common ownership.
E. R-4 Townhome Residence: R-4 townhome residence district regulations are provided to allow for the development of horizontally attached or
detached dwelling units where the land or lot beneath each dwelling unit may be individually owned or owned in common by a homeowners'
association. The maximum density allowed within a townhome residence district shall be eight (8) units per acre.
F. R-5 Single-Family Residence: Single-family residence district regulations are provided to allow for the development of single- family dwelling units
on individual platted lots with a minimum lot area of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-6-3: PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses for residential (RE through R-5) districts are as follows:
PERMITTED USES - RESIDENTIAL
P = Principal permitted use
SP = Permitted following BOA approval
Use RE R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
Assisted living centers P
Attached dwellings, townhomes P P
Community centers SP SP SP SP SP SP
Detached dwellings, townhomes P P
Driving range in conjunction with a golf course SP SP SP SP SP SP
Duplexes P
General farming1 P
Golf courses SP SP SP SP SP SP
Independent living facilities P
Libraries SP SP SP SP SP SP
Multiple-family dwellings P
Nursing homes SP SP
Parks, open space P P P P P P
Religious institutions SP SP SP SP SP SP
Schools SP SP SP SP SP SP
Single-family residences P P P P P
Utility substations SP SP SP SP SP SP
Notes:
1."General farming use" shall be defined for the purpose of this title as the growing of crops and raising of livestock, and excluding confined
animal feeding operations. "Livestock" means less than 20 of any of the following combination of animals: cattle, sheep, swine, poultry and
other animals or fowl, which are being produced primarily for use as food or food products for human consumption. A "confined animal
feeding operation" means using a building for 45 or more days in any 12 month period to confine cattle, swine or poultry to areas which are
totally roofed for the purpose of feeding and growth prior to slaughter or, for poultry, for the additional purpose of egg production.
(Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-6-4: ACCESSORY USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 385/439
The following accessory uses are permitted in residential zoned districts:
Accessory buildings and structures to house agricultural equipment or permitted livestock, excluding buildings and structures used for animal
confinement or animal feeding operations, may be permitted in RE residential estate districts subject to the following:
A. Minimum setback for any agricultural accessory building or structure shall be at least twenty five feet (25') from all property lines.
B. Maximum height for any such agricultural accessory building or structure shall be twenty five feet (25').
C. Metal panels may be used in the construction of accessory buildings.
Clubhouses within a residential subdivision where ownership is maintained under a homeowners' association. Clubhouses shall be constructed of
materials similar to the principal structures within the development and shall meet all setback requirements as specified later in this title. Parking
shall be provided at a rate of five (5) stalls per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
Home occupations as permitted in section 11-4-12 of this title.
In R-3 residential zones, developed as a senior care, congregate care facility, condominium, apartment complex, an accessory management
office, retail convenience or service shop may be permitted, provided that such complex be self-governed or under similar control, contains more
than thirty (30) permanent dwelling units, provided that:
A. Such shops are located on the first floor or lower and there is no entrance to such place of business except from the inside of the building or
internal courtyard.
B. Display of any stock, goods, or advertising is so arranged that it cannot be viewed from outside the building.
C. No advertising sign shall be permitted that exceeds one square foot in area.
Private garages which may include living quarters of domestic servants employed on the premises.
Private stables or other similar recreational uses may be permitted within the RE residential estate district.
Any other accessory use as determined by the community development director as a use that is not detrimental to the health, safety, and general
welfare of the surrounding properties. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-6-5: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A. Accessory buildings may be constructed in residential lots as permitted in section 11-4-7 of this title.
B. Accessory structures may be constructed in residential lots as permitted in section 11-4-8 of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-6-6: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Open space requirements shall be provided consistent with the provisions outlined in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-6-7: DIMENSION REGULATIONS:
DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS - RESIDENTIAL
SF = Single-family
DP = Duplex
MF = Multi-family
SU = Single unit
TU = Two unit
MU = Multi-unit
RE R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
Density 16 units per
acre
8 units per
acre
Lot area 4
acres
10,000 sq. ft. 8,500 sq. ft. for SF
10,000 sq. ft. for DP
7,500 sq.
ft.
Lot width 80 feet
80 feet 70 feet
75 feet DP
60 feet
Minimum front yard
depth
35 feet
35 feet 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Minimum rear yard
depth
35 feet
35 feet 35 feet 35 feet2 30 feet1,2 35 feet
Side yard 8 feet 8 feet
See subsection 11-6-10B of this
chapter
8 feet
See subsection 11-6-10B of this
chapter
8 feet TU1,2
12.5 feet
6 feet SU2
8 feet TU1,2
12.5 MU1,2
8 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 386/439
MU1,2
20 feet MF2
Maximum height 35 feet
35 feet 35 feet 45 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Notes:
1. Except where rear or side wall is a common wall.
2. Internal Setback Dimensions: In the case of 0 lot line layouts, an open space shall be provided between the buildings/units such that the
required front, rear or side yard depth for each building/unit is provided (example: In an R-4 development, the required open space between
the rear elevations of 2 single units shall be 60 feet).
(Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-6-8: SITE PLANS:
Site plans shall be required for all uses except single-family and duplex family residential buildings. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-6-9: BUFFER REQUIREMENTS:
Buffer requirements shall be consistent with the requirements set forth in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-6-10: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Open Space: Each principal building of a residential complex shall be separated from other principal buildings in the complex by an open space of
not less than twenty five feet (25') in width.
B. Side Yard Reduction: On R-1, R-2, and R-3 residential lots of record platted on or before January 3, 1963, having a width less than required by this
title, the side yard may be reduced as follows:
1. One side yard may be reduced to not less than ten percent (10%) of the lot width.
2. The sum of both side yards may be reduced to not less than twenty three percent (23%) of the lot width.
3. On corner lots, only the interior side yard may be reduced below eight feet (8').
C. Issuance Of Permits And Certificates: On any lots of record platted on or before September 7, 2000, under a community unit plan as approved by
the Clive city council, building permits and certificates of zoning compliance may be issued even though the use of land, building setbacks, lot
areas and building height do not conform in all respects to the district regulations as required in this title. Bulk regulations for the individual platted
lots of record shall comply with the specific requirements within the approved community unit plan.
D. Attached Garage: Each dwelling unit located within an R-1, R-2, R-4 or R-5 district shall have a minimum two (2) car attached garage.
E. Enclosed Parking Area: Each dwelling unit located within an R-3 district shall have a minimum one car enclosed (detached, attached, underground)
area per unit. Carports shall not be considered as an acceptable covered area. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
F. Dwelling Occupant Load: The maximum permitted occupant load within a dwelling unit in any residential district shall not exceed the following:
Room Type Room Area Maximum Occupant Load
Bedroom room At least 70 sq. ft. but less than 120 sq. ft. 1 per room
Bedroom room 120 sq. ft. to 180 sq. ft. 2 per room
Bedroom room 180 sq. ft. or more 3 per room
Multipurpose room At least 70 sq. ft. 1 per room, not more than 2 per dwelling unit
For the purposes of this section, a "bedroom" is defined as a space primarily designed and intended for use as a sleeping room which shall include all
of the following characteristics:
1. A room with a minimum floor area of seventy (70) square feet of area that is capable of being secured by a door.
2. A room with an enclosed closet space of a minimum floor area of six (6) square feet.
3. A room with the provisions for emergency escape and natural light in accordance with the adopted version of the international residential code or
international building code as applicable for the dwelling type.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 387/439
For the purposes of this section, a multipurpose room may include a living room, den, study, or other similar room that by design or layout is not
primarily intended to be used as a bedroom, but that is otherwise habitable and provides accommodations for sleeping such as a bed, daybed,
couch, futon or other similar multipurpose sleeping furniture. (Ord. 967, 9-6-2012)
11-6-11:DWELLING UNIT MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
MINIMUM FLOOR AREA - DWELLINGS
RE R-1 R-2 R-4 R-5
1 story
1,250 sq. ft. on 1st floor 1,250 sq. ft. on 1st floor 1,000 sq. ft. on 1st floor 1,250 sq. ft. on 1st floor 900 sq. ft. on 1st floor
11/2
stories
1st or 2nd
floor 750 sq.
ft.
Total sq.
ft. 1,400
1st or 2nd
floor 750 sq.
ft.
Total sq.
ft. 1,400
1st or 2nd
floor 750 sq.
ft.
Total sq.
ft. 1,200
1st or 2nd
floor 750 sq.
ft.
Total sq.
ft. 1,400
1st or 2nd
floor 750 sq.
ft.
Total sq.
ft. 1,200
2
stories
1st or 2nd
floor 750 sq.
ft.
Total sq.
ft. 1,400
1st or 2nd
floor 750 sq.
ft.
Total sq.
ft. 1,400
1st or 2nd
floor 750 sq.
ft.
Total sq.
ft. 1,200
1st or 2nd
floor 750 sq.
ft.
Total sq.
ft. 1,400
1st or 2nd
floor 750 sq.
ft.
Total sq.
ft. 1,200
Splitlevel
1,250 sq. ft., any 2
adjacent levels
1,250 sq. ft., any 2
adjacent levels
1,000 sq. ft., any 2
adjacent levels
1,250 sq. ft., any 2
adjacent levels
850 sq. ft., any 2
adjacent levels
Note: All floor areas indicated do not include utility rooms or cellars, unless noted.
A. Multiple-family dwellings shall, in addition to the requirements of this section, have a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet of actual finished
living space in each family unit. "Living space" shall be defined, for purposes of this title, as that portion of the dwelling customarily designed for the
day to day use by the residents and does not include the garage and basement.
B. Townhome units constructed within the R-3 district shall meet the minimum dwelling unit floor area requirements of the R-4 district. (Ord. 876, 1-17-
2008)
Chapter 7
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
11-7-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 and C-5 commercially zoned districts are intended and designed to provide for high quality areas of various densities and
intensities needed to promote quality of life, health, and general welfare of citizens and visitors, while providing a large variety of recreation, services,
and shopping needed to support the citizens of the city, all consistent with the comprehensive plan. The developments will incorporate high quality
materials in unique designs with substantial planting of trees, shrubs, and other plant materials. It shall be generally recognized that the type of use is
not as important as the manner in which the use is accomplished. It is intended that the district shall not be used indiscriminately to permit any use that
could potentially be detrimental to the intent of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-7-2: PURPOSES OF DISTRICTS:
A. C-1 Convenience Commercial: The convenience commercial zoning classification is designed to provide for the development of ground that
routinely assists the daily needs of the local traveling public.
B. C-2 Community Commercial: The community commercial zoning classification is designed to accommodate developments that, by nature of
business, provide services and commodities that benefit the community at large.
C. C-3 Planned Office Park Commercial: The planned office park commercial district is intended to provide certain areas of the city for the
development of business, professional, and public service offices and office buildings as a planned and integrated commercial unit. The C-3 district
is designed to be a planned commercial area under single ownership, management, or control, characterized by a grouping of offices and office
buildings with various facilities designed to be used in common, such as access drives, parking, loading, lighting, signs and walks. Any enterprise
which cannot wholly enclose its operations within the principal structure shall not be permitted.
D. C-4 Planned Shopping Center: The purpose of the planned shopping center district is to provide land for the orderly and logical development of a
complete and intensive shopping center with a broad range of retail and permitted office use, which exhibits a high quality of architectural and
design quality. The development will incorporate high quality materials in unique architectural designs and substantial plantings of trees, shrubs,
and other plant materials.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 388/439
E. C-5 Highway Commercial:
1. Purpose: The highway commercial district is intended to provide for major business and commercial districts to serve the highway traveling
population.
2. Automobile And Travel Plaza: Automobile and truck travel plazas shall be under single ownership, management or control and may be
characterized by a concentrated group of structures and compatible uses. Various facilities shall be designed to be used in common, such as
access roads, parking and loading areas, lighting, signs and walks. For automobile and truck travel plazas, the following regulations shall apply,
except as otherwise provided herein:
a. Minimum lot area is twenty five (25) acres. No minimum lot area shall be required for individual lots or tracts with the same area, provided that
all such development shall be in accordance with the site plan and development of such individual lots or tracts and all common facilities within
such area shall remain under single management or control.
b. The community development director or the city council may also require a statement of financial responsibility to assure construction of the
development in accordance with the submitted site plan and the requirements of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-7-3: AUXILIARY USES:
An "auxiliary use" shall mean a conditional use consisting of certain low intensity commercial establishments which are primarily intended, designed
and utilized to serve the proven needs within the C-3 and C-4 districts of the principal permitted uses that are in existence or that will be constructed at
or about the same time as the auxiliary use. Possible auxiliary uses are listed in section 11-7-4 of this chapter and noted with an "A". In C-3 zoning
districts, any enterprise that cannot wholly enclose its functions within the principal structure shall be prohibited. The city council may permit an
auxiliary use within a C-3 or C-4 district as part of a development plan provided that the following conditions are satisfied:
A. The auxiliary use shall primarily serve the needs within the C-3 or C-4 district of the principal permitted uses that are then in existence or that will be
constructed at or about the same time as the auxiliary use.
B. The design, aesthetics, location, and character of the auxiliary structure or use shall be compatible with the principal permitted uses within the C-3
or C-4 district and abutting or nearby properties in adjoining zoning districts.
C. The auxiliary use shall not adversely affect the setting and quality of development for the principal permitted uses within the C-3 or C-4 district due
to over concentration or over saturation within the C-3 or C-4 district.
D. The auxiliary use shall not generate substantial additional traffic nor create traffic congestion beyond that which would occur if any principal
permitted use were to locate on the same site.
E. The auxiliary use shall not be hazardous, detrimental, or disturbing to principal permitted uses, nor to adjoining or abutting properties due to dust,
glare, noises, smoke, odor, fumes, vibration, or other effects not consistent with the principal permitted uses within the C-3 or C-4 district.
F. The auxiliary uses shall incorporate the site's natural and scenic features into the development design. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-7-4: PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses for commercially zoned property are listed in the following table. Where a use is not expressly listed below, the community
development director shall have authority to determine if the use is compatible and consistent with the surrounding environment. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
PERMITTED USES - COMMERCIAL
P = Permitted
C = Conditional
A = Auxiliary
SP = Special use permit
Use C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Auditoriums P P A
Automobile and truck travel plaza P
Automobile sales and display P
Automobile supply (retail) P P P
Automotive repair P P P
Automotive wash P P P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 389/439
Bakeries P P C
Banks P P P P P
Building material sales yard, lumberyard P P
Childcare, including daycare P P A A
Commercial entertainment P P P
Convenience stores/gas stations P P P P
Dance studio P P P
Domesticated animal boarding/kennels P P A
Drinking places P P A A
Farm machinery and mobile home sales and repair P P
Fitness center P P A P
Funeral homes and mortuaries P P P
Grocery store P P P
Hair salon P P A P P
Hospitals SP SP P
Hotel, motel or motor lodge P P P P
Launderette and similar business using only nonflammable solvents P P P
Laundry, repair, dry cleaning and pick up P P A P
Libraries P P P P
Medical office, clinic P P P P
Millwork P
Ministorage P
Monument sales and engraving P
Movie theater P P P
Museums P P A P
Nurseries and greenhouses P P
Nursing homes SP SP
Photographic studios P P P
Printing and/or publishing house P
Professional offices P P P P P
Religious institutions P P SP
Restaurant, fast food P P P P P
Restaurant, fast food drive-through P P P
Restaurant, full service sit down P P P P P
Retail P P P
Sheet metal shop P
Small engine/lawn mower repair shop P P
Storage warehouse, provided no outside storage shall be permitted P
Utility substations SP SP SP SP
Veterinary clinic and hospital P P P
(Ord. 876, 1-17-2008; amd. Ord. 917, 9-3-2009)
11-7-5: BAKERIES:
Bakeries, including, but not limited to, other organic food processing uses, shall be permitted, provided that the retail sales area shall be within one
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 390/439
hundred feet (100') of the premises on which the bakery is located where all products produced in the bakery are available for sale fresh daily and
provided the product preparation and storage area does not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. Distribution of products to
other premises is permitted; however, no semitrailer trucks shall be used for distribution purposes. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-7-6: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; OUTDOOR STORAGE AREAS:
A. Accessory buildings may be constructed in commercial lots as permitted in section 11-4-7 of this title.
B. Accessory structures may be constructed in commercial lots as permitted in section 11-4-8 of this title.
C. Outdoor storage areas may be utilized in C-1, C-2, C-4 and C-5 districts, provided such storage area is accessory to the principal building, as
permitted in section 11-4-9 of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-7-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking requirements may be found in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-7-8: SITE PLANS:
Site plans shall be required for all uses. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-7-9: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Open space requirements shall be provided consistent with the provisions outlined in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-7-10: DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS:
DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS - COMMERCIAL
C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Maximum height 40 feet or 3 stories 60 feet None None 60 feet
Minimum lot area
None None None None 12,000 square feet
Minimum lot
width
None None None None 100 feet
Minimum front
yard depth
25 feet 25 feet 60
feet1
60
feet1
30 feet
Minimum rear
yard
35 feet1 35 feet2,3 35
feet1
35
feet1,4
40 feet2
Minimum side
yard
None, except 10 feet where
adjacent to R district
None, except 10 feet where
adjacent to R district
25
feet1,5
25
feet1,4
None, except 25 feet where
adjacent to R district
Notes:
1. A minimum yard of 75 feet shall be required for such yards in C-1, C-3, C-4, C-5 districts adjacent to or across from any R district.
2. Where rear lot line is adjacent to a railroad ROW, there is no yard requirement.
3. For each foot that the front yard is increased over 25 feet, the rear yard may be decreased proportionately, except that where the rear yard adjoins
the side lot line of a lot in an R district, there shall be a minimum rear yard of 75 feet required adjacent to said side lot line.
4. Where the side or rear of a building within a C-4 planned shopping district is adjacent to another building within a C-4 planned shopping district, the
internal yard requirement may be either 0 feet or 12.5 feet.
5. The internal side yard requirement may be reduced to 12.5 feet within a C-3 planned office park district if adjacent to another building within a C-3
planned office park district.
(Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 391/439
Chapter 8
TOWN CENTER DISTRICTS
11-8-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The TC-1, TC-2, TC-3, and TC-4 Town Center Zoned Districts are intended and designed to provide for an economically viable, diverse place, located
within and adjacent to the NW 86th Street corridor, with quality residential, commercial, service, employment and recreational uses of various densities
and intensities needed to promote quality of life, health and general welfare of citizens and visitors within the City and which draws citizens and visitors
to the corridor. It shall be generally recognized that the type of use is not as important as the manner in which the use is accomplished. It is intended
that the district shall not be used indiscriminately to permit any use that could potentially be detrimental to the intent of the zoning ordinance.
For the purposes of this chapter, other than the principal permitted uses table, the regulations contained herewithin shall only apply to the
redevelopment, or substantial expansion of the existing development, of the properties currently zoned TC-1, TC-2, TC-3 and TC-4. The term
substantial expansion of the existing development shall mean the cumulative set of site improvements that result in the expansion of the impervious
surface area of the site by more than fifteen percent (15%) of the surface area of the property at the time of adoption hereof.
If the proposed site improvements result in less than a fifteen percent (15%) expansion of the impervious surface area of the site, the zoning district
regulations and design standards for that property that existed prior to the rezoning of the property to TC-1, TC-2, TC-3 or TC-4 shall be applicable
with respect to the proposed site improvements.
The principal permitted uses table in this chapter shall continue to be enforced in accordance with the current zoning district of each property. (Ord.
1059, 7-12-2018)
11-8-2: PURPOSES OF DISTRICTS:
A. TC-1 North End Development Area: The North End Development Area District is designed to provide land for the orderly and logical development of
a complete and intensive community shopping center with a broad range of retail and professional office use which exhibits a high quality of
architectural and design elements. The district will incorporate high quality materials in unique architectural designs and substantial plantings of
trees, shrubs and other plant materials. The district will be developed with a network of connecting parking lots with minimal street openings to NW
86th Street and Hickman Road.
B. TC-2 Residential Development Area: The Residential Development Area District is primarily intended to provide opportunities for medium density
condo/townhome residential development preserving the integrity and value of the existing single-family neighborhoods. The district will be
designed so that the residential structures engage the street, providing the massing and building form that helps define the block. The district will
incorporate high quality materials and unique architectural designs. Open space will be used to accent the architectural and natural features of the
residential development within the district.
C. TC-3 Mixed Use Development Area: The Mixed Use Development Area District is designed to provide land for mixed use development
incorporating retail commercial and office uses with residential and recreational opportunities. The district will be primarily developed with ground
level retail commercial and upper level office or residential uses. Pedestrian traffic is considered a priority and shall be well planned for throughout
the district. The district will incorporate high quality materials and unique architectural designs. Public and private plaza and courtyard open space
are encouraged.
D. TC-4 Entertainment Development Area: The Entertainment Development Area District is intended to provide for an office and regional commercial
entertainment center and will be designed in consideration of public plazas or courtyards, Clive Greenbelt Park, historical amenities and other
urban open space that can serve as a focal point for community activities. The area will include retail/commercial, office, entertainment, residential,
institutional and open space uses. The buildings within the district will be constructed with high quality materials and will be designed to form part of
a larger composition rather than being designed in isolation of one another. (Ord. 1059, 7-12-2018)
11-8-3: PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses for Town Center zoned property may be found below. Where a use is not expressly listed below, the Community Development
Director shall have authority to determine if the use is compatible and consistent with the surrounding environment. If it is determined by the
Community Development Director that the proposed use is not compatible and consistent with the surrounding environment, the property owner shall
have the right to appeal the decision to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the regulations and requirements as expressed in chapter 3 of this title.
PERMITTED USES - TOWN CENTER
P = Permitted
A = Auxiliary
SP = Special use permit
Use TC-1 TC-2 TC-3 TC-4
Attached dwellings, townhomes P
Auditoriums P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 392/439
Automobile repair (see subsection 11-8-3-1G1 of this section 11-8-3) A A
Automobile supply (see subsection 11-8-3-1G1 of this section 11-8-3) A A
Bakeries (see subsection 11-8-3-1G2 of this section 11-8-3) P A A
Banks P P P
Car wash (see subsection 11-8-3-1G3 of this section 11-8-3) P A A
Childcare, including daycare P P
Commercial entertainment P P P
Convenience stores/gas stations (see subsection 11-8-3-1G4 of this section 11-8-3) A A A
Dance studio P P P
Domesticated animal boarding/kennels A A A
Drinking establishments P
Fitness center P P P
Funeral homes and mortuaries P
Grocery store P P P
Hair salon P P P
Hotel, motel or motor lodge P P
Laundry, repair, dry cleaning and pick up P P
Libraries P P P P
Medical office, clinic P P P
Movie theater P P
Multiple-family dwellings P P P P
Museum P
Photographic studios P P P
Professional offices P P P
Religious institutions SP SP SP SP
Restaurant, fast food P P P
Restaurant, fast food drive-through (see subsection 11-8-3-1G5 of this section 11-8-3) A A A
Restaurant, full service sit down P P P
Retail P P P
Veterinary clinic and hospital P P P
(Ord. 1059, 7-12-2018)
11-8-3-1: AUXILIARY USES:
An "auxiliary use" shall mean a conditional use consisting of certain low intensity commercial establishments which are primarily intended, designed
and utilized to serve the proven needs within the TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4 District of the principal permitted uses that are in existence or that will be
constructed at or about the same time as the auxiliary use. Possible auxiliary uses are listed in section 11-8-3 of this chapter and noted with an "A". In
TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4 Zoning Districts, any enterprise that cannot wholly enclose its functions within the principal structure shall be prohibited. The City
Council may permit an auxiliary use within a TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4 District as part of a development plan provided that the following conditions are
satisfied:
A. The auxiliary use shall primarily serve the needs within the TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4 District of the principal permitted uses that are then in existence or
that will be constructed at or about the same time as the auxiliary use.
B. The design, aesthetics, location, and character of the auxiliary structure or use shall be compatible with the principal permitted uses within the TC-1,
TC-3 or TC-4 District and abutting or nearby properties in adjoining zoning districts.
C. The auxiliary use shall not adversely affect the setting and quality of development for the principal permitted uses within the TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4
District due to over concentration or over saturation within the TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4 District.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 393/439
D. The auxiliary use shall not generate substantial additional traffic nor create traffic congestion beyond that which would occur if any principal
permitted use were to locate on the same site.
E. The auxiliary use shall not be hazardous, detrimental, or disturbing to principal permitted uses, nor to adjoining or abutting properties due to dust,
glare, noises, smoke, odor, fumes, vibration, or other effects not consistent with the principal permitted uses within the TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4 District.
F. The auxiliary uses shall incorporate the site's natural and scenic features into the development design.
G. In addition to the conditions above, the following special conditions shall be met for specific uses within the TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4 Districts:
1. Automobile supply and repair businesses shall be permitted provided that all overhead doors (if applicable) be oriented away from NW 86th
Street, and provided that the retail square footage of the building be at least one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet or twenty five
percent (25%) of the total gross floor area of the building, whichever is greater. All functions of the business must be entirely contained within the
confines of the building and no outdoor storage of vehicles and/or parts is allowed.
2. Bakeries, including, but not limited to, other organic food processing uses, shall be permitted, provided that the retail sales area shall be within
one hundred feet (100') of the premises on which the bakery is located where all products produced in the bakery are available for sale fresh
daily, and provided the product preparation and storage area does not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. Distribution
of products to other premises is permitted; however, no semitrailer trucks shall be used for distribution purposes.
3. Car wash facilities shall be permitted provided that all overhead doors be oriented away from NW 86th Street. Additionally, all exterior detailing
stations shall be designed in accordance with the principal structure, and located away from NW 86th Street and any adjoining side street.
4. Convenience stores shall be permitted provided that the fuel canopy is architecturally detailed and integrated into the design of the principal
building. Specifically, elements of brick, stone or masonry must be imported into the support columns, the canopy structure itself shall be clad in
a material that is consistent with the principal structure in both type and color. Additionally, the perimeter of the parking areas surround the fueling
areas shall be heavily landscaped with elements of the required streetscape incorporated throughout.
5. Fast food restaurants which include a drive through shall be permitted provided that all circulation and queuing areas necessary to support the
drive through are located away from NW 86th Street. (Ord. 1059, 7-12-2018)
11-8-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A. Accessory buildings may be constructed in Town Center zoned lots as permitted in section 11-4-7 of this title.
B. Accessory structures may be constructed in Town Center zoned lots as permitted in section 11-4-8 of this title. Where the Town Center district is not
specifically mentioned, the requirements shall be consistent with the commercial district regulations. (Ord. 1059, 7-12-2018)
11-8-5: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking requirements shall be provided consistent with the provisions outlined in chapter 13 of this title. Where the Town Center district is not
specifically mentioned, the requirements shall be consistent with the C-1 and C-2 Commercial District regulations. In addition to the parking
requirements in chapter 13 of this title, the following regulations shall apply to property located within the Town Center zoning districts:
A. TC-1, TC-3 Or TC-4: No single parking block shall have more than one hundred (100) parking spaces in the TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4 Zoning District.
B. Parking Blocks Defined: "Parking blocks" shall be defined on all sides by any of the following in the TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4 Zoning District:
1. The front building facade containing a minimum ten foot (10') wide sidewalk along the entire length of the facade.
2. A side or rear building facade containing a minimum six foot (6') wide sidewalk along the entire length of the facade.
3. A public street, provided that a ten foot (10') parking lot and driveway setback is accommodated.
4. A twenty foot (20') landscape buffer meeting the requirements of subsection 11-8-7C of this chapter.
5. A twenty foot (20') wide landscaped median containing a minimum six foot (6') wide sidewalk.
C. Shared Parking: Shared parking shall be strongly encouraged for mixed use developments located within the TC-1, TC-3 and TC-4 Zoning Districts
and shall be allowed based upon the following requirements:
1. A written agreement shall be required between property owners sharing parking facilities and shall include any necessary easements,
maintenance agreements and projected parking projections for each party. The agreement shall be approved by the City Council and filed with
the County Recorder.
2. The following table shall be used to determine the required parking based on the shared parking agreement. Whichever time period requires the
highest total parking spaces among the various uses subject to the shared parking agreement should be the amount of parking provided.
SHARED PARKING STANDARDS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 394/439
Category Of Use Sharing
Parking
Percentage Of Required Parking Spaces By Time Period
Weekday
Daytime And Evening
Weekend
Daytime And Evening Nighttime
6:00 A.M. to 5:00
P.M.
5:00 P.M. to 1:00
A.M.
6:00 A.M. to 5:00
P.M.
5:00 P.M. to 1:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. to 6:00
A.M.
Church 5% 25% 100% 50% 5%
Entertainment and recreation 30% 100% 75% 100% 5%
Lodging 50% 90% 75% 100% 100%
Office 100% 10% 5% 5% 5%
Residential 25% 90% 50% 90% 100%
Restaurant 50% 100% 75% 100% 25%
Retail 75% 75% 100% 90% 5%
School 100% 10% 10% 10% 5%
D. Bicycle Parking: On site bicycle parking racks shall be provided at a rate of 0.5 rack spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building area to
a maximum of twenty (20) rack spaces required for all commercial uses and one rack per five (5) units to a maximum of twenty (20) rack spaces
required for all residential uses. (Ord. 1059, 7-12-2018)
11-8-6: SITE PLANS:
Site plans, consistent with the requirements as outlined in the NW 86th Street Corridor Design Guidelines shall be required for all uses. (Ord. 1059, 7-
12-2018)
11-8-7: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Open space requirements shall be provided consistent with the provisions outlined in chapter 14 of this title. In addition to the open space
requirements in chapter 14 of this title, the following regulations shall apply to property located within the Town Center zoning districts:
A. Minimum Quantity: The minimum number of plantings per site within the Town Center districts shall be 1.5 trees per one thousand (1,000) square
feet of required open space. This shall be in addition to plantings required within a landscape buffer.
B. Open Space Requirements: Open space shall be provided for each site in each district in accordance to the following table. Values are in
percentage of total site.
OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
TC-1 TC-2 TC-3 TC-4
25 10 (6 - 8 units per acre) 15 20
15 (9 - 13 units per acre)
20 (14 - 17 units per acre)
25 (18 - 20 units per acre)
C. Buffers: Buffers shall be provided for each site in each district in accordance with the following table. Values are in feet.
BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
R-1, R-2, R-5
R-3
R-4
C
Districts
TC-1
TC-2
TC-3
TC-4
M Districts
R-1, R-2, R-5 districts - 30 30 50 30 - 20 30 65
R-3 30 - 30 50 30 - 20 - 65
R-4 30 30 - 50 30 - 20 - 65
C districts 50 50 50 - - 30 - - 30
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 395/439
TC-1 30 30 30 - - 20 - - 30
TC-2 - - - 30 20 - - - 30
TC-3 20 20 20 - - - - - 30
TC-4 30 - - - - - - - 30
M districts 65 65 65 30 30 30 30 30 -
D. Buffer Material Requirements: The following shall be the minimum requirement. All buffers shall provide the plantings as prescribed below.
BUFFER MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
Buffer Material Requirements Per 30 Linear Feet Of Buffer
20 feet 1 overstory 1 evergreen 1 ornamental 9 shrubs
30 feet 1 overstory 2 evergreen 1 ornamental -
50 feet 1 overstory 3 evergreen 2 ornamental -
65 feet 2 overstory 4 evergreen 2 ornamental -
(Ord. 1059, 7-12-2018)
11-8-8: DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Table Of Requirements:
DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS - TOWN CENTER
TC-1 TC-2 TC-3 TC-4
Density (residential uses only) 20 units per acre 20 units per acre 20 units per acre 20 units per acre
Maximum height 45 feet or 3-story 45 feet or 3-story 50 feet or 4-story 50 feet or 4-story
Minimum front yard depth 60 feet 15 feet 0 feet 0 feet
Maximum front yard depth None 50 feet 85 feet 85 feet
Minimum rear yard 35 feet1,2 25 feet 35 feet1 35 feet1,2
Minimum side yard 25 feet1,2 6 feet3 25 feet1,2 25 feet1,2
Notes:
1. A minimum yard of 75 feet shall be required for such yards adjacent to or across from any R district.
2. Where the side or rear of a building within the TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4 District is adjacent to another building within the TC-1, TC-3 or TC-4 District, the
internal yard requirement may be either 0 feet or 12.5 feet.
3. Except where rear or side wall is a common wall.
B. Parking Requirements: In addition to the requirements of this chapter, each dwelling unit located within the TC-2 District shall have a minimum one
car enclosed (detached, attached, underground) area per unit. Carports shall not be considered as an acceptable covered area. Detached garages
shall not exceed four hundred fifty (450) square feet per dwelling unit and shall not be taller than twelve feet (12') in total height. In no case shall
more than six (6) detached garages be attached in a row. (Ord. 1059, 7-12-2018)
Chapter 9
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
11-9-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The planned unit development district is intended and designed to promote and encourage development or redevelopment of tracts of land on a
planned, unified basis by allowing greater flexibility for those developments that propose a creative and innovative design whose layout is not
achievable under the standards of other zoning districts. A planned unit development shall consist of an arrangement and selection of land uses in
groupings that are organized and designed as an integrated unit rather than a collection of independent building and sites. The integrated design shall
include a holistic presentation of elements such as building orientation and materials, utilities, parking areas, traffic and pedestrian circulation,
landscaping and open spaces that satisfy the individual site needs while achieving greater value for the entire development area. (Ord. 876, 1-17-
2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 396/439
11-9-2: CRITERIA:
The planned unit development district shall be reserved for only those developments, which meet one or more of the following criteria:
A. Developments that provide for varying land uses to coexist within the same development so that the growing demands of the population may be
met by greater variety in type, design, and layout.
B. Developments which encourage a more efficient use of land through the incorporation of public/private spaces or uses which enhance the
community at large.
C. Developments that provide both public and private open spaces that accent and enhance both the architectural and natural features of the
development and provide for the protection and preservation of existing vegetative and water resources.
D. Developments that present a common and unified theme through the use of architecturally compatible detailing to form a part of a larger
composition rather than separate land uses designed in isolation of one another. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-9-3: PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses for planned unit development zoned property shall consist of residential uses, neighborhood commercial uses and
neighborhood office uses. If it is determined by the city council that a proposed use is not compatible and consistent with the proposed planned unit
development, the property owner shall have the right to appeal the decision to the board of adjustment pursuant to the regulations and requirements
as expressed in chapter 3 of this title.
A. "Residential uses" shall be defined as single-family residential, attached dwellings, multiple-family residential, assisted and independent living
facilities and nursing homes.
B. "Neighborhood commercial uses" shall be defined as those uses which normally and customarily service the surrounding residential properties.
Neighborhood commercial uses shall include, but not be limited to, dry cleaners, delis, coffee shops, markets, convenience stores, and small retail
establishments.
C. "Neighborhood office uses" shall be defined as those office uses which normally and customarily service the surrounding residential properties.
Neighborhood commercial uses shall include, but not be limited to, small medical clinics, veterinarians, and banks. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-9-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A. Accessory buildings may be constructed in planned unit development zoned lots as permitted in section 11-4-7 of this title.
B. Accessory structures may be constructed in planned unit development zoned lots as permitted in section 11-4-8 of this title. Where the planned unit
development is not specifically mentioned, the requirements shall be consistent with the commercial district regulations. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-9-5: SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS:
Signage within a planned unit development shall serve as a unifying element while creating measured and consistent identification of the various land
uses within the planned unit development. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-9-6: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Adequate parking shall be provided within the planned unit development based upon the proposed uses. Shared parking for varying uses shall be
strongly encouraged. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-9-7: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Open space requirements within a planned unit development shall consist of both public and private landscape areas, natural areas, plazas and
courtyards designed to enhance the architectural and natural features of the development. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-9-8: ARCHITECTURAL REQUIREMENTS:
Buildings within a planned unit development shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with each other and should be seen as a larger
composition as opposed to individual buildings. Buildings shall be designed to promote quality architecture and design elements along all four (4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 397/439
building elevations. The use of colors, materials, facade projections and recesses, articulated rooflines, enhanced entrances, lighting, windows and/or
awnings shall be used to make the development architecturally compatible as a whole. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-9-9: BULK REGULATIONS:
Density, setbacks and height requirements shall be clearly specified within the development plan and development agreement. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-9-10: DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
A development plan and development agreement shall be required for all planned unit development districts. The development plan shall include a
narrative section that identifies the primary objectives of the development as well as providing specific guidelines and design standards related to the
development including, but not limited to, size, location and uses of buildings, bulk regulations, parking configurations and requirements, architectural
standards, landscaping, open space design, signage design and location, pedestrian access, and utilities. In addition to the development plan, a
development agreement shall be required of the developer, which shall acknowledge the developer's commitment to develop the property in
accordance with the development plan. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
Chapter 10
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
11-10-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The M-1 and M-2 industrially zoned districts are intended and designed to provide for areas within the city deemed appropriate for value added and
manufacturing processes of various intensities needed by the business and technology population of a local, state and national level while promoting
the quality of life, health, and general welfare desired by the citizens of the city, all consistent with the comprehensive plan. The development will
incorporate high quality materials in unique designs with substantial buffering and the incorporation of trees, shrubs, and other plant materials. It shall
be generally recognized that the type of use is not so important as the manner in which the use is accomplished. It is intended that the district shall not
be used indiscriminately to permit any use that could potentially be detrimental to the intent of this title. No use shall be permitted to be established or
maintained which by reason of its nature or manner of operation is or may become hazardous, noxious or offensive owing to the emission of odor,
dust, smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, vibrations, refuse matter or waste. The best practical means known for disposal of refuse material, the abatement of
obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or similar nuisance shall be employed. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-10-2: PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
A. M-1 Light Industrial Park: Principal permitted uses as listed in subsection C of this section.
B. M-2 Heavy Industrial Park:
1. Principal permitted uses as listed in subsection C of this section.
2. Any other use which is not objectionable by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, light, vibration, noise, or similar nuisance. (Ord. 876,
1-17-2008)
C. Permitted Uses:
PERMITTED USES - INDUSTRIAL
P = Permitted
SP = Special use permit
Use M-
1
M-
2
Abattoirs and slaughterhouses SP
Acid manufacture or wholesale storage of acids SP
Adult uses subject to the provisions of section 11-4-16 of this title P
P
Animal boarding/kennels P
P
Animal hospitals P
P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 398/439
Auditoriums P
P
Automobile assembly and repair P
P
Automobile sales and display P
P
Automobile supply P
P
Automobile, tractor, or machinery wrecking and used parts yards, provided the operations are conducted wholly within an enclosed
fence not less than 8 feet in height and completely obscuring the activity
SP
Automotive wash/drive-through only P
P
Automotive wash self-service P
P
Bag/rug/carpet cleaning P
P
Bakeries P
P
Bookbinding P
P
Building material sales yard, lumberyard P
P
Candy or confections manufacturing P
P
Cement products, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture SP
Collection office of public utility P
P
Commercial entertainment P
P
Commercial parking lots P
P
Communication towers P
P
Community centers P
P
Consumer fireworks sales P
P
Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant storage yard for vehicles of a delivery or driving service P
P
Convenience stores/gas stations P
P
Creamery, bottling, ice manufacturing and cold storage plant P
P
Crematory, if located not less than 200 feet from any R district P
P
Dance studio P
P
Display fireworks sales P
Distillation of bones, coal tar, petroleum, refuse, grain, or wood SP
Drinking places P
P
Driving range in conjunction with a golf course P
P
Enameling, lacquering P
P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 399/439
Equipment sales and display P
P
Farm machinery and mobile home sales and repair P
P
Fat rendering SP
Fertilizer manufacture SP
Fitness center P
P
Foundry - casting lightweight nonferrous metals, or electric foundry, not causing noxious fumes or odors SP
Funeral homes and mortuaries P
P
Furniture manufacturing P
P
Gas manufacture and cylinder recharging SP
Glue or gelatin manufacture SP
Grocery store P
P
Hair salon P
P
Hospitals P
P
Hotel, motel or motor lodge P
P
Ice storage and distribution station of not more than 5 tons' capacity P
P
Junk, iron or rag storage or bailing, and wastepaper yards; provided such activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed building or
within an enclosed fence at least 8 feet high and completely obscuring the activity
SP
Laboratories, film or testing P
P
Launderette and similar business using only nonflammable solvents P
P
Laundry, repair, dry cleaning and pick up P
P
Libraries P
P
Manufacture and repair of electric signs, advertising structures, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating
equipment
P
P
Manufacture of musical instruments, novelties and molded rubber products P
P
Manufacture of pottery or other similar ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas
P
P
Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, instruments and devices P
P
Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, or treatment of article or merchandise from previously prepared materials such as bone or
cloth, cork, fiber, leather, paper, plastics, metals, precious stones, tobacco, wax, yarns, and wood
P
P
Manufacturing, compounding, processing, treating and packaging of food products other than fish and meat (except as permitted
below) and other than sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, fats and oils
P
P
Medical office, clinics P
P
Millwork P
P
Mineral extraction, including sand and gravel pits SP
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 400/439
Ministorage P
P
Monument sales and engraving P
P
Motorcycle sales and repair P
P
Museums P
P
Nurseries and greenhouses P
P
Petroleum or its products, refining or wholesale storage of, and asphalt plants SP
Post office substation P
P
Printing and/or publishing house P
P
Printing facilities P
P
Processing and packaging of boxed or frozen fish and meat for human consumption. (Provided, however, this provision does not
allow the rendering, boiling, cooking [other than final roasting or broiling for immediate restaurant or delicatessen use], smoking,
pickling, curing or chemical preserving of fish or meat or any activity which would create or result in a nuisance under state statute or
common law. The boiling/precooking of food in a bag such that smells and juices are completely contained shall be acceptable.)
P
P
Professional offices P
P
Religious institutions P
P
Restaurant, fast food P
P
Restaurant, fast food drive-through P
P
Restaurant, full service sit down P
P
Retail P
P
Rubber goods manufacture SP
Sanitary landfill or transfer station SP
Sawmill, planing mill; including manufacture of wood products not involving chemical treatment P
P
Sheet metal shop P
P
Sign painting P
P
Small engine/lawn mower repair shop P
P
Smelting of ores SP
Storage warehouse, provided no outside storage shall be permitted P
P
Tannery SP
Tavern P
P
Tire repair shops P
P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 401/439
Travel agencies P
P
Truck terminal or yard including repair P
P
Utility substations P
P
Wholesale storage of coal SP
Wholesale storage of liquid fertilizer SP
(Ord. 1037, 5-25-2017)
11-10-3: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A. Accessory buildings may be constructed in industrial lots as permitted in section 11-4-7 of this title.
B. Accessory structures may be constructed in industrial lots as permitted in section 11-4-8 of this title. Uses permitted shall provide screening from
adjacent streets and properties with a fence, berm, or combination of at least eight feet (8') in height for all outside storage of all products or
materials. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-10-4: DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS:
DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
M-1 M-2
Maximum height 60 feet 60 feet
Minimum lot area 10,000 square feet 1 acre
Minimum lot width 70 feet 150 feet
Minimum front yard depth 30 feet 30 feet
Minimum side yard None1 None2
Minimum rear yard 40 feet3 40 feet3
Notes:
1.Minimum side yard adjacent to residential for M-1 districts shall be 75 feet.
2.Minimum side yard adjacent to residential for M-2 districts shall be 200 feet and 50 feet from a commercial district.
3.Where rear lot line is adjacent to a railroad ROW, there is no minimum yard requirement.
(Ord. 876, 1-17-2008; amd. Ord. 907, 2-5-2009)
11-10-5: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Each principal building of a manufacturing complex shall be separated from other principal buildings in the complex by an open space of not less than
twenty five feet (25') in width. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-10-6: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Open space requirements shall be provided consistent with the provisions outlined in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-10-7: SITE PLANS:
Site plans shall be required for all uses in accordance with chapter 15 of this title and the Clive development standards manual. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-10-8: OUTDOOR STORAGE AREAS:
Outdoor storage areas are permitted, following site plan approval. Enclosure area shall be constructed as required in section 11-4-9 of this title. (Ord.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 402/439
876, 1-17-2008)
Chapter 11
FLOOD CONTROL
11-11-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE:
A. Authority: The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in chapter 414, Code of Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning
regulations to secure safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
B. Findings Of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of the City of Clive are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community.
2. These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by:
a. The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being
inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and
b. The cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
3. This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the
Department of Natural Resources.
C. Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City of Clive and its
residents and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood
losses described in subsection B1 of this section with provisions designed to:
1. Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
2. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
3. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
4. Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.
5. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program. (Ord. 1067, 1-24-2019)
11-11-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which Chapter Apply: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Clive shown on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of the Floodway Overlay, Floodway Fringe Overlay, and General Floodplain Overlay
Districts, as established in section 11-5-1 of this title.
B. Establishment Of Official Floodplain Zoning Map: The Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Polk County and Incorporated Areas, City of Clive,
panels 19153C0165F, 0305F, 0310F, 0326F, 0327F dated February 1, 2019, which were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Polk
County, is (are) hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material
contained with the Flood Insurance Study are also declared to be a part of this chapter.
C. Rules For Interpretation Of District Boundaries: The boundaries of the zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Community Development Director shall make
the necessary interpretation.
D. Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the Governing Body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State Statutes.
E. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain District areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City of Clive or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
F. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 403/439
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
G. Severability: If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1067, 1-24-2019)
11-11-3: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Appointment, Duties And Responsibilities Of Local Official:
1. The Community Development Director is hereby appointed to implement and administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred
to as the Administrator.
2. Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not necessarily be limited to the following:
a. Review all floodplain development applications to assure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
b. Review floodplain development applications to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural Resources for floodplain construction.
c. Record and maintain a record of:
(1) The elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures or
(2) The elevation to which new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
d. Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse
and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
e. Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
f. Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or modifications to the community's boundaries.
g. Review subdivision proposals to insure such proposals are consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Planning and Zoning
Commission of potential conflict.
h. Maintain the accuracy of the community's Flood Insurance Rate Maps when;
(1) Development placed within the Floodway Overlay District results in any of the following:
(A) An increase in the base flood elevations, or
(B) Alteration to the floodway boundary;
(2) Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one
foot (1') in the base elevation; or
(3) Development relocates or alters the channel.
Within six (6) months of the completion of the development, the applicant shall submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for
a Letter of Map Revision.
i. Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards of this chapter.
j. Forward all requests for variances to the Board of Adjustment for consideration.
B. Floodplain Development Permit:
1. Permit Required: A floodplain development permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development.
2. Application For Permit: Application shall be made on forms furnished by the Administrator and shall include the following:
a. Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is to be made.
b. Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done that will readily identify and locate the work to be done.
c. Location and dimensions of all buildings and building additions.
d. Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
e. Elevation of the base flood.
f. Elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement, of buildings or of the level to which a building is to be floodproofed.
g. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
h. Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably necessary for the purpose of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 404/439
3. Action On Permit Application: The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant
shall be informed, in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by the
Board of Adjustment.
4. Construction And Use To Be As Provided In Application And Plans: Floodplain development permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use,
arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction in conflict with that approved permit shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State
of Iowa, that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure. (Ord. 1067, 1-24-2019)
11-11-4: FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses, having a low flood damage potential and not obstructing flood flow, shall be permitted within the Floodway
Overlay District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or statute, and provided they do not require structures, fill, fences
or storage of materials or equipment, excavation, or alteration of a watercourse. In addition, no use shall adversely affect the capacity or flow of
Walnut Creek or North Walnut Creek or the channels or floodways of any tributary to Walnut Creek or North Walnut Creek or any other drainage
facility or system. All other uses permitted within the underlying zoning district shall be expressly prohibited unless otherwise noted herein.
1. Agricultural uses such as, but not limited to, general farming, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, and sod farming.
2. Private and public recreational uses such as, but not limited to: golf courses, archery ranges, parks, picnic grounds, tennis courts, hiking and
biking trails.
3. Parks and public recreational uses, and structures accessory to such uses, by the City.
4. Such other open space uses similar in nature to the above uses, as determined by the Community Development Director.
5. Utility transmission lines, including poles and towers.
B. Performance Standards: All Floodway Overlay District uses allowed as a permitted use shall meet the following standards:
1. No use shall be permitted in the Floodway Overlay District that would result in any increase in the base flood elevation. Consideration of the
effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for
similarly situated lands.
2. All uses within the Floodway Overlay District shall:
a. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
b. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
c. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
3. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other
drainage facility or system.
4. Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe
Overlay District and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
5. Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and shall not be for human habitation.
6. Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of
other material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway Overlay District within the time available after flood warning.
7. Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
8. Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
9. Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to
channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows. (Ord. 1067, 1-24-2019)
11-11-5: FLOODWAY FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses: All uses within the Floodway Fringe Overlay District shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other
chapter (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe Overlay District.
B. Performance Standards: All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance
standards. Where base flood data has not been provided on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be
contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical
information to make such determination.
1. All Structures: All structures shall:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 405/439
a. Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
b. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
c. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
2. Residential Structures:
a. Residential Structures Without Basements: All new or substantially improved residential structures shall have the lowest floor elevated a
minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than
1.0 foot above the base flood elevation and extend at such elevation at least eighteen feet (18') beyond the limits of any structure erected
thereon. Subject to approval by the Administrator, alternate methods of elevating may be allowed where existing topography, street grades, or
other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the
various forces and hazards associated with flooding.
b. Residential Structures With Basements:
(1) All new or substantially improved residential structures with basements shall have the basement, together with attendant utility and
sanitation systems, floodproofed to a level at least one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. Construction of floodproofed basements
shall:
(A) Take place within a compacted fill berm which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot (1') above the base flood elevation and
extend at such elevation at least eighteen feet (18') beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon;
(B) Be constructed such that the lowest part of all basement external openings, such as doors and windows, are placed at least one foot (1')
above the base flood elevation;
(C) Be designed and constructed so that the structure, below one foot (1') above the base flood elevation, is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and with the capability to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy associated with the base flood; and
(D) Be designed so that minimal structural damage will occur if this design is exceeded.
(2) A professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofed basement has been designed in accordance with
the above provisions. A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to
which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Community Development Director. All basements constructed in
accordance with these provisions shall not be used for sleeping purposes and shall require the approval and recording of an agreement that
indicates the restriction.
(3) All new residential structures located in areas that would become isolated due to flooding of surrounding ground shall be provided with a
means of access that will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base flood. However, this criterion shall not apply where the
Administrator determines there is sufficient flood warning time for the protection of life and property. When estimating flood warning time,
consideration shall be given to the criteria listed in 567-75.2(3), Iowa Administrative Code.
3. Non-Residential Structures: All new or substantially improved non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level.
When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are
adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the base flood; and that
the structure, below the base flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the
certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be
maintained by the Administrator.
4. New And Substantially Improved Structures:
a. Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two (2) openings, with positioning on at least two (2) walls, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
Where the distance between the floor and ceiling of the fully enclosed area below the "lowest floor" is five feet (5') or more, the applicant
shall be required to sign and record with the County Recorder a Non-Conversion Agreement that ensures the lower enclosed area remains
compliant with the criteria outlined in this subsection.
b. New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
c. New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, duct
work and other service facilities elevated or floodproofed to a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
5. Factory-Built Homes:
a. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 406/439
b. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors as
required by the State Building Code.
6. Utility And Sanitary Systems:
a. On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the
system during flooding.
b. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system as well
as the discharge of effluent into floodwaters. Wastewater treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood
protection equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
c. New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. Water supply
treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the base
flood elevation.
d. Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
e. The utilization of septic sanitary sewer systems shall be prohibited within the Floodway Fringe Overlay District.
7. Hazardous Material: Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited
unless elevated or protected to a minimum of one foot (1') above the 500-year flood elevation.
8. Flood Control Structures: Structural works such as levees, flood walls, etc., shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base flood with a
minimum of three feet (3') of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources
shall approve structural flood control works.
9. Changes In Watercourse: Alterations or relocations to the watercourse must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources must approve such alterations or relocations.
10. Subdivisions: Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages
and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated with subdivision proposals (including
the installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential
use shall provide all lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions
greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots (whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas located within the Floodplain
District.
11. Accessory Structures To Residential Uses:
a. Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are incidental to a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation requirements
where the following criteria are satisfied.
(1) The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential. Its size shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet in size. Those
portions of the structure located less than one foot (1') above the BFE must be constructed of flood-resistant materials.
(2) The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure shall
not be used for human habitation.
(3) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(4) The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(5) The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot (1') above
the base flood elevation.
(6) The structure's walls shall include openings that satisfy the provisions of subsection B4a of this section.
b. Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage
of the structure and its contents.
12. Recreational Vehicles:
a. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of subsection B5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built
homes when the following criteria are satisfied.
(1) The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and,
(2) The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.
b. Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or are not ready for highway use
must satisfy the requirements of subsection B5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.
13. River And Stream Crossings: Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently
protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
14. Maximum Damage Potential Uses: All new or substantially improved maximum damage potential uses shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the elevation of the 500-year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems,
be floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 407/439
floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors
associated with the 0.2 percent annual chance flood; and that the structure, below the 0.2 percent annual chance flood elevation is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to North
American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator. Where 0.2 percent chance
flood elevation data has not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to
compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to
make such determinations.
15. Outdoor Storage: The storage of goods, materials, equipment or any other products outside of an approved structure shall be prohibited within
the Floodway Fringe Overlay District. (Ord. 1067, 1-24-2019)
11-11-6: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses:
1. All uses within the General Floodplain Overlay District shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other chapter (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance standards of the General Floodplain Overlay District.
2. Any uses which involve placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or
alteration of a watercourse shall be reviewed by the Department of Natural Resources to determine:
a. Whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the Floodway Overlay or Floodway Fringe Overlay; and
b. The base flood elevation. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical
information to make the determination.
3. Review by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources is not required for the proposed construction of new or replacement bridges or culverts
where:
a. The bridge or culvert is located on a stream that drains less than one hundred (100) square miles, and
b. The bridge or culvert is not associated with a channel modification that constitutes a channel change as specified in 567-71.2(1)b, Iowa
Administrative Code.
B. Performance Standards:
1. All uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the applicable
provisions and standards of the Floodway Overlay District, section 11-11-4 of this chapter.
2. All uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the Floodway Fringe Overlay as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Fringe Overlay District, section 11-11-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1067, 1-24-2019)
11-11-7: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; APPEALS; VARIANCES:
A. Decisions Of The Board Of Adjustment: The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal or variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an
appeal, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the
order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the
reasons for its decision. In granting a variance, the Board shall consider such factors as contained in this section and all other relevant sections of
this chapter and may prescribe such conditions as contained in subsection A2 of this section.
1. Factors Upon Which The Decision Of The Board Of Adjustment Shall Be Based: In passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall
consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
a. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
b. The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or downstream to the injury of others.
c. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions.
d. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
e. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the City.
f. The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
g. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
h. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
i. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area.
j. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
k. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwater expected at the site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 408/439
l. The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.
m. Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter.
2. Conditions Attached To Variances: Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
a. Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
b. Limitation of periods of use and operation.
c. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
d. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
e. Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with the regulatory flood. The Board of Adjustment shall require that
the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the
regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area. Such floodproofing measures may include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(1) Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement.
(2) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, shutters, or similar methods of construction.
(3) Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures.
(4) Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce the seepage of water through walls.
(5) Addition of mass or weight structures to resist flotation.
(6) Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
(7) Pumping facilities or comparable practices for subsurface drainage systems for buildings to relieve external foundation wall and basement
flood pressures.
(8) Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance of floodwaters.
(9) Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris.
(10) Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and
stormwater into buildings or structures.
(11) Location of all electrical equipment, including circuits and installed electrical appliances in a manner that will assure they are not subject to
flooding.
B. Variances: No variance shall be granted for any development within the Floodway Overlay District that would result in any increase in floods during
the occurrence of the base flood. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal
degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands. All variances granted affecting the Floodway Overlay or Floodway Fringe
Overlay Districts shall have approval of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources. (Ord. 1067, 1-24-2019)
11-11-8: AMENDMENTS:
The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment,
supplement, change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the Department of Natural Resources. (Ord. 1067, 1-24-2019)
Chapter 12
SIGNS
11-12-1: TITLE:
This chapter, providing for the administration and enforcement of sign regulations, shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SIGN
ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF CLIVE, IOWA. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-2: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and preserve the public health, safety, and general welfare, to maintain and enhance the visual environment
of the City, improvement of pedestrian and traffic safety, and the minimization of possible adverse effects on public and private property. The provisions
of this chapter are intended to permit signs that will not, by reason of their size, location, construction or manner of display, endanger life and limb,
confuse or mislead traffic, obstruct vision necessary for traffic safety, or otherwise endanger the public health, safety, and welfare; and further, to
regulate such permitted signs in a way to promote development that is not detrimental to the property values and aesthetics of the City. No sign shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 409/439
be erected or maintained in the City's jurisdiction, except those specifically allowed by this chapter. All signs as permitted by the applicable zoning
district regulations in all zoning districts in the City shall comply with the regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-3: JURISDICTION:
The lawful use of a sign existing at the time of the enactment of the zoning ordinance may be continued although such use may not conform to the
regulations herein. For those signs permitted before the adoption of these regulations, such signs shall be classified as "permitted nonconforming"
structures. No sign permit shall be issued for any lot, tenant, or development after the effective date hereof and not in substantial conformity with the
provisions of this title. Nor shall any sign, except as hereinafter specified, be erected, substantially improved, converted, enlarged, moved, or
structurally altered without conforming with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-4: PROHIBITED SIGNS AND CONDITIONS:
The following signs shall not be permitted, erected, or maintained on any property within the City:
A. Banners, pennants, spinners, streamers, except as permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
B. Billboards.
C. Neon lights or signs, not intended to add to the overall architectural theme of the site, except as permitted elsewhere in this chapter, or expressly
permitted by City Council.
D. Building panel signs.
E. Hazardous signs, any sign or sign structure which is structurally unsafe, is not kept in good repair, or is capable of causing electrical shock to
persons likely to come in contact.
F. Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing or moving lights unless expressly permitted by City Council.
G. Signs which include visible moving parts, changeable copy or description by electrical or nonelectrical means, or by action of wind currents; except
as permitted in this chapter.
H. Spotlights or strobe lights, whether stationary or moving, intended to draw attention to a location of a property and not primarily intended to accent
the signage or building form, except as expressly permitted by City Council.
I. Pole signs.
J. Portable or temporary signs, except as permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
K. String lights or other displays used in connection with commercial premises for commercial purposes, other than temporary decorations displayed
between October 15 and January 15.
L. Any sign unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter.
M. Any sign displaying any obscene, indecent or immoral matter, as defined by this chapter.
N. Roof signs, unless expressly permitted by City Council.
O. Any vehicle sign, not normally used in the day to day operations of a business, parked in such a way to draw attention of people from a public place
or street.
P. Ground mounted signs in any residential land use, except as permitted elsewhere in this chapter, or expressly permitted by City Council.
Q. Building mounted signs in any residential land use, except as permitted elsewhere in this chapter, or expressly permitted by City Council.
R. Manual changeable copy signs.
S. Video message boards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 410/439
T. Any signs, except permitted nonconforming signs, not specifically permitted within this chapter. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-5: DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Sign Face Extension: No sign face shall extend horizontally beyond the supporting structure a distance greater than twelve inches (12").
B. Electric Signs: All electric signs shall be manufactured to meet UL specifications and be approved by the building official in accordance with the City
of Clive Electrical Code. An alternate equivalent may be accepted as approved by the building official.
1. Electric signs shall be watertight, with service holes to provide access to each compartment with fitted waterproof covers.
2. Any electrical equipment or apparatus of a sign, which causes interference with radio or television reception, shall not be allowed.
C. Wind Pressure And Dead Load Requirements: All signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure as
regulated by the Building Code of the City, and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the Building Code and/or other ordinances
of the City. Temporary signs shall be excluded from dead load requirements as required above.
D. Clearance From Electric Lines: A clearance of not less than eight feet (8') horizontally and twelve feet (12') vertically shall be maintained between
any sign and any overhead electrical transmission line.
E. Number Of Faces: No sign shall have more than two (2) faces. Sign faces shall be parallel, unless determined to be consistent with the architectural
character of the building, and expressly permitted by City Council.
F. Lighting Of Signs: Signs, if illuminated, must be lit by internal fixtures unless determined to be consistent with the architectural character of the
building, and is approved by the Community Development Director. A constant level of light must be maintained, provided that this shall not be
construed to prohibit use of an automatic dimmer to reduce garish effects at night. Lighting shall not flash or move unless approved by City Council.
G. Emissions Prohibited: No sign shall emit audible sound, noticeable odor, or smoke or other visible matter.
H. Obstruction Of Fire Exits, Light Or Ventilation: No sign shall be permitted to obstruct or interfere in any way with free use of any door, window, fire
escape, nor to obstruct or impair operation of any opening required for light or ventilation.
I. Traffic Hazards: It is illegal for any sign to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be of such design which may be confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal, or device; no sign shall imitate an official traffic sign or include the words "stop", "look", "caution", or any other word, phrase, symbol, or
character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse motorists. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-6: GROUND MOUNTED SIGNS:
A. Cutout Letters Or Figures; Copy Area Limited: All letters, figures, characters or representations in cutout or irregular form maintained in conjunction
with, attached to, or superimposed on a ground mounted sign shall be safely and securely built to or attached to the sign structure and shall comply
with all requirements of the "design" and "maintenance" subsections of this chapter1. The copy area shall be limited to a single geometric shape
unless it emulates the building form or feature.
B. Sign Bases And Surround: All sign bases and surrounds shall be designed and constructed of materials that are similar to those used on the
principal building. Sign bases and surrounds shall be dominated with materials of permanency and strength, such as brick, stone, block, other
masonry or concrete materials, or architectural paneling and shall be compatible with other structures and signs in the development. No exposed
sign cabinetry shall be visible from either side of the sign. Metal skirting around a supporting pole shall not be considered an acceptable sign base
and surround material. All sign bases shall be at least twelve inches (12") in height, while all sign surrounds shall be at least six inches (6") in
thickness. See figure 11-12-6B of this subsection for additional details.
FIGURE 11-12-6B
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 411/439
C. Sign Area: No more than seventy five (75) square feet of ground mounted sign area shall be permitted on each lot of record; provided, however, if
the frontage(s) of such lot measured along such street exceeds five hundred feet (500'), then one hundred fifty (150) square feet of ground
mounted sign area shall be permitted. A minimum distance of fifty feet (50') shall separate any two (2) ground mounted signs. The total area of a
sign shall be the actual square footage of one sign face. Double faced signs may be permitted with the maximum square footage permitted on each
side. The maximum sign area of a ground mounted sign shall not exceed twenty five (25) square feet; provided, however, the maximum sign area
may be increased five (5) square feet for each additional one foot (1') of setback over the minimum required setback to a maximum sign area of
seventy five (75) square feet. See section 11-12-18, "Ground Mounted Sign Regulations Table", of this chapter, for more information.
D. Setback Requirement: The minimum setback required for ground mounted signs shall be five feet (5'). All signs shall have a side setback not less
than the height of the sign. See section 11-12-18, "Ground Mounted Sign Regulations Table", of this chapter, for more information.
E. Height: The maximum height of a ground mounted sign shall be five feet (5'); provided, however, the maximum height may be increased one foot
(1') for each additional one foot (1') of setback over the minimum required setback to a maximum sign height of fifteen feet (15'). See section 11-12-
18, "Ground Mounted Sign Regulations Table", of this chapter, for more information. For the purpose of measuring the height of the sign when the
sign is placed on a slope, the ground surface at the midpoint between the elevation of the leading and trailing edge shall be considered the point of
measurement. Where the street is substantially higher or lower than the proposed sign location, the City Council may provide variations on the
height requirement as described in this chapter. "Substantially" is defined, in this case, as a change in vertical distance greater than five feet (5'). In
figure 11-12-6E of this subsection, the sign height would be calculated at eight feet (8') in height.
FIGURE 11-12-6E
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 412/439
F. Monolithic Or Columnar Line: Ground mounted signs shall have a monolithic or columnar line that maintains essentially the same profile from grade
to top.
G. Design Standards: All ground mounted signs that display more than one tenant shall utilize a consistent field color or pattern for the copy area of
the sign. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-7: BUILDING MOUNTED SIGNS:
A. Sign Area Allowed: The following sign areas shall be allowed. For a demonstration on how these provisions are applied, please see figures 11-12-
7A and 11-12-7B of this section.
1. Public street facing tenant:
a. One and a half square feet of sign area may be erected for every linear foot of tenant frontage to a maximum of one hundred (100) square
feet.
b. In the case that the tenant(s) sign has a setback of greater than two hundred fifty feet (250') from the nearest public street right-of-way, two (2)
square feet of sign area may be erected per linear foot of tenant frontage to a maximum sign area of two hundred (200) square feet.
c. In the case that a tenant has frontage along more than one public street, the total sign area shall be calculated off of no more than two (2)
public street frontages, up to a maximum of four hundred (400) square feet.
2. Nonpublic street facing tenant:
a. One and a half square feet of sign area may be erected for every linear foot of tenant frontage to a maximum of one hundred (100) square
feet.
b. In the case that the tenant(s) sign has a setback of greater than two hundred fifty feet (250') from the nearest public street right-of-way, two (2)
square feet of sign area may be erected per linear foot of tenant frontage to a maximum sign area of two hundred (200) square feet.
c. In the case that a tenant has frontage along both a non-public street and a public street, the sign area shall be calculated off of the public
street facing frontage.
d. In the case that a tenant is not oriented towards a street frontage and desires to place a sign on the elevation that faces a street frontage, the
maximum allowable sign area allowed to be displayed by all tenants on the public street facing frontage shall be one and a half square feet of
sign area per linear foot of building frontage.
FIGURE 11-12-7A
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 413/439
FIGURE 11-12-7B
Tenant Space Orientation Special Remarks Frontage (Linear Feet)
Area
(Square Feet)
1 Public street n/a 60 90
2 Public street n/a 35 52.5
3 Public street n/a 25 37.5
4 Public street n/a 35 52.5
5 Non-public street Exceeds 250-foot setback 85 170
6 Public street n/a 55 82.5
7 Public street 2 public street frontages 80 & 50 175
8 Public street n/a 50 75
9 Public street n/a 50 75
10 Public street n/a 50 75
11 Non-public street n/a 50 75
12 Non-public street n/a 40 60
13 Public street Exceeds 250-foot setback 100 200
14 Non-public street Exceeds 250-foot setback 50 100
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 414/439
B. Multi-Story Buildings: In the case of a multi-story building, the maximum square footage for each building or tenant signs shall be one square foot of
sign area for every linear foot of building or tenant frontage. In the event that a tenant occupies more than one story, they shall not be permitted to
count the frontage on both stories.
C. Letters, Symbols And Logos: Under no circumstances will a letter, symbol, or logo dimension greater than six feet (6') be allowed. All building signs
shall be principally comprised of individual channel letters, at least one inch (1") in thickness. Push through or routed letters, provided they are
internally illuminated shall be permitted. For the purpose of displaying letters, symbols or logos, no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total
sign area may be allotted to an awning or capsule sign. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-8: INTERSTATE GROUND MOUNTED SIGNS:
In addition to ground mounted signs as permitted under this chapter, one interstate ground mounted sign shall be allowed on lots or tracts under single
ownership, management or control, provided the following conditions are met:
A. Monolithic Or Columnar Line: Interstate signs shall have a monolithic or columnar line that maintains essentially the same profile from grade to top.
B. Sign Area: The total area of a sign shall be actual square footage of one sign face. Double face signs may be permitted with the maximum square
footage permitted on each side. The area of one sign face shall equal one square foot per linear foot of interstate ROW frontage. The maximum
size of an interstate sign shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
C. Tract Frontage: The tract must have frontage abutting the interstate ROW, or be within three hundred feet (300') of the interstate ROW. See figure
11-12-8A of this subsection for a graphic representation of the properties granted an interstate ground mounted sign.
FIGURE 11-12-8A
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 415/439
D. Height: The maximum height of an interstate sign shall be thirty feet (30') above the interstate road grade. See figure 11-12-8B of this subsection.
FIGURE 11-12-8B
E. Location: An interstate ground mounted sign must be located within fifty feet (50') of the interstate or interstate ramp ROW, or in the event that the
interstate ground mounted sign is located on a parcel that does not have direct interstate frontage, the interstate ground mounted sign must be
positioned adjacent to the nearest interstate ROW abutting property line.
F. Setback: Minimum interstate sign setback shall be five feet (5'). In the event that the interstate ground mounted sign is located on a parcel that does
not have direct interstate frontage, the interstate ground mounted sign must be set back at least equal to the overall height of the sign.
G. Distance From Other Signs: An interstate ground mounted sign must be at least one hundred feet (100') from any other such interstate ground
mounted sign, or other ground mounted sign.
H. Permits: In addition to the permitting requirements of this chapter, all applicable interstate ground mounted signs must obtain any necessary permits
or licenses from the Iowa Department of Transportation. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-9: SUBDIVISION SIGNS:
In the case of a commercial or residential subdivision, when there exists an owners' association that provides for the maintenance of the sign or
structures, seventy (70) square feet of sign area shall be granted to the subdivision. All sign dimensions shall be regulated in accordance with the
ground mounted sign regulations table as provided in section 11-12-18 of this chapter; however, the maximum area for each sign shall be thirty five
(35) square feet. The minimum setback required is five feet (5'), and each sign must be separated by at least sixty feet (60'). Such signs shall be
extensively landscaped with trees, plantings, and natural features. Such signs may incorporate fountains, fences, or similar features. In the case of a
commercial or residential subdivision that is actively under development/construction thirty five (35) square feet of sign area shall be permitted for the
display of signage. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-10: GROUND MOUNTED SIGNS FOR CHURCHES AND SCHOOLS:
Ground mounted signs for churches, schools and other public uses shall be regulated in accordance with the ground mounted sign regulations table
as provided in section 11-12-18 of this chapter. The maximum sign area of said signs in residential districts shall be thirty five (35) square feet. (Ord.
1053, 2-8-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 416/439
11-12-11: PUBLIC FACILITY SIGNS:
Public facility signs shall be permitted, provided they are considered to advance the goals and vision established within the Clive City Wide Signage
Master Plan, as approved by the City Council. Public facility signs shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by City
Council. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-12: ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY:
Electronic changeable copy shall be allowed on ground mounted signs for events centers, convenience stores, schools, churches and other public
uses. A maximum of thirty five (35) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the maximum sign area, whichever is less, may be dedicated to electronic
changeable copy, provided the following conditions are met:
A. Electronic changeable message copy may change no more than one time in a five (5) minute period and shall not include any flashing, flowing,
alternating or blinking lights.
B. Electronic changeable message copy shall be integral to and a part of an approved ground mounted sign. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-13: NEON LIGHTS, MURALS:
Neon lights, murals, or similar architecture details, subsequent to Planning and Zoning and City Council approval, may be permitted as part of the
theme of the site if it is determined that the architecture detail proposed is intended to create an identifiable theme and will not be detrimental to the
surrounding environment. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-14: ADDRESSES:
Address letters on residential, commercial and manufacturing developments shall be required and not have a dimension less than four inches (4").
Address letters may be less than one inch (1") in depth. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-15: FLAGS:
Flags of the United States, the State, the City, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the United States, and other flags adopted or sanctioned
by an elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction, must be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the United States
for the Stars and Stripes. Notwithstanding the above, the following flags shall not be prohibited by this chapter:
A. Number Of Flag Poles:
1. All commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential properties shall be permitted two (2) flag poles.
2. All residential properties shall be permitted one flag pole.
B. Commercial Flags:
1. In commercial districts, all properties shall be permitted to display no more than thirty (30) square feet of commercial flag area on any one flag
pole.
2. In residential districts, all properties shall be permitted to display no more than fifteen (15) square feet of commercial flag area on any one flag
pole.
3. Flag poles shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. Minimum setback from property line shall be the height of the flagpole.
C. Noncommercial Flags:
1. In commercial districts, all properties shall be permitted to display no more than sixty (60) square feet of non-commercial flag area on any one
flag pole.
2. In residential districts, all properties shall be permitted to display no more than fifteen (15) square feet of non-commercial flag area on any one
flag pole.
3. Flag poles shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. Minimum setback from property line shall be the height of the flagpole.
D. Flag Poles: Flags shall be displayed on flagpoles only. Flags displayed on light poles, utility poles, etc., except for City sponsored events, shall be
prohibited. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-16: AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR TO CLASSIFY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 417/439
The Community Development Director has the authority to classify a proposed sign as incompatible with the already existing environment. (Ord. 1053,
2-8-2018)
11-12-17: SIGN AREA FORMULA:
The area of a sign is determined by the Community Development Director using actual dimensions where practical, or approximate dimensions when
irregularity of a sign shape warrants. The sign area shall be the sum of the area of all rectangles or squares that enclose the extreme points or edges
of all copy, logos, and symbols of said sign. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-18: GROUND MOUNTED SIGN REGULATIONS TABLE:
GROUND MOUNTED SIGN REGULATIONS TABLE
Setback
(Feet)
Height
(Feet)
Area
(Square Feet)
5 5 25
6 6 30
7 7 35
8 8 40
9 9 45
10 10 50
11 11 55
12 12 60
13 13 65
14 14 70
15 15 75
(Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-19: RESIDENTIAL TEMPORARY SIGNS:
The purpose of this section is to allow temporary signage for residential land uses. Signs in this section shall be permitted in all residential districts.
Residential properties shall not display more than six (6) square feet of temporary sign area. Temporary signs shall be displayed for no more than
ninety (90) days. Temporary signs must be separated by at least ten feet (10') in distance. The maximum height of any residential temporary sign shall
be six feet (6'). Under no circumstances shall any residential temporary sign be illuminated. The minimum setback of residential temporary signs shall
be five feet (5') from property line. Under no circumstances shall any residential temporary sign be located on public property. During the period of time
that a property is actively listed for sale, or for lease, an additional six (6) square feet of sign area shall be permitted for display. The following signs are
allowed:
A. Yard signs.
B. Detached rigid signs.
C. Banners, detached or attached. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-20: COMMERCIAL TEMPORARY SIGNS:
The purpose of this section is to allow temporary signage for commercial or industrial land uses. Signs in this section shall be permitted in all
commercial districts and require a temporary sign permit. Such signs shall be limited to six (6) periods per year for any one business or tenant space.
Each commercial temporary sign event shall last for a period of not more than fourteen (14) days. In conjunction with a temporary site plan, the City
Council may permit the display of temporary signs for a greater period of time. Commercial properties shall not display more than thirty five (35)
square feet of temporary sign area during the permitted period. Temporary signs must be separated by at least ten feet (10') in distance. The maximum
height of any commercial temporary sign shall be six feet (6'). Under no circumstances shall any commercial temporary sign be illuminated. The
minimum setback of a commercial temporary sign shall be five feet (5') from property line. Under no circumstances shall any temporary sign be located
on public property. During the period of time that a property is actively listed for sale, or for lease, an additional thirty five (35) square feet of sign area
shall be permitted. The following signs are allowed:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 418/439
A. Yard signs;
B. Detached rigid signs;
C. Banners, detached or attached;
D. Air animated displays, limited to eight feet (8') in height;
E. A-frame style signs;
F. Bag signs: Such signs shall be permitted for businesses wishing to cover existing signage until the replacement sign is manufactured. Bag signs
shall be made of a canvas or cloth material and may be displayed for a period no longer than forty five (45) days. Under special circumstances, the
Community Development Director may authorize to extend this period by an additional thirty (30) days. The square footage of all bag signs shall
not exceed the area necessary to cover the existing sign. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-21: SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to paint, print, or in any way affix any picture, bill, sign, signboard, poster or advertising material on any post, utility pole,
fire escape, hydrant, curb, sidewalk, tree, lamppost or other structure of any kind on, or as to overhang or protrude over any property owned by the
City or any easement of the City. No sign shall be located on or allowed to extend over public property except by permission of the City Council. The
Community Development Director is hereby authorized and empowered to remove any such sign at the expense of the parties responsible for erection
of such signs. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-22: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEES; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Permit Required; Payment Of Fee: It is unlawful for any person to erect, alter or relocate within the City any sign without first obtaining a permit from
the Community Development Department and paying the fee required herein unless provided elsewhere. The Community Development Director
may require persons failing to hold such permit to pay double the permit fee. No person shall erect, construct, or maintain any sign upon any
property or building without the consent of the owner or person entitled to possession of the property or building. Application for permits shall be
made upon forms provided by the Community Development Department.
B. Permit Fees: Every applicant before being granted a permit hereunder shall pay to the City a permit fee in an amount determined by resolution of
the City Council from time to time.
C. Signs Not Needing Permit: The following signs do not require a permit:
1. Residential temporary signs.
2. Traffic or other Municipal signs, public facility signs, civic or service organizations, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger, and such
temporary, emergency and nonadvertising signs as may be approved by City Council.
3. Non-commercial signs.
4. Flag poles and flags.
5. Private ground mounted traffic control signs.
6. Window signs. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-23: INSPECTIONS:
All construction work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official. All such construction or work, including
footings and foundations (structural and location), electrical connections, etc., shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection until approved.
Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code. Inspections presuming to
give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain
accessible and exposed for inspection purposes and to schedule and be present for the required inspections. Neither the building official nor the City
shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal of any material required to allow inspection. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-24: MAINTENANCE:
All signs and parts thereof, including, but not limited to, electrical wiring and fixtures, supports, faces, lighting, and braces, shall be kept in good repair
at all times, and shall be kept neatly painted or otherwise treated to prevent rust and similar unsightly deterioration and weathering. The Community
Development Director, after thirty (30) days' written notice to the sign owner, may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance
with the provisions of this section and the cost assessed against the property where said sign is located. However, in the case a sign structure
becomes a safety hazard as defined in the City Building Code, the building official shall require owner of said sign structure to immediately abate the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 419/439
safety hazard as provided in the City Building Code. The Community Development Director may cause to be inspected, from time to time as he deems
necessary, any sign regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is secure, and whether it is in need of removal or
repair to be in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-25: COMMERCIAL ABANDONED SIGNS:
Any commercial abandoned sign now or hereafter existing shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of
the building or land upon which the sign may be found within thirty (30) days after written notification from the Community Development Director and,
upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the Community Development Director is hereby authorized to cause
removal of such sign, and any expense thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building or structure to which the sign is attached. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-
2018)
11-12-26: NON-COMMERCIAL TEMPORARY SIGNS:
In addition to any permitted commercial sign, all properties shall be granted a maximum of thirty five (35) square feet of sign area for the display of
non-commercial temporary signage. The minimum setback of a non-commercial temporary sign shall be five feet (5') from property line. The maximum
height of any non-commercial temporary sign shall be six feet (6'). Under no circumstances shall any non-commercial temporary sign be illuminated or
be located on public property. Non-commercial temporary signs shall be displayed for no more than ninety (90) days. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-27: SUBSTITUTION:
The owner of any sign which is otherwise permitted under this chapter may substitute non-commercial copy in lieu of any other commercial copy. The
purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial
message over any other commercial message. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary. This provision does
not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
11-12-28: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter or any regulation contained herein is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is the
intent of the City of Clive that said portion or regulation is to be deemed severed from this chapter and should in no way affect or diminish the validity
of the remainder of this title or any other sign regulation set forth herein. (Ord. 1053, 2-8-2018)
Chapter 13
OFF STREET PARKING AND CIRCULATION
11-13-1: TITLE:
This chapter, providing for the administration and enforcement of parking regulations, shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the CITY OF
CLIVE PARKING AND CIRCULATION REQUIREMENTS. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-13-2: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens, prevent traffic congestion and hazards, provide for
proper traffic safety by preserving the public thoroughfares for the unimpaired movement of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic, provide for
attractive, secure, properly lighted, and well screened off street parking facilities, assure the mobility and access of emergency vehicles, provide for
appropriately designed parking facilities in proportion to the needs generated by the varying types of land use, and minimize the negative visual
impacts of large expanses of parking by reducing glare from parking lots through open space and landscaping around the parking areas. (Ord. 876, 1-
17-2008)
11-13-3: JURISDICTION:
The lawful use of parking facilities existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter (January 17, 2008) may be continued although such use may
not conform to the regulations herein. For those parking facilities permitted before the adoption of these regulations, such facilities shall be classified
as "permitted nonconforming" facilities. No permit shall be issued for any lot, tenant, or development after the effective date hereof and not in
substantial conformity with the provisions of these regulations. Nor shall any parking facility, except as herein specified, be substantially improved,
converted, enlarged, or otherwise altered without conforming to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-13-4: APPLICABILITY:
In all districts, in connection with every industrial, commercial, business, recreational, or dwelling use, and all other uses, space for off street parking
and storage of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with all of the following regulations except as elsewhere provided herein. (Ord. 876, 1-17-
2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 420/439
11-13-5: OFF STREET PARKING REGULATIONS:
All of the following standards shall apply to all off street parking:
A. Spaces Required: No structure or use shall be permitted or constructed unless off street parking spaces are provided in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Parking Area Arrangement And Markings: All parking areas shall be so arranged and marked so as to provide for orderly and safe loading or
unloading, parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles.
C. Fractional Spaces: Fractional space requirements shall be rounded up to the next whole space.
D. Uses With Differing Business Hours: The number of required parking spaces for uses with differing business hours that share a parking lot may be
reduced by twenty five percent (25%) of the total required for each use if it is determined by the community development director that such
reduction will not have a negative impact on the congestion or safety of the development. Special regulations for town center (TC) district: All town
center district parking requirements are subject to section 10-8-7 of this title.
E. Principal Building Enlargement: When any principal building is enlarged, increased in capacity, or when a change in use creates an increase in the
amount of off street parking space required, additional off street parking spaces shall be required, in conformity with this chapter.
F. Mixed Use Building: For a building where a single tenant has multiple uses, parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the parking
requirements of each use. An example of a mixed use building is one containing a combination of both office and manufacturing uses. The area
dedicated to each use can be calculated at its individual requirement, at the discretion of the community development director. The tenant may
need to demonstrate that the parking can meet the more restrictive standard if the uses are changed. Special regulations for town center (TC)
district: All town center district parking requirements are subject to section 10-8-7 of this title.
G. Flexible Space Buildings: Buildings developed as "flexible space" shall be designed to accommodate six (6) spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross building area. In the case that a big box retailer is a tenant within a "flexible space" building, the minimum parking
requirements shall be provided in accordance with the parking requirements of each use. "Big box retailers" shall be defined as a single tenant user
with a minimum square footage of twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet in gross floor area.
H. Outdoor Patron Use Or Assembly Areas: Outdoor patron use areas or areas used for assembly shall be included in the gross floor area (GFA) for
calculating parking requirements. Outdoor dining or drinking areas shall be included in the GFA for bars, restaurants, and taverns when calculating
parking requirements.
I. Parking Spaces Displaced By Building Expansion: Any required parking spaces displaced by building expansion shall be provided elsewhere on the
site. No required off street parking facility shall be reduced in capacity below the minimum requirements of this chapter.
J. Use Of Parking Spaces Restricted: Required parking spaces shall be used only for parking of vehicles for property owners, guests, renters, patrons
or employees of the site. Parking spaces shall not be used for the commercial sale, display, rental or repair of other motor vehicles, unless that is
the principal use of the site.
K. Long Term Storage Prohibited: No outdoor parking spaces or drives shall be used as long term storage for the following, including, but not limited
to, vehicles, supplies, construction materials, portable sheds. "Long term" in this case shall be defined as a period of time greater than ten (10)
days.
L. Parking Areas For Storage Or Display Of Vehicles:
1. All parking of vehicles, including automobiles, vans, campers, trucks, trailers, tractors, recreational vehicles, boats, construction equipment and
any other mobile vehicle equipped for street and highway travel shall occur on permanent impervious surface (concrete or asphalt) areas and on
private property only, except for the special limited uses in this subsection. Those commercial uses associated with the leasing and or selling of
vehicles shall be permitted to temporarily display vehicles on nonpaved surfaces at a rate of one vehicle per one hundred (100) linear feet of
street frontage to a maximum of seven (7) vehicles per street frontage.
2. A minimum setback of ten feet (10') from the property line shall be required. No vehicle shall be located within a one hundred foot (100') vision
clearance triangle at any public street intersection (or private street/driveway with any public street intersection). At no time shall city ROW
between the property line and the street be used for the parking or display of vehicles.
M. Maneuvering And Circulation: Off street parking facilities shall accommodate the maneuvering and circulation of all vehicles on site, so as not to
impair the movement of vehicles on public streets. Except for single-family and attached dwellings, there shall be no backing of vehicles from an off
street parking facility into the public street.
N. Striping: All parking spaces, except parking spaces for single-family and attached dwellings, shall be striped in accordance with approved site plan.
The striping shall be maintained in a clear and visible manner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 421/439
O. Curbs And Gutters: All off street parking areas and associated driveways, access roadways and frontage roads, except driveways for single-family
attached and detached residences, shall be constructed with permanent, PCC curb and gutter of at least six inches (6") high and twenty four inches
(24") wide or of alternate height and width approved by the city. Prefabricated portable curb or wheel stops shall not be considered an acceptable
alternative, unless otherwise approved by the city council during review of a development request.
P. Construction And Maintenance: All parking facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained with security as a priority to protect the safety of
the users. All required parking facilities shall be permanently maintained, free of litter and debris, potholes, broken curb, etc.
Q. Auto Repair Shops: For auto repair, car wash, oil change shops or other similar uses, lift racks shall not be considered as a required parking space.
R. Exceptions: Notwithstanding anything else contained herein, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following uses:
1. Temporary parking areas that have been approved by the city.
2. Parking areas and access roadways located within a public park or recreational area. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-13-6: HANDICAPPED PARKING REGULATIONS:
With respect to handicapped parking, all of the following shall apply:
A. The owner, contractor, and developer shall comply with all federal, state and local laws regarding handicapped parking including, but not limited to,
Iowa Code chapter 321L and the Americans with disabilities act.
B. Handicapped parking spaces required by federal, state and local laws shall count toward meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 876, 1-17-
2008)
11-13-7: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Driveways: With respect to driveways, all of the following shall apply:
1. There shall be provided an access drive not less than ten feet (10') in width in the case of a single-family and attached dwelling.
2. Except for single-family or attached dwellings, the minimum width of a one-way driveway shall be sixteen feet (16'). The minimum width of a twoway
driveway shall be twenty four feet (24').
3. For those commercial uses that require the need for a drive-through lane, commonly associated with banks, fast food restaurants and dry
cleaners, the minimum drive-through lane width shall be twelve feet (12'). In the case that a drive-through lane is in combination with a drive-by
lane, the minimum lane width shall be twenty four feet (24').
B. Parking Spaces: With respect to parking spaces, all of the following shall apply:
1. A parking space reserved for the parking of vehicles shall have a dimension of not less than ten feet (10') in stall width and nineteen feet (19') in
length for ninety degree (90o) parking without front end overhang.
2. Any parking space proposed at any angle other than specified above shall have a length and depth sufficient to allow a ten foot by nineteen foot
(10' x 19') rectangle parking area.
3. Any parking space located parallel to a wall or other solid barrier shall be widened by an additional two feet (2').
4. When the front of a parking space abuts a sidewalk, the minimum width of the sidewalk shall be six feet (6'). When the front of a parking space
abuts open space within the perimeter of the parking lot, the minimum width of the open space shall be three feet (3').
5. When the front of a parking space provides space as defined in subsection B4 of this section, the stall length may be decreased two feet (2').
6. The dimensions of an automobile parking space may be reduced to not less than nine feet by nineteen feet (9' x 19'), provided all of the following
conditions are satisfied:
a. The parking spaces are intended for the use of employees working in, or visitors to, an office building. An "office building" means a building
containing business and professional offices which do not provide more than limited direct retail sales or services to the visiting public, such as
the following: law, engineering, architecture, real estate, insurance, accounting, bookkeeping, finance, stock brokerage, management,
research, design, development, marketing, consulting, and uses of a like or similar nature.
b. The "office building" at which the parking spaces are located shall have at least ten (10) full time employees who work at said building.
c. The total land area devoted to open space and landscaping shall be not less than the sum of: 1) any minimum requirement under the
applicable zoning regulation or twenty five percent (25%) of the gross land area included in the site, whichever is greater; plus 2) twenty nine
(29) additional square feet per each nine foot by nineteen foot (9' x 19') car space.
C. Parking Lot Setbacks: With respect to parking lot setbacks, all of the following shall apply:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 422/439
1. No part of any parking space in C-1, C-2, M-1, or M-2 shall be closer than ten feet (10') to any established public street right of way or public
street easement. The minimum side and rear yard setback of parking facilities in C-1, C-2, M-1 or M-2 shall be five feet (5').
2. No part of any parking space in C-3, C-4 or C-5 shall be closer than fifteen feet (15') to any established public street right of way or public street
easement. The minimum side and rear yard setback of parking facilities in C-3, C-4 or C-5 shall be five feet (5'). In the case that the parking
facility is a part of a planned office development or planned shopping center, located within a C-3 or C-4 district, no parking lot setbacks shall be
required internal to the development.
3. In case the parking lot is adjacent to an R district, it shall be set back at least fifteen feet (15') from the R district boundary and shall be effectively
screened with plantings.
4. Driveways for individual single-family residences shall not be located closer than two feet (2') from an adjoining residential lot line, unless such
driveway is jointly used by adjoining property owners and a joint easement has been recorded with the county recorder.
5. Off street parking areas may be established in any R district that immediately adjoins a C or M district, or is directly across an alley from a C or M
district provided that:
a. Such parking shall be accessory to and for use of one or more permitted uses in the adjoining C or M district and shall not include trucks.
b. Such parking areas shall not extend more than one hundred feet (100') from the boundary of the less restricted district. In no case shall said
areas extend closer than thirty feet (30') to the street right of way line. The yard between said parking areas and the adjoining streets shall be
screen planted and landscaped as provided in subsection C5c of this section.
c. A thirty foot (30') buffer shall be maintained between said parking areas and adjoining lots in residential districts. Said buffer shall be consistent
with the requirements set forth in this chapter. A masonry wall or other suitable fence may be substituted for the wood fence.
d. All entrances and exits for said parking areas shall be from said adjoining alley or C or M district.
e. No such parking area shall be located in any required front yard in an R district or in front of the immediately adjoining permitted principal
structures. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-13-8: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED:
In case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use that is mentioned and to
which said use is similar shall apply, as determined by the community development director. All following requirements listed are the minimum that
must be met:
A. Development Applications: Development applications, which exceed the minimum requirements up to twenty five percent (25%), shall be required
to provide additional open space and landscaping within the site, equal to or greater than the area of parking in excess of the minimum required.
For purposes of this chapter, a parking stall shall be calculated as two hundred ninety (290) square feet. This additional open space shall be in
addition to the minimum open space required for the site. (Ord. 970, 11-1-2012)
B. Request For Additional Parking: In the case of a request to exceed the minimum parking requirements by more than twenty five percent (25%), the
city council may approve or conditionally approve the additional parking subject to demonstration of need. In determining if the proposed parking is
needed, the city council may request a market analysis, estimated employee count, floor plans or other similar materials justifying the need. In no
case shall the additional parking be approved without providing additional open space within the site, equal to or greater than the area of parking in
excess of the minimum required. This additional open space shall be in addition to the minimum open space required for the site. Additionally, the
city council may conditionally approve the additional parking subject to a phased construction schedule, creative surfacing for overflow parking
areas or additional open space and/or landscaping.
PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Use Parking Spaces Required
Animal boarding/kennels 3.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Assisted living centers 1 space per 2 dwelling units, plus 1 per staff
Automotive repair stations 3 spaces per service bay; 1 space per service vehicle; 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
nonservice area
Automotive sales 1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per 5,000 square feet of developed area
Banks 3.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Barber, beauty shops 2 spaces per chair or beautician station
Bowling centers 3 spaces per lane; 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area for associated eating and
drinking places
Car wash, drive-through oil change 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet; queuing capacity equal to 2 per service capacity
Car washes - self-service 5 spaces per wash bay, plus 2 queuing spaces per bay
Childcare center 1 space per 6 students, 5 spaces minimum; 1 space per each van or bus, plus 1 queue
space per 6 students
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 423/439
Commercial entertainment 1 space per 1,000 square feet of outdoor area and building combined
Consumer fireworks sales 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Convenience stores 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Dance and assembly halls, theaters, events
centers, auditoriums and gymnasiums
1 space per 4 fixed seats. In the case of no fixed seats, 20 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Delicatessen/donut shop/coffee bar 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Display fireworks sales 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, or 1 space per 2 employees, whichever is
greater
Drinking establishments/lounge 20 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Drive-through lane 5 queuing spaces from the order board for food related uses
3 queuing spaces from window for all other nonfood related uses
Driving ranges 2 per tee area; additional spaces as required for accessory uses
Elementary and junior high schools 1 space per 2 employees, plus auditoriums and gymnasiums - 1 space per 4 seats
Fitness centers/health clubs 2.25 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Funeral homes/mortuary 1 space per 4 fixed seats. In cases of no fixed seats, 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
assembly area
Furniture, carpet/appliance retail 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Golf courses 6 spaces per hole; additional spaces as required for accessory uses
Grocery stores 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Hotels and motels 1 space per guestroom; additional spaces as required by accessory services
Independent living facilities 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1 visitor space per 5 dwelling units
Industrial or manufacturing facility 1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Medical office/clinic 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Multi-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit; 1 visitor space per 5 dwelling units
Outdoor service area (refer to section 11-4-9 of
this title for additional requirements):
0 - 300 square feet 0 spaces
301 square feet and up 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Professional/business office 3.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Religious organizations 1 space per 4 fixed seats; in cases where an auditorium is not involved, 10 per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area
Restaurant - fast food 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Restaurant - sit down, non-fast food 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Retail, general commercial 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Secondary schools, colleges and universities,
and vocational schools
1 space per classroom; 1 space per 4 student seats at capacity
Auditoriums and gymnasiums, 1 space per 4 seats
Self-storage and miniwarehousing 1 space per 20,000 square feet gross floor area; 1 space per 50,000 square feet of vehicle or
boat storage spaces; office space equal to office space requirement
Single-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Townhomes 2 spaces per dwelling unit; 1 visitor space per 5 dwelling units
Warehousing 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space per 2 employees, whichever is
greater
(Ord. 1037, 5-25-2017)
Chapter 14
LANDSCAPE AND OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
11-14-1: TITLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 424/439
This chapter, providing for the administration and enforcement of landscaping regulations, shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
LANDSCAPING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF CLIVE, IOWA. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-14-2: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the preservation, installation, and maintenance of landscape plantings and
landscaped open space in residential, commercial and manufacturing districts, to utilize landscaping and landscaping open space as an effective
means of energy conservation, to preserve open space, to improve property values, to maintain aesthetic quality of the city, thereby promoting the
health and general welfare of the city. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-14-3: LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS:
All of the following standards shall apply to all required landscape plantings:
A. Interference With Site Drainage: Landscape plantings shall not be placed where they interfere with site drainage.
B. Plantings Shown On Approved Site Plan: Landscape plantings shall not be placed in any public utility easement unless specifically permitted on the
approved site plan.
C. Interference With Public Utilities: Plantings shall not be placed where they may interfere with maintenance of sanitary and storm structures, fire
hydrants, or water valves, or any other public utility.
D. Approved Plantings: Landscape planting shall not be placed in any public street right of way unless previously approved by the city council.
E. Vision Clearance Triangle: Vision clearance triangle shall be maintained at all times.
F. Restoration With Sod: All disturbed land shall be restored with sod, unless specifically approved otherwise. In residential districts or uses, the entire
front yard, side yard, and rear yard to the building setback line shall be sodded. In all cases, the adjacent ROW shall be sodded.
G. Survey Of Larger Trees: A survey of trees larger than three inch (3") caliper in diameter is required for sites with such existing trees. The tree
inventory shall include species, size and a location map. Such plan shall be included in the initial development submittal.
H. Saving Or Replacing Larger Trees: All existing trees larger than three inch (3") caliper shall be saved. In the case a tree or trees cannot be saved,
trees shall be replaced. If it is impractical to replace such trees with an equal size, then several smaller sized plantings, totaling, in aggregate, the
size of the removed landscaping, shall be required. The city may require that some of the landscaping be planted on public property if it is
impractical to place all plantings on that particular site or plat. Replacement trees shall be similar to those included in the original tree inventory.
I. Existing Landscaping Identified And Protected: All existing landscaping which is not to be removed pursuant to the grading, landscape or site plan,
shall be clearly identified and, prior to issuance of a grading permit, shall be protected by fencing located around the dripline of the tree, maximizing
the protection of the root zone area. The building official may waive this requirement if the landscaping to be saved is not located in the immediate
area where construction is to occur.
J. Preservation Of Existing Landscaping: Whenever practical, existing landscaping shall be preserved and incorporated into the overall design and
layout of the site.
K. Quantity Of Trees Required: In sites where landscaping existed and was retained during development, the minimum quantity of trees required may
be reduced by the total amount of caliper saved in the case of a deciduous tree or the total height in the case of an evergreen tree. No more than
fifty percent (50%) of required plants may be waived in this manner. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-14-4: DESIGN STANDARDS:
The provisions below represent the minimum standards required for compliance of this chapter. These regulations are not intended to suppress
creative design concepts or the use of variety in the landscape plan.
A. Minimum Size: The minimum size for required plantings, other than those in required buffers, shall be as follows:
1. Deciduous overstory trees shall be a minimum two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper.
2. Evergreen overstory trees shall be a minimum height of six feet (6').
3. Ornamental trees shall be a minimum one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper in size.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 425/439
B. Minimum Quantity: The minimum number of plantings per site shall be as follows:
1. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all required trees shall be overstory shade trees.
2. For all uses except single-family and duplex family residential dwellings, a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of all required trees shall be
evergreen trees.
PLANTING REQUIREMENTS
R-1, R-2, R-4, R-5 R-3, Commercial, Manufacturing
Planting requirement 2 trees per dwelling unit 1.5 trees per 1,000 square feet of required open space
3. Values expressed in the table above are in addition to plantings required in buffer.
4. Based upon recommendation by planning and zoning commission and approval by city council, the evergreen requirement may be modified,
substituting a different species of trees.
C. Off Street Parking Areas: All of the following requirements shall apply to off street parking areas as follows:
1. All rows of parking spaces shall be provided a terminal landscaped island, with a minimum width of ten feet (10'), to protect parked vehicles,
provide visibility, confine moving traffic to driveways, and provide space for landscaping.
2. There shall be provided within each row of parking spaces, landscaped islands, with a minimum width of ten feet (10'), located so as to prevent
more than fifteen (15) vehicles from being parked side by side in an abutting configuration.
3. All landscaped islands required in subsection C2 of this section shall be planted with at least one ornamental or one deciduous overstory tree. A
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the landscaped islands shall be provided with a deciduous overstory tree. The entire landscaped island area
shall be covered with plant materials, lawn or mulches.
4. The setback between the parking area and the public right of way shall be landscaped with a minimum of one overstory deciduous tree per forty
(40) linear feet of frontage. The frontage calculation shall be exclusive of the driveways. The plantings may be planted individually or in clusters.
This requirement shall be included in the minimum number of trees required for the site and is not in addition to.
D. Open Space Requirements:
1. It is recognized that the extensive use and excessive congestion of land may become hazardous to the general health and welfare of the
community. Therefore, the intent of this chapter shall be to require not less than that open space which is necessary to preserve the basic
qualities and beauty of nature. Open space shall be provided for each site in each district in accordance with the table below. Values are in
percentage of total site:
OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
(Values In Percent)
R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 M-1 M-2
25 15 15 25 25 25 15 15
2. The calculation of required open space shall be the entire limits of the lot, exclusive of the required buffer areas. The calculation shall not include
sidewalks or patios in the minimum required open space.
E. Maintenance Of Open Space: All open space and common areas shall be under single management or control, and shall be maintained and
preserved in accordance with the site plan requirements.
F. Buffers: It is recognized that the transition from one district to another district of contrasting and conflicting uses is across a line in theory, not in
existence. Therefore, it is the intent of this chapter to require the actual provision of a physical barrier so as to reduce possible harmful or
detrimental influence one zoning district's use may have to an abutting and contrasting or conflicting zoning district's use. The following are
conditions for requiring a buffer:
1. Any lot in any R or M district platted after the effective date hereof, having both its front and rear lines abutting a public thoroughfare (a double
frontage lot) shall require a thirty foot (30') buffer from the thoroughfare abutting its rear lot line.
2. Buffers shall be provided in accordance with the following table. Values are in feet:
BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
(Values In Feet)
R-1, R-2, R-5 Districts
R-3
R-4
C Districts
M Districts
R-1, R-2, R-5 districts -- 30 30 50 65
R-3 30 -- 30 50 65
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 426/439
R-4 30 30 -- 50 65
C districts 50 50 50 -- 30
M districts 65 65 65 30 --
3. The more intense use shall provide the buffer required above. In an instance where adjacent property is down zoned, thereby requiring
additional buffer, the newly zoned property shall provide the additional required buffer.
G. Buffer Requirements: The following shall be the minimum requirement. All buffers shall provide the plantings as prescribed below.
MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS - BUFFERS
Buffer Material Requirements (Per 30 Linear Feet Of Buffer)
30 feet 1 overstory 2 evergreen 1 ornamental
50 feet 1 overstory 3 evergreen 2 ornamental
65 feet 2 overstory 4 evergreen 2 ornamental
1. Deciduous overstory trees shall be a minimum two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper and evergreen overstory trees shall be a minimum height of
six feet (6'). Ornamental trees shall be a minimum one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper in size. Whenever practical, existing trees and shrubs
should be preserved and incorporated into the overall design of the buffer and can be included to meet the total number of required trees. A
continuous earthen berm, minimum of three feet (3') in height, shall be provided in addition to the required plantings.
2. In addition to the required permanent landscape buffer, the city council may require a fence or a heavily landscaped earth berm to provide
additional screening. Such fence shall be constructed of substantial support elements, including, but not limited to, brick, poured concrete, and
stone. Steel posts shall not be considered appropriate.
3. Required yards shall be measured from the lot lines as prescribed in this title. Buffer may be included in yards required by this title. No building,
parking, or structures shall be permitted within any buffer, unless authorized by the city council.
4. In a residential subdivision, the developer of the subdivision shall be required to install the buffer improvements as required by this section. The
owner of the adjacent private property shall maintain the buffer in perpetuity.
5. In a situation that has landscape requirements other than those stated in the buffering requirements, the buffer requirements shall be in addition
to any other required landscaping.
6. The need to establish the buffer as an easement shall be reviewed and identified during the development review process. Easements shall
generally be required between different zoning districts and for buffering requirements of residential districts. It shall be assumed that the buffer
will be established by an easement unless noted otherwise during the development review process and approved by the city council. Buffer
easements shall be recorded with the county at the time of establishment, prior to, or concurrent with the recording of a final plat or the final
approval of a site plan.
7. For single-family residential subdivisions, the landscape buffer shall be submitted for review and approval as a public improvement, at the same
time as the preliminary plat. For any type of development that requires a site plan review, the buffer plans shall be submitted as a part of the site
plan submittal.
H. Reduction In Required Buffer: The city council may, at its discretion, reduce the required buffer under the following conditions:
1. In those areas where the boundary line abuts permanent natural features which function as a buffer, including, but not limited to, ponds, severe
grades, or mature woodlands, requirements for a buffer area for that portion of the boundary may be reduced by the city council in the
proportions that the permanent natural features fulfill the buffer requirements.
2. In those areas where the property abuts an undeveloped property that is shown on the adopted land use plan as the same or a more intensive
use.
3. The abutting property has provided a portion or the entire required buffer.
4. On lots that can present evidence that the above buffer provisions would render the property unbuildable, the city council may grant a waiver of
the buffer requirements and permit a fence of not less than six feet (6') in height. Provisions for landscaping to soften the visual appearance of
the fence and provide additional buffering may be required and will be reviewed on a case by case basis.
5. In those areas that abut a public park, the buffer area for that portion of the boundary may be reduced to fifty percent (50%) of the requirement.
(Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-14-5: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Landscaping as approved by a site plan shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at all times.
Landscaping shall be maintained to minimize property damage and public safety hazards, including the removal/replacement of dead or decaying
plant material, removal of low hanging branches and those obstructing street lighting and maintenance of sight distance standards as set forth
herein. Landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with the following standards:
1. Landscaping shall be kept visibly free of insects and disease.
2. Areas originally mulched shall be kept free from weeds and other volunteer plants.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 427/439
3. Irrigation systems shall be maintained so as to eliminate water loss due to damaged, missing, or improperly operating sprinkler heads, emitters,
piping and valves. Irrigation shall not spray or otherwise allow water to go into roads or other public pathways.
B. In the event a tree, shrub, or other plant causes damage to streets, sidewalks, or other public improvements, the offending plant shall be removed
and replaced.
C. All dead or diseased landscape plantings shall be replaced with equivalent material in a timely fashion, or within thirty (30) days following notice
from the community development director.
D. If any landscaping is removed in violation of an approved site plan or plat, the property owner shall plant three (3) times such amount, of equal
quality and size, on such site or plat. If it is impractical to replace such landscaping with an equal size, then several smaller sized plantings,
totaling, in aggregate, the size of the improperly removed landscaping, shall be required. The city may require that some of the landscaping be
planted on public property if it is impractical to place all plantings on that particular site or plat. Failure to maintain landscaping in accordance with
approved site plan shall constitute a violation of the approved site plan. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
Chapter 15
SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
11-15-1: TITLE:
This chapter, providing for the administration and enforcement of site plans, shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SITE PLAN
ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF CLIVE, IOWA. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-15-2: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards to guide the appropriate development of land, to ensure that provisions are made for
adequate traffic safety, emergency access, water supply, sewage disposal, management of stormwater, erosion and sedimentation, to minimize the
adverse affects on adjacent property values, to maintain aesthetic quality of the city, thereby promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the
city. Site plan review and approval shall be required for any permitted, accessory, or conditional uses, other than single-family and duplex family
residential dwellings, in any zoning district. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-15-3: JURISDICTION:
The lawful use of property in which a site plan has been approved at the time of enactment of this chapter may be continued although such use may
not conform to the regulations herein. For those properties approved before the adoption of these regulations, such property shall be classified as
"permitted nonconforming". No permit shall be issued for any site development after the effective date hereof and not in substantial conformity with the
provisions of this title. Nor shall any development requiring an approved site plan, except as herein specified, be substantially improved, converted,
enlarged, or otherwise altered without conforming to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-15-4: PROCEDURES:
A. Preapplication: Prior to the submission of a site plan application, it is recommended that a preapplication review meeting be scheduled with the
community development director. The purpose of the preapplication review meeting is to begin identifying issues, communicate development
requirements, and point out possible future difficulties. This evaluation is preliminary in nature and shall not be considered an intention to approve
or deny any particular project and is not intended to be inclusive of the comments but only to identify major areas of concern. The city reserves the
right to supplement additional comments that may be generated during the formal review of the application.
B. Application Submission:
1. At the time of submission, the applicant shall provide the following items:
a. Application form, signed by property owner.
b. Proof of ownership such as deed, purchase agreement, owner consent.
c. Payment of required fees.
d. Six (6) folded copies of each plan set.
2. If all required submittal items are not provided, the application will be deemed invalid and such submittal will be returned to the applicant as
incomplete. The city will retain no record of the submittal if returned to the applicant.
C. Waive Or Reduce Requirements: The community development director may find that unusual characteristics of an application make it unnecessary
for the applicant to submit all of the information for an application required by this title. In such cases, the community development director may
waive or reduce the requirements if it is also found that the absence of such information will not inhibit the city's ability to evaluate the compliance
of the proposed site development with the standards of this title and any other requirements of this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 428/439
D. Review By City Officials: The community development director shall immediately refer a copy of the site plan to the public works director, fire chief,
parks and recreation director, and city engineer. Each department shall review said site plan as to its compliance with the ordinances of the city, its
effect upon public utilities, streets, property, and safety, and submit his findings as soon as possible to the community development director. The
community development director shall forward the site plan and city staff report to the planning and zoning commission.
E. Notification Signs: The city will post at least one notification sign for which a request has been made. Notification signs shall be posted once the
agenda has been set for the planning and zoning commission meeting and shall remain until one day after the city council review.
F. Review And Recommendation Of Commission: The planning and zoning commission shall, after receiving the site plan and city staff report, review
the site plan for conformity with the regulations and design standards contained herein, and may confer with developer on changes deemed
advisable in such site plan. The planning and zoning commission shall forward its recommendation either for approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval of the site plan to the city council.
G. Public Hearing: The chairperson of the planning and zoning may, solely as a matter of discretion, by written order, fix a date, time and place for a
public hearing to be held by the planning and zoning commission on the site plan of the proposed development and prescribe the notice thereof
and to whom such notice shall be given. If the planning and zoning commission shall hold such hearing at such date, time and place, and at such
hearing all affected property owners shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
H. Council Decision: The city council shall, upon receipt of the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission, either approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the site plan of the proposed development.
I. Filing Of Approved Site Plan: Upon final action by the city council on any site plan, five (5) copies consistent with the city council's approval shall be
provided and stamped approved by the city clerk and filed with the community development director. One copy of the approved site plan shall be
returned to the applicant. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-15-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Site Plan Required: A site plan, consistent with the requirements as outlined in the Clive development standards manual, shall be required for all
commercial, manufacturing, and nonsingle and duplex family dwellings in residential zoning districts when new construction, expansion of existing
structures, or major modification of existing structures is proposed.
B. Certificate Of Zoning Compliance: A certificate of zoning compliance shall be obtained prior to issuance of any building permit or occupancy of an
existing building. In the event a certificate of zoning compliance is denied, a variance may be requested from the board of adjustment. Such
variance request shall follow the same procedure as outlined in chapter 3 of this title. A certificate of zoning compliance shall include, but is not
limited to:
1. Name and address of proposed business.
2. Name and address of building owner.
3. Zoning classification.
4. Legal description.
5. Use or parking restrictions.
6. Proposed use of business.
7. Number of parking stalls used, and required.
C. Building Permit Issuance: No building permit for any structure or development within any district within which a site plan is required shall be issued
until said site plan has been approved by the city council and stamped approved by the city clerk.
D. Expiration Of Approvals: All site plan approvals shall expire and terminate ninety (90) days after the date of such approval unless a building permit
has been issued for the construction provided for in the site plan.
E. Extension Of Time: Except as provided below, if the owner or developer of property for which a site plan has been approved, determines that an
extension of time is necessary in the development schedule, or that a significant modification of the site plan would provide for a more appropriate
or more practical development of the site, the owner or developer may apply for an amendment of the site plan. Any such modifications or
development schedule extensions shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city council.
F. Minor Modifications: In the case of minor modifications of the site plan or development schedule, the community development director may give
approval if the decision does not modify the overall theme of the development, affect public safety, or result in the reduction of any minimum
standard as provided in this zoning ordinance. Minor modifications shall include the following:
1. Lighting location and fixture type.
2. Location, height, and style of fences and walls.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 429/439
3. Location of trash enclosures.
4. Location and size of building and monument signs.
5. Location and construction of on site sidewalks, except on city rights of way.
6. Location, type, and size of plantings, provided the modification would have the same effective cover and screening.
7. Location and construction of accessory buildings of less than four hundred (400) square feet.
8. Location and construction of accessory structures.
9. Reconfiguration of architectural features, including colors, and/or modification of finished materials that do not alter or compromise the previously
approved theme.
10. Minor relocation or addition of driveways or parking spaces.
G. Refer Minor Modifications To Commission: Nothing contained herein shall be construed to allow the community development director to vary the
provisions of any statute, ordinance, city policy, or previous directives of the city council. The director shall have the discretion to refer any minor
modification requests to the planning and zoning commission for its review.
H. Site Plan Amendment: Any modification that is deemed by the community development director not to be minor modification shall be required to
submit a site plan amendment. Site plan amendments shall follow procedures prescribed in this chapter 15.
I. Suspension Of Building Permit; Order Construction Stopped: If the community development director finds that any construction or proposed
construction or occupancy of a development on a property for which a site plan has been approved will not substantially comply with the site plan
as approved, or that the construction and development of the property is not being carried out in accordance with the development schedule filed
with the site plan, the community development director shall suspend all building permits for the development and order all construction stopped
until such time as the owner of the project, or the owner's successors in interest, shall provide satisfactory proof that the site plan and schedule of
development will be complied with. In no case will a zoning compliance certificate or certificate of occupancy be issued for any structure within the
development while the building permit or the development has been suspended pursuant to this subsection. Any person aggrieved by any decision
or action of the community development director under this subsection may appeal such action or decision to the city council.
J. Granting Of Certificates Of Occupancy: A certificate of occupancy will be granted upon completion of new construction or completion of alterations
or additions to existing structures. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until such time as all site improvements and building construction is
completed in substantial compliance with all provisions identified on the approved site plan and within all applicable building codes.
K. Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy: A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued prior to completion of the project if, in the opinion of the
community development director, the remaining items could not be completed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control and the
issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy will not inhibit the completion of the total project, nor have an adverse effect on persons in the
immediate area or nearby properties. The applicant will be required to sign an agreement to complete and post a certified check with the
community development department in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the remaining items to be completed. The check will be returned
to the applicant with the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy. The agreement to complete will be accepted by the city council. (Ord. 876, 1-
17-2008)
11-15-6: SITE PLAN INFORMATION REQUIRED:
All site plans shall provide the following information as prescribed in the Clive development standards manual. The information required shall include,
but is not limited to, access and circulation, parking, lighting, landscaping, buffering, drainage and architecture. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-15-7: FEES:
Said fee shall be in an amount determined by resolution of the city council from time to time. In addition to the application fee, the applicant for site
plan review must also pay all cost incurred by the city for legal services, engineering services, and services of other persons or entities employed by
the city for, or in any way involved in, the review and inspection of said site plan and public utility extensions contemplated thereby, including, but not
limited to: street, sidewalks, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, streetlights, electric and gas lines, water retention areas and all other
improvements intended for public use or benefit constructed or caused to be constructed by the owner, and under no condition shall said fee be
refunded for failure of the city to approve said site plan. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
11-15-8: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Failure To Maintain: Failure to maintain a site in accordance with an approved site plan shall constitute a violation of this title and a failure to correct
such a violation within thirty (30) days following written notice of said violation shall render the site plan and any certificates of zoning compliance
and occupancy subject to cancellation.
B. Failure To Acquire Approval: Failure to acquire site plan/site plan amendment approval where required, prior to construction, alteration, or other
modification of a building, sign, or structure, shall constitute a violation of this title and a failure to correct such a violation within thirty (30) days
following written notice of said violation shall render the site plan and any certificates of zoning compliance and occupancy subject to cancellation.
In addition, the building official shall post a stop work order relating to work in the process of completion outside the requirements of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 430/439
C. Penalties: Penalties for a violation of this title are outlined in section 11-1-7 of this title. (Ord. 876, 1-17-2008)
Title 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
PURPOSE, JURISDICTION AND DEFINITIONS
12-1-1: PURPOSE:
It is deemed essential to establish minimum standards for the design and development of all new subdivisions so that existing developments will be
protected and so that adequate provisions are made for public utilities and other public requirements and to improve the health, safety and general
welfare. (2000 Code § 176.01)
12-1-2: JURISDICTION:
In accordance with the provisions of chapter 354 of the code of Iowa and amendatory acts thereto, to the extent not inconsistent with this title, the
provisions of this title are hereby adopted by the city, governing the subdivision of all lands within the corporate limits of the city and, as provided in
section 354.9 of the code of Iowa, governing the subdivision of all lands outside the city but within two (2) miles of the corporate limits. (2000 Code
§ 176.02)
12-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
AUDITOR'S PLAT: A plat prepared upon request of the Polk County auditor or the Dallas County auditor pursuant to the applicable provisions of the
code of Iowa, including, but not limited to, sections 441.65 through 441.71 of the code of Iowa.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, highways, or ways, except alleys; and the exterior boundary or
boundaries of the subdivision.
BUILDING LINES: Shall be shown on all lots intended for residential use of any character, and on commercial and industrial lots when required by
ordinance. Such building lines shall not be less than required by the zoning ordinance. Where the subdivided area is not under zoning control, the
commission shall require building lines in accordance with the needs of each addition.
COLLECTOR STREETS: Those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal
entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development.
COMMISSION: The Clive planning and zoning commission.
CUL-DE-SAC: A short, minor street, having one end open to motor traffic, the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner of the use, for a specific purpose, of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person
or persons, and within the limits of which the owner of the fee shall not erect any permanent structures but shall have the right to make any other use
of the land subject to such easement which is not inconsistent with the rights of the grantee. Public utilities shall have the right to trim or remove trees
which interfere with the use of such easements.
ENGINEER: A registered engineer authorized to practice civil engineering, as defined by the registration act of the state of Iowa.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building
development.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE: A street used primarily for fast, large volume traffic.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A street that is parallel to and adjacent to a major thoroughfare or highway, and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
MINOR STREET: A street used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
PERFORMANCE BOND: A surety bond or cash deposit made out to the city in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which are
required by this title, said cost being estimated by the city engineer, and said surety bond or cash deposit being legally sufficient to secure to the city
that said improvements will be constructed in accordance with this title.
PLAT: A map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider's plan of the subdivision is presented and which the subdivider submits for approval and
intends in final form to record.
ROADWAY: That portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, and where curbs are laid, the portion from back to back of curbs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 431/439
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into three (3) or more lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building
development; or, any change in existing street lines or public easement. The term, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided or the resubdivision of land heretofore divided or platted into lots or other divisions of land, or, if a new street is
involved, any division of land.
SURVEYOR: A registered surveyor authorized to practice surveying, as defined by the registration act of the state of Iowa. (2000 Code § 176.03; amd.
2008 Code)
Chapter 2
GENERAL REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
12-2-1: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
Whenever the tract proposed to be subdivided is of such unusual topography, size, or shape, or is surrounded by such development or unusual
conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in this title would result in substantial hardships or injustices, the council, upon
recommendation of the commission, may vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider is allowed to develop the property in a reasonable
manner; but so, at the same time, the public welfare and interest of the city and surrounding area are protected and the general intent and the spirit of
this title are preserved. (2000 Code § 176.04)
12-2-2: RECORDING OF PLAT:
No plat or any subdivision shall be recorded in the county recorder's office or have any validity until it has been approved in the manner prescribed in
this title. (2000 Code § 176.05)
12-2-3: EXPENDITURE OF CITY FUNDS:
The council shall not permit any public improvements over which it has control to be made from funds, or any city money expended for improvements
or maintenance on any street in any area that has been subdivided after the date of adoption of this title unless such subdivision and streets have
been approved in accordance with the provisions contained herein and accepted by the council as a public street. (2000 Code § 176.06)
12-2-4: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
Any provisions of this title may be changed and amended from time to time by the council; provided, however, that such changes and amendments
shall not become effective until after study and report by the commission and until after a public hearing has been held, public notice of which shall be
given in a newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing. (2000 Code § 176.07)
12-2-5: BUILDING PERMITS:
Not more than two (2) building permits shall be issued for each separate tract of land existing as of November 24, 1970, or for any lot which has been
created by platting or replatting since such date (except for those lots zoned C-3 or C-4), unless such tract or lot has been platted or replatted in
accordance with this title; provided, however, this section does not limit the number of permits that may be issued for accessory buildings or additions
to buildings already existing on such tract or lot. (2000 Code § 176.08)
12-2-6: AUDITOR'S PLAT:
Whenever the Polk County auditor or Dallas County auditor requests an auditor's plat, all provisions of this code governing subdivisions shall apply to
such auditor's plat; provided, however, the commission, subject to the approval of the council, shall have the right to waive any such provisions in this
code governing subdivisions applicable thereto if there is on file with the clerk a copy of the request for such plat by the Polk County auditor or the
Dallas County auditor and a letter from said auditor stating that the plat as submitted meets the requirements for which he or she has ordered the plat.
(2000 Code § 176.09; amd. 2008 Code)
12-2-7: FEES:
The following fees are established in connection with the review and approval of a subdivision filing:
A. Preliminary Plat Review Fees: Before a preliminary plat may be considered for approval by the commission, the owner shall deposit with the city
treasurer a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first twenty five (25) lots or less and two dollars ($2.00) per lot thereafter plus an amount
equal to all actual costs incurred by the city for legal services, engineering services and services of other persons or entities employed by the city
(other than city staff personnel) for, or in any way involved in, the review and inspection of said plat and public utility extensions contemplated
thereby, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, streetlights, electric lines, gas lines,
cable television lines, telephone lines, water retention areas and all other improvements intended for public use or benefit to be constructed or
caused to be constructed by the owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 432/439
B. Installation Of Public Utilities: The owner, as a fee for the installation of public utilities prior to acceptance of the public utilities by the city, shall pay
to the city treasurer all actual costs incurred by the city for engineering services and services of other persons or entities employed by the city
(other than city staff personnel) for, or in any way involved in, the inspection and testing of the materials, construction and installation of all public
utilities, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, streetlights, electric lines, gas lines,
cable television lines, telephone lines, water retention areas and all improvements intended for public use or benefit constructed or caused to be
constructed in the subdivision by the owner. After the construction of all public utilities, but prior to acceptance of the same by the city, all actual
costs incurred by the city for engineering services and city staff services in the review of the as built construction drawings shall be paid to the city
by the owner.
C. Final Plat Review Fees: Before a final plat may be considered for approval by the commission or council, the owner shall deposit with the city
treasurer a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first twenty five (25) lots, or less, and two dollars ($2.00) per lot thereafter plus an amount
equal to all actual costs incurred by the city for legal services, engineering services and services of other persons or entities employed by the city
(other than city staff personnel) for, or in any way involved in, the review and inspection of said plat and public utility extensions contemplated
thereby, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, streetlights, electric lines, gas lines,
cable television lines, telephone lines, water retention areas and all other improvements intended for public use or benefit to be constructed or
caused to be constructed by the owner.
D. Auditor's Plat Review Fees: Before an auditor's plat may be considered for approval by the commission or council, the owner shall deposit with the
city treasurer a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus an amount equal to all actual costs incurred by the city for legal services, engineering
services and services of other persons or entities employed by the city (other than city staff personnel) for, or in any way involved in, the review and
inspection of said plat and public utility extensions contemplated thereby, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, water lines, sanitary sewer
lines, storm sewer lines, streetlights, electric lines, gas lines, cable television lines, telephone lines, water retention areas and all other
improvements intended for public use or benefit to be constructed or caused to be constructed by the owner. (2000 Code § 176.10)
Chapter 3
PRELIMINARY PLAT
12-3-1: PURPOSE; ADVANCE CONSIDERATION:
The preliminary plat of a subdivision is not intended to serve as a record plan. Its purpose is to show on a map all facts needed to enable the
commission to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in question is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The subdivider,
owner, or representative may call at the office of the commission in advance of the preliminary plat in order to discuss the proposed subdivision and in
order to obtain information as to the requirements necessary for the approval of the plat. (2000 Code § 176.11)
12-3-2: FILING OF PLAT:
Whenever the owner of any tract or parcel of land within the city wishes to subdivide or plat the same, said owner shall cause to be prepared a
preliminary plat of said subdivision, and shall submit three (3) copies of said preliminary plat and other information to the clerk. The preliminary plat
shall contain such information and data as is outlined in section 12-3-7 of this chapter. (2000 Code § 176.12)
12-3-3: REFERRAL TO COMMISSION AND ENGINEER:
The clerk shall immediately refer copies of the preliminary plat to the commission and to the city engineer. The city engineer shall carefully examine
said plat as to its compliance with the ordinances of the city, the existing street system, and good engineering practices, and shall, as soon as
possible, submit findings to the commission. (2000 Code § 176.13)
12-3-4: ACTION BY COMMISSION:
After receiving the engineer's report, the commission shall study the preliminary plat and other material for conformity thereof to these regulations. The
commission may confer with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of such improvements to be made by the
subdivider. The commission shall approve or reject such plat within forty five (45) days after the date of submission thereof to the commission. If the
commission does not act within forty five (45) days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be approved; provided, however, that the subdivider may
agree to an extension of the time for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. The approval of the preliminary plat by the commission shall be null and
void unless the final plat is presented to the commission within one hundred eighty (180) days after date of approval. (2000 Code § 176.14)
12-3-5: PUBLIC HEARING:
Before approving a preliminary plat, the commission may in its discretion hold a public hearing on the proposed plat, notice of which shall be given by
publication in a local newspaper of general distribution, or by posting notices on the tract, or by sending notices to affected property owners by mail.
Such notice shall be given within seven (7) days prior to the public hearing. (2000 Code § 176.15)
12-3-6: SCALE OF MAP:
The scale of the map shall be one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') on small subdivisions, and one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') on large
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 433/439
subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the commission. (2000 Code § 176.16)
12-3-7: CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The preliminary plat as filed shall contain the following:
A. Identification: Name of subdivision, date, point of compass, scale, and official description of the property being platted.
B. Owner/Developer: Name and address of recorded owner and/or developer.
C. Engineer: Name and address of engineer.
D. Existing Features: Existing buildings, railroads, underground utilities, and other rights of way.
E. Streets: Location, names and widths of all existing and proposed roads, alleys, streets, and highways in or adjoining the area being subdivided.
F. Adjoining Property: Location and names of adjoining subdivisions, and the names of the owners of adjoining acreage parcels.
G. Lot Lines: Proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and the square foot area of nonrectangular lots.
H. Public Use Areas: Areas dedicated for public use, such as schools, parks, and playgrounds.
I. Contours: Contour lines at intervals of not more than five feet (5').
J. Setbacks: Building setback lines.
K. Boundaries: Boundaries of the proposed subdivision shall be indicated by a heavy line.
L. Zoning: Zoning classification of the area.
M. Utilities: Proposed utility service, including the source of water supply and provision for sewage disposal, drainage and flood control.
N. Vicinity Sketch: A vicinity sketch at a legible scale showing the relationship of the plat to its general surroundings.
O. Numbers: Lot numbers.
P. Area For Water Detention: Area for water detention two (2) year release on 100-year storm frequency. (2000 Code § 176.17)
12-3-8: ATTORNEY'S OPINION:
An attorney's opinion, in duplicate, showing that the fee title to the subdivision land is in the owner as shown on the plat and any encumbrances that
may exist against said land shall be filed with the preliminary plat. (2000 Code § 176.18)
12-3-9: SOIL PERCOLATION TEST:
Any plat that cannot reasonably be served by public sewer shall show results of soil percolation tests made by the engineer preparing the plat. Such
tests shall be made in accordance with specifications approved by the city engineer. (2000 Code § 176.19)
12-3-10: PROPOSAL OF RESIDENTIAL COMMON NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT THEME:
A plan for a common neighborhood development theme may be proposed as an accessory use for subdivision land located in residential zoning
districts. The plan shall be filed with the preliminary plat and include provisions for an owners' association consisting of the owners of at least fifty (50)
lots within the subdivision which, pursuant to covenant satisfactory to the city, will be bound to provide for the maintenance of the proposed structures
and uses. The features to be included in the plan shall be indicated on the preliminary plat filed pursuant to section 12-3-2 of this chapter. (2000 Code
§ 176.20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 434/439
Chapter 4
FINAL PLAT
12-4-1: FILING OF PLAT:
When and if the preliminary plat is approved, the subdivider shall submit fourteen (14) copies of the final plat for review by the commission. The scale
of the map shall be one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') on small subdivisions, and one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') on large subdivisions,
unless otherwise approved by the commission. (2000 Code § 176.21)
12-4-2: CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT:
The final plat as submitted shall contain the following:
A. Name: Name of subdivision.
B. Scale: Scale.
C. Compass Point: Compass point.
D. Geometrics: Curve data including delta angle, length of arc, degree of curve, tangent.
E. Boundaries: Boundary lines of subdivided area with accurate distances, bearings, and boundary angles.
F. Streets: Exact name, location, width, lot designation, and centerline of all streets within the subdivision.
G. Utility Easements: Easements for public utilities showing width and use intended.
H. Setbacks: Building setback lines with dimensions.
I. Legal Description: Official legal description of the property being subdivided.
J. Lot Numbers: Lot numbers.
K. Certification: Certification of registered engineer and/or land surveyor.
L. Survey Data: Description and location of all permanent monuments set in the subdivision, including ties to original government corners.
M. Area For On Site Detention: Area for on site detention for two (2) year release on 100-year storm frequency.
N. House Number: House numbers. (2000 Code § 176.22)
12-4-3: PLANS AND PROFILES:
Plans and profiles of all streets and alleys at a fifty foot (50') horizontal scale and five foot (5') vertical scale. Profiles shall show location, size, and
grade of all conduits, sewers, pipelines, etc., to be placed under the streets and alleys. Profiles of east and west streets shall be drawn so that the
west end of the profile shall be at the left side of the drawing. Profiles of north and south streets shall be drawn so that the south end of the profile shall
be at the left side of the drawing. (2000 Code § 176.23)
12-4-4: PROTECTIVE COVENANTS:
Any protective covenants or restrictions to be imposed upon the plat shall be submitted for approval with the final plat. (2000 Code § 176.24)
12-4-5: DEEDS TO CITY:
A deed to the city, properly executed, for all streets intended as public streets, and for any other property intended for public use shall be submitted
with the final plat. (2000 Code § 176.25)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 435/439
12-4-6: CERTIFICATES TO ACCOMPANY FINAL PLAT:
The following certificates shall be submitted with the final plat:
A. Owner: A certificate by the owner and spouse, if any, that the subdivision is with the free consent and is in accordance with the desire of the
owners. This certificate must be signed and acknowledged by the owner and spouse before some officer authorized to take the acknowledgments
of deeds.
B. County Treasurer: A certificate from the county treasurer that the subdivision land is free from certified taxes and certified special assessments.
C. Opinion: An opinion by an attorney at law who has examined the abstract of title of the land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the
owners and holders of mortgages, liens or other encumbrances on the land being platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds
securing the encumbrances.
D. Resolution: A resolution and certificate for approval by the council and for signatures of the mayor and clerk.
E. Performance Bond: A copy of the performance bond, if any. (2000 Code § 176.26)
12-4-7: APPROVAL OF RESIDENTIAL COMMON NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT THEME:
A plan for a common neighborhood development theme may be approved as a matter of absolute discretion by the council as an accessory use for
subdivision land located in residential zoning districts. The plan shall be filed with the final plat required by section 12-4-1 of this chapter and shall
include provisions for an owners' association consisting of the owners of at least fifty (50) lots within the subdivision which, pursuant to covenant
satisfactory to the city, will be bound to provide for the maintenance of the proposed structures and uses. The features to be included in the plan shall
be indicated on the final plat and on the plans and profiles required by section 12-4-3 of this chapter. (2000 Code § 176.27)
Chapter 5
DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS
12-5-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The standards and details of design herein contained are intended only as minimum requirements so that the general arrangement and layout of a
subdivision may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances. However, in the design and development of a plat, the subdivider should use
standards consistent with the current edition of the Des Moines metropolitan design standards manual and the site conditions so as to assure an
economical, pleasant, and durable neighborhood. (2000 Code § 176.28)
12-5-2: STREETS:
The design of streets, alleys and other public ways shall conform to the following minimum design standards:
A. Comprehensive Plan: All proposed plats and subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the city.
B. Continuation Of Existing Streets: Proposed streets shall provide for continuation or completion of any existing streets (constructed or recorded) in
adjoining property, at equal or greater width, but not less than fifty feet (50') in width, and in similar alignment, unless variations are recommended
by the commission.
C. Circulation: The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation within the subdivision as well as convenient access to adjoining streets,
thoroughfares, or unsubdivided land as may be required by the commission. In a case where a street will eventually be extended beyond the plat,
but is temporarily dead ended, an interim turnaround may be required.
D. Street Intersections: Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible.
E. Cul-De-Sac: Whenever a cul-de-sac is permitted, such street shall be no longer than six hundred feet (600') and shall be provided at the closed end
with a turnaround having a street property line diameter of at least one hundred feet (100') in the case of residential subdivisions. The right of way
width of the street leading to the turnaround shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50'). The property line at the intersection of the turnaround and the
lead in portion of the street shall be rounded at a radius of not less than twenty five feet (25'). A turnaround diameter greater than one hundred feet
(100') may be required by the commission in the case of commercial or industrial subdivisions if it is deemed necessary.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 436/439
F. Street Names: All newly platted streets shall be named and in a manner conforming to the prevailing street naming system. A proposed street that is
obviously in alignment with other existing streets, or with a street that may logically be extended, although the various portions be at a considerable
distance from each other, shall bear the same name. Names of new streets shall be subject to the approval of the commission in order to avoid
duplication or close similarity of names.
G. Physical And Cultural Features: In general, streets shall be platted with appropriate regard for topography, creeks, wooded areas, and other natural
features which would lend themselves to attractive treatment.
H. Half Streets: Dedication of half streets will be discouraged. Where there exists a dedicated or platted half street or alley adjacent to the tract to be
subdivided, the other half shall be platted if deemed necessary by the commission.
I. Alleys: Alleys may be required in business areas and industrial districts for adequate access to block interiors and for off street loading and parking
purposes. Except where justified by unusual conditions, alleys will not be approved in residential districts. Dead end alleys shall be provided with a
means of turning around at the dead end thereof.
J. Easements: Easements for utilities shall be provided along rear or side lot lines or along alleys, if needed. Whenever any stream or important
surface watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall, at the subdivider's own expense, make adequate provision
for straightening or widening the channel so that it will properly carry the surface water, and shall provide and dedicate to the city an easement
along each side of the stream, which easement shall be for the purpose of widening, improving, or protecting the stream. The width of such
easement shall be not less than twenty feet (20') and the total width of the easement shall be adequate to provide for any necessary channel
relocation or straightening.
K. Neighborhood Plan: If any overall plan has been made by the commission for the neighborhood in which the proposed subdivision is located, the
street system of the latter shall conform in general thereto.
L. Unsubdivided Portion Of Plat: Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned by the subdivider, the commission may require
topography and a sketch of a tentative future street system of the unsubdivided portion.
M. Major Thoroughfares: Where a new subdivision, except where justified by limiting conditions, involves frontage on a heavy trafficway, limited
accessway, freeway, or parkway, the street layout shall provide motor access to such frontage by one of the following means:
1. A parallel street, supplying frontage for lots backing onto the trafficway.
2. A series of cul-de-sacs or short loops entered from and planned at right angles to such a parallel street, with their terminal lots backing onto the
highway.
3. An access drive separated by a planting strip from the highway to which motor access from the drive is provided at points suitably spaced.
4. A service drive or alley at the rear of the lots.
N. Deed Covenants: Where any one of the above mentioned arrangements is used, deed covenants or other means should prevent any private
residential driveways from having direct access to the trafficway.
O. Dedication: A deed to the city of Clive shall be given for all streets before the same will be accepted for maintenance.
P. Railroads: If a railroad is involved, the subdivision plan should:
1. Be so arranged as to permit, where necessary, future grade separations at highway crossings of the railroad.
2. Border the railroad with a parallel street at a sufficient distance from it to permit deep lots to back onto the railroad; or form a buffer strip for park,
commercial, or industrial use.
3. Provide cul-de-sacs at right angles to the railroad so as to permit lots to back there onto.
Q. Street Widths: Streets shall have a width and cross section as shown in the comprehensive plan for the type of street involved.
R. Street Grades: Streets and alleys shall be completed to grades which have been officially determined or approved by the city engineer. All streets
shall be graded to the full width of the right of way and adjacent side slopes graded to blend with the natural ground level. The maximum grade
shall not exceed six percent (6%) for main and secondary thoroughfares, or ten percent (10%) for minor or local service streets. All changes in
grades on major roads or highways shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to twenty (20) times the algebraic
difference between the rates of grades, expressed in feet per hundred, or greater, if deemed necessary by the city engineer; for secondary and
minor streets, fifteen (15) times. The grade alignment and resultant visibility, especially at intersections, shall be worked out in detail to meet the
approval of the city engineer. (2000 Code § 176.29)
12-5-3: BLOCKS:
Blocks shall comply with the following minimum design standards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 437/439
A. Length: No block shall be longer than one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320').
B. Corners: At street intersections, block corners shall be rounded with a radius of not less than fifteen feet (15'); where, at any one intersection a
curve radius has been previously established, such radius shall be used as standard. (2000 Code § 176.30)
12-5-4: LOTS:
Lots shall comply with the following minimum design standards:
A. Corner Lots: Corner lots shall have a minimum width of seventy five feet (75'), except in districts where wider lots are required by the zoning
ordinance, in order to permit adequate building setbacks on both front and side streets.
B. Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots, other than corner lots, shall be prohibited except where such lots back onto a major street or highway
or except in the case of large commercial or industrial lots.
C. Lot Sizes: For the purpose of complying with minimum health standards, the following minimum lot sizes shall be observed:
1. Lots which cannot be reasonably served by an existing public sanitary sewer system and public water mains shall have a minimum width of one
hundred feet (100'), measured at the building line, and an area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Lots which are not within a reasonable distance of a public sanitary sewer system but are connected to a public water supply main shall have a
minimum width of eighty feet (80') and an area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet; except where other lot sizes are specified by the zoning
ordinance.
D. Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the street or radial to curved streets. On large size lots and except when
indicated by topography, lot lines shall be straight. (2000 Code § 176.31)
12-5-5: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
The subdivider shall install and construct all improvements required by this title. All required improvements shall be installed and constructed in
accordance with approved specifications and under the supervision of the council and to its satisfaction. (2000 Code § 176.32)
12-5-6: GRADING:
All streets and alleys within the platted area which are dedicated for public use shall be brought to the grade approved by the council after receiving
the report and recommendations of the city engineer. (2000 Code § 176.33)
12-5-7: CURB AND GUTTER:
Curb and gutter shall be installed on all roadways in the plat being dedicated for public use and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete in
accordance with designs and specifications approved by the council and at grades established by the city engineer. (2000 Code § 176.34)
12-5-8: SURFACING:
All roadways being dedicated for public use shall be surfaced from curb to curb. Surfacing shall be Portland cement concrete and shall be constructed
in accordance with designs and specifications approved by the council at grades established by the city engineer. (2000 Code § 176.35)
12-5-9: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all streets being dedicated for public use. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in width and
shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete in accordance with designs and specifications approved by the council and at grades established by
the city engineer. The requirement of section 12-5-12 of this chapter, as it relates to the construction of sidewalks, may be waived by the council in its
discretion; provided, however, that in no event shall a certificate of occupancy be issued on a lot within a platted area until all sidewalks on such lot
that are required by the plat are constructed. (2000 Code § 176.36)
12-5-10: WATER AND SEWERS:
Water mains, sanitary sewer lines, and storm sewers and their appurtenances shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the plans and
specifications adopted by the council. Water and sewer lines shall be made accessible to each lot. (2000 Code § 176.37)
12-5-11: UTILITY LINES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 438/439
All utility lines, except electric lines of nominal voltage in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) volts, shall be installed underground. The subdivider shall
be responsible for making the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for installation of such facilities. Such utility lines shall be installed in
such a manner so as not to interfere with other underground utilities. Incidental appurtenances, such as pad mounted electrical equipment and its
enclosures, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meters and meter cabinets may be placed aboveground but shall be located so as not to be unsightly or
hazardous to the public and, if located in city right of way, as approved by the council. All underground utility lines shall be installed in accordance with
applicable federal and state statutes and regulations, and the electrical code of the city. The council may waive all or any part of the requirements of
this section if the council, in its sole discretion, finds that soil, topographical or other conditions make underground installation impracticable. (2000
Code § 176.38)
12-5-12: ACCEPTANCE BY COUNCIL:
Before the council approves the final plat, all of the foregoing improvements shall be constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the council.
Before passage of said resolution of acceptance, the city engineer shall report that said improvements meet all city specifications and ordinances or
other city requirements, and agreements between the subdivider and the city. (2000 Code § 176.39)
12-5-13: BOND IN LIEU OF CONSTRUCTION:
The requirement of section 12-5-12 of this chapter may be waived if the subdivider will post a performance bond or certified check with the council
guaranteeing that said improvements will be constructed within a period of one year from final acceptance of the plat. However, if a performance bond
is posted, final acceptance of the plat will not constitute final acceptance by the city of any improvements to be constructed. Improvements will be
accepted only after their construction has been completed, and no public funds will be expended in the subdivision until such improvements have been
completed and accepted by the city. (2000 Code § 176.40)
12-5-14: WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS:
The council may waive the requirements for the construction and installation of some or all of the foregoing improvements in cases of resubdivisions
where only the size, shape and arrangement of the lots is being changed and no new streets are required, and in cases of dedications of land or rights
of way to public use where such dedication is in excess of the needs of the subdivision and is desired by a public agency in lieu of a purchase or
condemnation proceeding. (2000 Code § 176.41)
12-5-15: RECREATIONAL FACILITIES:
A. Definition: For use in this section, the following terms are defined: "development" or "developing" means any land subdivided under other
ordinances of the city or a tract of land otherwise developed which is to be used for residential purposes and which is more than one-half (1/2) acre
in size. The person that is subdividing the land shall be referred to herein as the "developer".
B. Design: In the design of the plat of a subdivision or preparation of the site plan for development, consideration shall be given to adequate provision
of and correlation with public and private recreation areas.
C. Dedication Of Land: Within the corporate limits of the city, the developer shall provide and dedicate to the public adequate land to provide for the
recreational needs of the development. The dedication of land to the city shall be accomplished by providing the city with a properly executed
warranty deed conveying the required land to the city without cost to the city.
D. Determination Of Amount Of Land:
1. The amount of land to be provided for recreational facilities shall be determined based upon: a) the projected population of the residential land
shown on the preliminary plat or site plan; and b) the amount of park land existing in the city per one thousand (1,000) residents. For purposes of
this calculation, the projected population of residential land shall be calculated as follows:
a. For single-family residences: 2.7 persons per household.
b. For multi-family residences: 1.25 persons per household.
c. For townhome residences: 2.0 persons per household.
2. The amount of park land, excluding regional parks, existing in the city per one thousand (1,000) residents shall be determined annually at the
beginning of each calendar year, and the city council shall, by resolution, establish the amount of park land to be dedicated per resident (the "per
resident park dedication requirement"). The per resident park dedication requirement shall be 8.36 acres per one thousand (1,000) residents or
0.00836 acre per resident, until revised by resolution of the city council. For purposes of illustration, if a development is projected to contain one
hundred (100) single-family residences, the projected population for the development is two hundred seventy (270) persons. The amount of land
dedicated for park land would be calculated as 0.00836 acre per resident times two hundred seventy (270) projected residents equals 2.26
acres.
E. Alternative Means Of Dedication Of Land; Master Agreement: If the land to be developed is a part of a larger area being developed by a single
developer or by a group of developers who enter into a single agreement with the city, the developer or developers may enter into a written
agreement with the city providing for the dedication of the land relating to the present development in a future subdivision plat, which land shall be
dedicated for recreational facilities serving the larger area under development by the developer or developers. The written agreement between the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=595 439/439
city and the developer or developers shall establish the timetable for the dedication of the land by the developer. The amount of land dedicated and
the method of dedication shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section.
F. Applicability To Existing Subdivisions Or Developments: The requirements of this section are not applicable to:
1. Existing developments which are presently constructed.
2. Parcels of land which have previously been developed with residential units and are being redeveloped to permit construction of additional
residences.
3. Developments for which building permits have been issued.
G. Applicability To Land Zoned PUD: Land zoned PUD (planned unit development) may include residential uses, neighborhood commercial uses and
neighborhood office uses which encourage the more efficient use of land through the incorporation of both public and private open spaces to
accent and enhance both the architectural and natural features of a development and provide for natural stormwater management systems. A
development plan and development agreement are required for all planned unit development districts. The city and the developer of land zoned
PUD shall address the private and public open space and recreation area requirements and the means to satisfy such requirements in the
development agreement. All PUD districts shall comply with the intent and purpose of subsection D of this section; however, the application of the
standard to PUD zoning districts may be more flexible in order to create equivalent recreational facilities while accommodating the mixed uses
present in such developments. (2000 Code § 176.42)
12-5-16: DATUM PLANE:
The United States coast and geodetic survey datum plane is hereby established and adopted as the city of Clive datum plane. The United States coast
and geodetic survey datum plane shall be used as the reference plane in establishing all elevations and grades within the city. (2000 Code § 176.43)