CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1.01 Title
1.07 Amendments
1.02 Definitions
1.08 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers
1.09 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity
1.10 Standard Penalty
1.05 Personal Injuries
1.11 Severability
1.06 Rules of Construction
1.01 TITLE. This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of Ordinances of the City of Creston, Iowa, 1996.
1.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined by State law, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances and are adopted by reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code of Ordinances:
1. “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording secondary means of access to abutting property.
2. “City” means the City of Creston, Iowa.
3. “Clerk” means the city clerk of Creston, Iowa.
4. “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
5. “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Creston, Iowa, 1996.
6. “Council” means the city council of Creston, Iowa.
7. “County” means Union County, Iowa.
8. “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
9. “Month” means a calendar month.
10. “Oath” means an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “affirm” and “affirmed” are equivalent to the words “swear” and “sworn.”
11. “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
12. “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Creston, Iowa, as embodied in the Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
13. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
14. “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
15. “Property” includes real property, and tangible and intangible personal property unless clearly indicated otherwise.
16. “Property owner” means a person owning private property in the City as shown by the County Auditor’s plats of the City.
17. “Public place” includes in its meaning, but is not restricted to, any City-owned open place, such as parks and squares.
18. “Public property” means any and all property owned by the City or held in the name of the City by any of the departments, commissions or agencies within the City government.
19. “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
20. “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
21. “State” means the State of Iowa.
22. “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
23. “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
24. “Writing” and “written” include printing, typing, lithographing, or other mode of representing words and letters.
25. “Year” means a calendar year.
1.03 CITY POWERS. The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City and of its residents, and preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents and each and every
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04 INDEMNITY. The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to property whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05 PERSONAL INJURIES. When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. In the construction of the Code of Ordinances the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the context of the provisions.
1. Verb Tense and Plurals. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular.
2. May. The word “may” confers a power.
3. Must. The word “must” states a requirement.
4. Shall. The word “shall” imposes a duty.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
5. Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders.
6. Interpretation. All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in the Code of Ordinances shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Council may be fully carried out.
7. Extension of Authority. Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a provision of the Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.07 AMENDMENTS. All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner affect the Code of Ordinances shall include proper reference to title, division, chapter, section and subsection to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.08 CATCHLINES AND NOTES. The catchlines of the several sections of the Code of Ordinances, titles, headings (chapter, division, section and subsection), editor's notes, cross references and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in the Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or clarify the contents of a section.
1.09 ALTERING CODE. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
with the Code of Ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.5)
1.10 STANDARD PENALTY. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for violation of any particular provision, section, or chapter, any person failing to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of at least sixty-five dollars ($65.00) but not to exceed six hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00). The court may order imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days in lieu of a fine or in addition to a fine, except a person shall not be imprisoned for a violation of any of the following chapters of this Code of Ordinances:
1. Chapter 50, Nuisance Abatement Procedure;
2. Chapter 51, Junk and Junk Vehicles;
3. Chapter 80, Abandoned Vehicles; and
4. Chapter 145, Dangerous Buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
(Ord. 18-177 – Jul. 18 Supp.)
1.11 SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision or part of the Code of Ordinances is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of the Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
[The next page is 9]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
2.01 Title
2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government
2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties
2.06 Copies on File
2.01 TITLE. This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Creston, Iowa.
2.02 FORM OF GOVERNMENT. The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City.
2.04 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of two (2) Council Members elected at large and one (1) Council Member from each of five (5) wards as established by the Code of Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four (4) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05 TERM OF MAYOR. The Mayor is elected for a term of four (4) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06 COPIES ON FILE. The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the charter available at the Clerk's office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
CHAPTER 2 CHARTER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
EDITOR'S NOTE
Ordinance No. 1.1 adopting a charter for the City was passed and approved by the Council on June 25, 1975, and published on January 16, 1976. Terms of Council Members and the Mayor were extended to four years pursuant to an election held February 23, 1993, and Ordinance No. 1.15.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 3
BOUNDARIES
3.01 Establishment of Ward Boundaries
3.03 Boundaries to Be Effective for All Elections
3.02 Property Numbering System
3.04 Voter Precincts
3.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF WARD BOUNDARIES. The boundaries of the five (5) wards in the City, to be known as “First Ward”, “Second Ward”, “Third Ward”, “Fourth Ward”, and “Fifth Ward”, are hereby established in and for the City, as follows:
1. First Ward. First Ward comprises a geographical area in the north central portion of the City and the boundaries thereof are established as follows:
An area comprising all of that portion of the incorporated limits of the City lying within the boundaries of a line commencing at a point on the north corporation line with the intersection of Hurley Creek, thence southerly along the centerline of Hurley Creek to the intersection of Hurley Creek, Swan Street and North Maple Street, thence easterly along the centerline of Swan Street to the intersection of North Pine Street, thence southerly along the centerline of North Pine Street to the intersection of West Mills Street, thence westerly along the centerline of West Mills Street to the intersection of North Sycamore Street, thence northerly along the centerline of North Sycamore Street to Townline Street, thence westerly along the centerline of Townline Street to the intersection of North Lincoln Street, thence northerly along the centerline of North Lincoln Street to the North Corporation line, thence easterly along the North Corporation line to the Hurley Creek, or the place of beginning.
2. Second Ward. Second Ward comprises a geographical area situated in the northwest portion of the City and the boundaries thereof are established as follows:
An area comprising all of that portion of the incorporated limits of the City lying within the boundaries of a line commencing at a point on the North Corporation line where the projected centerline of North Lincoln Street intersects said North Corporation line, thence southerly along the centerline of North Lincoln Street to its intersection with Townline Street, thence easterly along the centerline of West Townline Street to the intersection of North Sycamore Street, thence southerly along the centerline of North Sycamore Street to West Montgomery Street, thence westerly along the centerline of West Montgomery Street to the intersection of North Lincoln Street, thence southerly along the centerline of North Lincoln Street to the intersection of West Adams Street, thence westerly along the centerline of West Adams Street to the intersection of Cottonwood Street, or the West Corporation boundary of the City, thence
CHAPTER 3 BOUNDARIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
northerly along the West Corporation line to the North Corporation line, thence easterly along the North Corporation line to the centerline of North Lincoln Street, or the place of beginning.
3. Third Ward. Third Ward comprises a geographical area situated in the southwest portion of the City and the boundaries thereof are established as follows:
An area comprising all of that portion of the incorporated limits of the City lying within the boundaries of a line commencing at the intersection of the centerline of West Adams Street and the West Corporate line, thence southerly and westerly along the West Corporation line to the South Corporation line, thence easterly along the South Corporation line to a point on the South Corporation line coinciding with the centerline of South Cherry Street, thence northerly along the centerline of South Cherry Street to the intersection of Ringgold Street to South Oak Street, thence northerly along the centerline of South Oak Street to the intersection of West Taylor Street, thence westerly to the intersection of South Division Street, thence northerly along the centerline of South Division Street to the intersection of West Union Street, thence westerly along the centerline of West Union Street to the intersection of New York Avenue, thence northerly and easterly along the centerline of New York Avenue to the intersection of West Jefferson Street, thence westerly along the centerline of West Jefferson Street to the intersection of South Spruce Street, thence northerly along the centerline of South Spruce Street, continuing along the centerline of North Spruce Street to the intersection of West Montgomery Street, thence westerly along the centerline of West Montgomery Street to the intersection of Lincoln Street, thence southerly along the centerline of North Lincoln Street to the intersection of Adams Street, thence westerly along the centerline of West Adams Street to the intersection of Cottonwood and the West Corporation boundary, or the place of beginning.
4. Fourth Ward. Fourth Ward comprises a geographical area situated in the southeast portion of the City and boundaries thereof are established as follows:
An area comprising all of that portion of the incorporated limits of the City lying within the boundaries of a line commencing at a point where East Howard Street intersects Osage Street in the east corporation line, thence westerly along the centerline of East Howard Street to the intersection of North Pine Street, thence southerly along the centerline of North Pine Street to the intersection of West Mills Street, thence westerly along the centerline of West Mills Street to the intersection of North Sycamore Street, thence southerly along the centerline of North Sycamore Street to the intersection of West Montgomery Street, thence westerly along the centerline of West Montgomery Street to the intersection of North Spruce Street, thence southerly along the centerline of North Spruce Street, continuing along the centerline of South Spruce Street to the intersection of West Jefferson Street, thence easterly along the centerline of West Jefferson Street to the intersection of New York Avenue, thence southerly and westerly to the intersection of West Union
CHAPTER 3 BOUNDARIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Street, thence easterly along the centerline of West Union Street to the intersection of South Division Street, thence southerly along the centerline of South Division Street to the intersection of West Taylor Street, thence easterly along the centerline of West Taylor Street to the intersection of South Oak Street, thence southerly along the centerline of South Oak Street to the intersection of Ringgold Street, thence easterly along the centerline of Ringgold Street to the intersection of South Cherry Street, thence southerly along the centerline of South Cherry Street to the South Corporation line, thence easterly along the South Corporation line to the East Corporation line, thence north and northeasterly on the East Corporation line to the intersection of the Eastern Corporation line and Osage Street, thence northerly along the centerline of Osage Street to the intersection of East Howard Street, or the place of beginning.
5. Fifth Ward. Fifth Ward comprises a geographical area situated in the northeast portion of the City and the boundaries thereof are established as follows:
An area comprising all of that portion of the incorporated limits of the City lying within the boundaries of a line commencing at the point on East Townline Street at the northeast corner of the City to the intersection of the East Corporation line and the North Corporation line, thence westerly along East Townline Street, or the North Corporation line, to the intersection of East Townline Street and the centerline of the Burlington Northern, Inc. right-of-way, thence northerly and northeasterly along said centerline of the Burlington-Northern, Inc., right-of-way or the East Corporation line to the North Corporation line, thence westerly along said North Corporation line to the intersection of said North Corporation line and the center of Hurley Creek, thence southerly along the centerline of Hurley Creek to the intersection of Hurley Creek, Swan Street and North Maple Street, thence easterly along the centerline of Swan Street to the intersection of North Pine Street, thence southerly along the centerline of North Pine Street to the intersection of Howard Street, thence easterly along the centerline of East Howard Street to its intersection with Osage Street, or the East Corporation line, thence northerly along the East Corporation line to the intersection of Osage Street and East Townline Street, or the place of beginning.
3.02 PROPERTY NUMBERING SYSTEM. This chapter shall not be construed as repealing or in any manner changing the system of numbering properties for address purposes in the City, which heretofore established Adams Street as a base line or dividing line between the north and south portions of the City for numbering purposes and which heretofore established Pine Street as the base line or dividing line between the east and west portions of the City for numbering purposes.
CHAPTER 3 BOUNDARIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
3.03 BOUNDARIES TO BE EFFECTIVE FOR ALL ELECTIONS. The boundaries or limits of the five (5) wards in the City, as set forth and delineated in this chapter, shall govern and be effective for any and all City municipal primary or general special elections in the City. Said boundaries shall be binding upon any and all voters and electors who may vote in any of said elections and upon any and all officers charged with conducting said elections, as well as all election officials, including the Clerks and Judges of any such election board. The boundaries of said wards shall also be binding upon any and all persons who may be candidates in any of the elections enumerated in this section.
3.04 VOTER PRECINCTS. The City is divided into five (5) election precincts. The boundaries of the five (5) Election Precincts in the City, to be known as the First Precinct, Second Precinct, Third Precinct, Fourth Precinct and Fifth Precinct, are hereby established as follows:
1. Precinct One. Precinct One consists of the boundaries outlined in Code Section 3.01(1) “First Ward” of the City of Creston.
2. Precinct Two. Precinct Two consists of the boundaries established in Code Section 3.01(2) “Second Ward” and includes the areas of Douglas and Spaulding Townships, County of Union.
3. Precinct Three. Precinct Three consists of the boundaries established in Code Section 3.01(3) “Third Ward” of the City of Creston.
4. Precinct Four. Precinct Four consists of the boundaries established in Code Section 3.01(4) “Fourth Ward” and includes the area of Highland Township, County of Union.
5. Precinct Five. Precinct Five consists of the boundaries established in Code Section 3.01(5) “Fifth Ward” and includes the area of Lincoln Township, County of Union.
(Ch. 3 - Ord. 12-133 – Oct. 11 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
4.01 Municipal Infraction
4.04 Civil Citations
4.02 Environmental Violation
4.05 Alternative Relief
4.03 Penalties
4.06 Criminal Penalties
4.01 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
4.02 ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION. A municipal infraction which is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the City has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
1. A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial production or manufacturing of grain products or by a person engaged in such industrial production or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
4.03 PENALTIES. A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
1. Standard Civil Penalties.
A. First Offense - Not to exceed $500.00
B. Each Repeat Offense - Not to exceed $750.00
(Ord. 00-50 – Sep. 00 Supp.)
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat offense.
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Special Civil Penalties.
A. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an industrial user shall be punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or continues.
B. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation shall be punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each occurrence. However, an environmental violation shall not be subject to such penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
(2) The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24) hours from the time that the violation begins.
(3) The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight (8) hours.
4.04 CIVIL CITATIONS. Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
1. The name and address of the defendant.
2. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the citation.
3. The location and time of the infraction.
4. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or both.
5. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
6. The time and place of court appearance.
7. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
8. The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local housing regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or safety violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District Court, the City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
(Ord. 11-127 – Oct. 10 Supp.)
4.05 ALTERNATIVE RELIEF. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [8])
4.06 CRIMINAL PENALTIES. This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
5.01 Oaths
5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds
5.08 Resignations
5.03 Duties: General
5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records
5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor
5.11 Unlawful Use of City Property
5.06 Meetings
5.12 Gifts
5.01 OATHS. The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the following:
1. Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after being certified as elected but not later than noon of the first day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2. Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear that I will support the constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in Creston as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3. Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the business of their respective office:
A. Mayor
B. City Clerk
C. Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02 BONDS. Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1. Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2. Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
3. Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
4. Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])
5.03 DUTIES: GENERAL. Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04 BOOKS AND RECORDS. All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to inspection by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.1 & 22.2)
5.05 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR. Each officer shall transfer to the officer’s successor in office all books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06 MEETINGS. All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multimembered body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held in accordance with the following:
1. Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the time, date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
2. Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
3. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
5. Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
6. Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
5.07 CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1. Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[1])
2. Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[2])
3. City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3])
4. Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind described in subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contract is for professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid, if the remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the contract, and if the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[5])
5. Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[6])
6. Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[7])
7. Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer fire fighters or civil defense volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[8])
8. Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[9])
9. Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[4])
10. Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section, for the purchase of goods or services which benefit a City officer or employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative total purchase price of fifteen hundred dollars ($1500.00) in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[10])
11. Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[12])
5.08 RESIGNATIONS. An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not
eligible for appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was elected, if during that time the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall give the reasons, be
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date the request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10 VACANCIES. A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled, at the Council’s option, by one of the two following procedures:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2])
1. Appointment. By appointment, following public notice, by the remaining members of the Council. The appointment shall be made within sixty (60) days after the vacancy occurs and shall be for the period until the next regular City election unless there is an intervening special election for the City, in which event the election for the office shall be placed on the ballot at such special election. If the Council chooses to proceed under this subsection, the Council shall publish notice of the appointment in accordance with Section 372.13 of the Code of Iowa. If the remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the full membership, or if a petition is filed requesting an election, the Council shall call a special election as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2a])
2. Special Election. By a special election held to fill the office for the remaining balance of the unexpired term as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2b])
(Ord. 15-157 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
5.11 UNLAWFUL USE OF CITY PROPERTY. No person shall use or
permit any other person to use the property owned by the City for any private purpose and for personal gain, to the detriment of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 721.2[5])
5.12 GIFTS. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a public official, public employee or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
6.01 Nominating Method to be Used
6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition
6.05 Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition
6.06 Persons Elected
6.01 NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED. All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02 NOMINATIONS BY PETITION. Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by nomination paper or papers signed by not less than twenty-five (25) eligible electors, residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03 ADDING NAME BY PETITION. The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04 PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT. Each eligible elector who signs a nominating petition shall add to the signature the elector’s residence address, and date of signing. The person whose nomination is proposed by the petition shall not sign it. Each candidate shall complete and file a signed, notarized affidavit of candidacy. The affidavit shall be filed at the same time as the nomination petition. The affidavit shall be in the form prescribed by the Secretary of State and shall include information required by the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3)
6.05 FILING, PRESUMPTION, WITHDRAWALS, OBJECTIONS. The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
CHAPTER 6 CITY ELECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
6.06 PERSONS ELECTED. The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
7.01 Purpose
7.06 Budget Amendments
7.02 Finance Officer
7.07 Accounting
7.03 Cash Control
7.08 Financial Reports
7.04 Fund Control
7.09 Unauthorized Expenditure
7.05 Operating Budget Preparation
7.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02 FINANCE OFFICER. The Finance Officer is the finance and accounting officer of the City and is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03 CASH CONTROL. To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following shall apply:
1. Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any City officer shall be deposited through the office of the Finance Officer. If any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check drawn by the Finance Officer and approved by the Council only upon such officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law, ordinance or Council directive.
2. Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law, including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
3. Petty Cash Fund. The City Administrator shall be custodian of a petty cash fund not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the payment of small claims for minor purchases, collect-on-delivery transportation charges and small fees customarily paid at the time of rendering a service for which payments the City Administrator shall obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the City Administrator shall draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the accumulated expenditures and said check and supporting detail shall be submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
manner for claims and charged to the proper funds and accounts. It shall not be used for salary payments or other personal services or personal expenses.
(Ord. 04-72 – Mar. 04 Supp.)
7.04 FUND CONTROL. There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in accordance with the following:
1. Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the proper fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution.
2. Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was properly budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
3. Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the emergency fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5 [384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])
4. Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law, moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the debt service fund to meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])
5. Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the capital improvements reserve fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])
6. Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a utility or enterprise fund may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund and Road Use Tax Funds, by resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the utility or enterprise fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the operating account or the unrestricted retained earnings calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in excess of:
A. The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating and maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three (3) months, and
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
B. The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted accounts for the succeeding three (3) months.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])
7. Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05 OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION. The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with the following:
1. Proposal Prepared. The Finance Officer shall be responsible for preparation of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
2. Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions and other administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the Finance Officer for inclusion in the proposed City budget no later than January 15 of each year and in such form as may be required by the Finance Officer.
3. Submission to Council. The Finance Officer shall submit the completed budget proposal to the Council no later than February 1 of each year.
4. Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may make any adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate before accepting such proposal for publication, hearing and final adoption.
5. Notice of Hearing. Upon adopting a proposed budget the Council shall set a date for public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause notice of such hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to be published not less than four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date established for the hearing. Proof of such publication must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
6. Copies of Budget on File. Not less than twenty (20) days before the date that the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than ten (10) days before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
7. Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt, by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
shall certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget. Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06 BUDGET AMENDMENTS. A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
1. Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2 [384, 388])
2. Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to another must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.3 [384, 388])
3. Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the Council.
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388])
4. Administrative Transfers. The Finance Officer shall have the authority to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a specific activity without prior Council approval.
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388])
7.07 ACCOUNTING. The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the following:
1. Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and disbursed.
2. General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording unappropriated surpluses.
3. Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by any two of the following officers — the Finance Officer, Clerk and Mayor — following Council approval, except as provided by subsection 5 hereof.
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to record receipts by source and expenditures by program, sub-program and activity as will provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
5. Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize the Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the Council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting following such payment. The resolution authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include but is not limited to payment of utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.
7.08 FINANCIAL REPORTS. The Finance Officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:
1. Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program and activity for the preceding month.
2. Annual Report. Not later than October first of each year there shall be published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of the City for the current fiscal year. A copy of the published annual report must be furnished to the Auditor of State.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
7.09 UNAUTHORIZED EXPENDITURE. No City official or employee, or any person acting under color of such office or employment, shall knowingly make any contract or authorize any expenditure known by him or her to be in excess of that authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 721.2[1])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
8.01 Purpose
8.06 Applications
8.02 Definitions
8.07 Approval
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption
8.08 Exemption Repealed
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption
8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05 Limitations
8.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution centers and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate.
8.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year for which the exemption is received, except that actual value added by improvements to machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined by the local assessor as of January 1 of each year for which the exemption is received.
2. “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets. Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
3. “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings and structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of an existing building or structure which does not constitute complete replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or process those products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the City Council of the City upon the recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic Development.
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX
EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. “New machinery and equipment assessed as real estate” means new machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to Section 427A.1, Subsection 1, Paragraph “e”, Code of Iowa, unless the machinery or equipment is part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand the existing operational status.
5. “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings devoted primarily to research and development activities, including, but not limited to, the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental use, and corporate research services which do not have a primary purpose of providing on-site services to the public.
6. “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail.
8.03 PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION. The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution centers, and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate, is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation for a period of five (5) years.
8.04 AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION. The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows:
1. For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%)
2. For the second year, sixty percent (60%)
3. For the third year, forty-five percent (45%)
4. For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%)
5. For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)
8.05 LIMITATIONS. The granting of the exemption under this chapter shall be limited as follows:
1. New construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the new construction added;
2. No exemptions shall be allowed for new construction located within an area subject to a tax incremental financing within the James Subdivision Urban Development area.
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX
EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(Ord. 98-30 - Nov. 98 Supp.)
8.06 APPLICATIONS. An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added for which an exemption is claimed.
1. The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation.
2. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the Director of Revenue.
8.07 APPROVAL. A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the City Council resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing thereon. Thereafter, at least thirty days after such hearing the City Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction if the new construction is in conformance with City zoning. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate.
8.08 EXEMPTION REPEALED. When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council may repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration.
8.09 DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED. A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax exemption authorized by law.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 9
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 00-48 – Apr. 00 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 10
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
10.01 Designation of Urban Revitalization Area
10.05 Tax Exemption Schedule
10.02 Applicability to Commercial Property
10.06 Relocation
10.03 Definitions
10.07 Outside Funding Assistance
10.04 Qualifications for Eligibility
10.08 Application and Prior Approval
10.01 DESIGNATION OF URBAN REVITALIZATION AREA. In accordance with Chapter 404 of the Code of Iowa, the City has designated an Urban Revitalization Area and has adopted an amended Urban Revitalization Plan for said area. The geographic description of the Urban Revitalization Area is the entire area within the corporate boundaries of the City.
10.02 APPLICABILITY TO COMMERCIAL PROPERTY. The revitalization is applicable to all commercial property within the designated area. The revitalization is for both new construction and rehabilitation/additions of existing structures.
10.03 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Commercial” For the purposes of tax abatement, “commercial” property is defined as meeting all the following:
A. The property is located in either the C- 1 Commercial District or the C-2 Light Commercial Office District as identified on the official city zoning map and defined in the City Code.
B. The property is assessed by the Union County Assessor at the commercial property tax levy rate. (If the property has more than one assessment, only the portion taxed at the commercial rate qualifies for the abatement.)
C. The property offers goods and services and is retail in nature, including offices.
2. “Date of beginning of new construction of a building” means the date on which the building permit is signed.
3. “Date of beginning of rehabilitation of or additions to an existing building” means the date on which the building permit is signed.
4. “Qualified tenant” means the legal occupant of a commercial unit which is located within the Area and who has occupied the same unit continuously since one year prior to the City’s adoption of the Urban Revitalization Plan.
CHAPTER 10 COMMERCIAL PROPERTY TAX
EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
10.04 QUALIFICATIONS FOR ELIGIBILITY. Improvements are eligible for the tax abatement plan provided they satisfy all of the following requirements:
1. The improvements must be added during the time the area is designated as a revitalization area.
2. Improvements, consisting of rehabilitation or additions to existing buildings, must increase the actual value of the qualified real estate by at least fifteen percent (15%).
3. The improvements must be completed in accordance with all applicable zoning and other regulations of the City.
10.05 TAX EXEMPTION SCHEDULE. Each property owner may implement upon application and approval by the Council, as follows: All qualified real estate is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation on the actual value added by the improvements for a period of five (5) years. The amount of partial exemption is equal to a percent of the actual value added by the improvements determined as follows:
1. First year, eighty percent (80%);
2. Second year, sixty percent (60%);
3. Third year, forty percent (40%);
4. Fourth year, thirty percent (30%);
5. Fifth year, fifteen percent (15%).
10.06 RELOCATION. In the event relocation occurs as a result of the tax abatement program, the following provisions must be met:
1. Benefits. Upon application for and verification of eligibility for tax abatement to a property owner by the City, qualified tenants in designated areas, whose displacement is due to action on the part of a property owner to qualify for tax abatement under the Urban Revitalization Plan, shall be compensated by the property owner for one month’s rent and for actual reasonable moving and related expenses.
2. Eligibility. “Qualified tenant” as used in the Urban Revitalization Plan means the legal occupant of a commercial unit which is located within the Area and who has occupied the same unit continuously since one year prior to the City’s adoption of the Urban Revitalization Plan.
3. Actual reasonable moving and related expenses for which a qualified tenant of a commercial unit is entitled to include:
CHAPTER 10 COMMERCIAL PROPERTY TAX
EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
A. Transportation of the displaced person and personal property from the displacement to the replacement site. Transportation costs for a distance beyond twenty-five (25) miles are not eligible.
B. Packing, crating, unpacking and uncrating of personal property.
C. Disconnecting, dismantling, removing, reassembling and reinstalling relocated household appliances and other personal property.
4. Least Costly Approach. The amount of compensation for an eligible expense shall not exceed the least costly method of accomplishing the objective of the compensation without causing undue hardship to the displaced tenant and/or landlord.
10.07 OUTSIDE FUNDING ASSISTANCE. The City may seek Federal and/or State grant or loan programs in developing proposed projects. Several State and Federal programs are potentially available.
10.08 APPLICATION AND PRIOR APPROVAL. A person may submit a proposal for an improvement project to the Council to receive prior approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on the project. The Council shall, by resolution, give its prior approval for an improvement project if the project is in conformance with the Urban Revitalization Plan. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the improvements have been completed and found to be qualified real estate; however, if the proposal is not approved, the person may submit an amended proposal for the Council to approve or reject. All prior approvals for an improvement project shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of prior approval of the City; if construction has not begun by the date, prior approval is null and void. An application shall be filed for each new exemption claimed.
1. The first application for an exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with the Council by February 1, of the assessment year for which the exemption is first claimed, but not later than February 1, of the assessment year following the assessment year in which all improvements included in the project are first assessed for taxation. The application shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
A. The nature of the improvement;
B. The cost of the improvement;
C. The estimated or actual date of completion;
CHAPTER 10 COMMERCIAL PROPERTY TAX
EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
D. The tenants that occupied the owner’s building on the date the City adopted the resolution of finding.
2. The Council shall approve the application, subject to review by the local assessor, if the project is in conformation with the Urban Revitalization Plan developed by the City, is located within a designated revitalization area, and if the improvements were made during the time the area was so designated. The Council shall forward for review all approved applications to the appropriate local assessor by March 1, of each year.
Applications for exemptions for succeeding years for approved projects shall not be required.
(Ch. 10 - Ord. 14-152 – Apr. 14 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 11
URBAN RENEWAL AREA
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted and provide for Urban Renewal Areas in the City and remain in full force and effect, for division of tax levied on taxable property.
ORDINANCE NO.
ADOPTED
NAME OF AREA
2.19
February 2, 1988
Downtown Urban Renewal Area
05-90
November 1, 2005
Creston Economic Development District 2005 Urban Renewal Project Area
06-98
January 2, 2007
Amended Creston Urban Renewal Area (James Subdivision)
06-99
January 2, 2007
Creston Economic Development District 2006 Urban Renewal Project Area
15-160
June 16, 2015
Amendment No. 2 James Subdivision Urban Renewal Area
18-175
November 7, 2017
South Cottonwood Residential Urban Renewal Area
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
[The next page is 75]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 12
HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
12.01 Definitions
12.03 Effective Date
12.02 Tax Rate
12.04 Payment of Tax
12.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1. “Hotel” and “motel” shall be deemed to mean any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house, mobile home which is tangible personal property, tourist court or any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent, whether with or without meals, except the gross receipts from the renting of sleeping rooms in dormitories and in memorial unions of all State of Iowa universities and colleges.
2. “Renting” and “rent,” shall include any kind of direct or indirect charge for such sleeping rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in hotel or motel, as defined in this chapter.
12.02 TAX RATE. A tax is hereby imposed upon the gross receipts from the renting of any and all rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in any hotel or motel as defined in this chapter at the rate of seven percent (7%) of such gross receipts derived from the renting of a room, apartment or sleeping quarters while rented by the same person for a period of not more than thirty-one (31) consecutive days.
12.03 EFFECTIVE DATE. The tax herein above established shall be effective on January 1, 2003. The provision of this chapter may be repealed or the tax herein levied may be decreased by ordinance of the City effective on a date and in a manner provided by State law.
12.04 PAYMENT OF TAX. Such tax shall be paid as is provided in Chapter 422A of the Iowa Code. Proceeds of such tax shall be used for the purposes stated in said chapter.
(Ch. 12 – Ord. 02-63 – Dec. 02 Supp.)
CHAPTER 13 URBAN REVITALIZATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 13
URBAN REVITALIZATION
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO.
ADOPTED
NAME OF AREA
19-188
June 18, 2019
Creston Urban Revitalization Area 2019
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
15.01 Term of Office
15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties
15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
15.01 TERM OF OFFICE. The Mayor is elected for a term of four (4) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
1. Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City and presiding officer of the Council. (Ord. 00-46 – Apr. 00 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
2. Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
3. Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
4. Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance, amendment or resolution passed by the Council. If the Mayor exercises such veto power, the Mayor shall explain the reason for such veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the veto. The Council may override the Mayor’s veto by a two-thirds majority of the Council members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])
5. Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
6. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 00-46 – Apr. 00 Supp.)
7. Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf of the City.
8. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 00-46 – Apr. 00 Supp.)
CHAPTER 15 MAYOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
9. Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits which have been granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be issued by another municipal officer.
10. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 00-46 – Apr. 00 Supp.)
11. Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03 APPOINTMENTS. The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem, Police Chief and Fire Chief, Finance Committee, and the Mayor also appoints, with Council approval, the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1. Library Board of Trustees
2. Cemetery Board
3. Utility Board of Trustees
4. Civil Service Commission
5. Historic Preservation Commission
6. Zoning Board of Adjustment
7. Crest Area Arts and Recreation Center Board
8. Animal Control Officer.
In addition, the Mayor recommends individuals, for appointment by the Council, for membership on the Planning and Zoning Commission and Airport Commission.
(Ord. 00-46 – Apr. 00 Supp.)
15.04 COMPENSATION. The salary of the Mayor is forty-eight hundred dollars ($4800.00) per year, which sum includes $1200.00 to cover expenses. Effective January 1, 2008, the salary of the Mayor shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month. (Ord. 06-96 – Oct. 06 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05 VOTING. The Mayor is not a member of the Council and may not vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
16.01 Vice President of Council
16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties
16.04 Compensation
16.01 VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. The Mayor Pro Tem is vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to employ, or discharge from employment, officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ or discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03 VOTING RIGHTS. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04 COMPENSATION. If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or more, the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 17
COUNCIL
17.01 Number and Term of Council
17.04 Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties
17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power
17.06 Compensation
17.01 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of two (2) Council Members elected at large and one Council Member from each of five (5) wards as established by the Code of Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four (4) years.
17.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the following:
1. General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
2. Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards or create new wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
3. Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or repairs which may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38 [1])
4. Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the doing of work, or the making or construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
5. Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts, and no contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless either made by ordinance or resolution adopted by the Council, or reduced to writing and approved by the Council, or expressly authorized by ordinance or resolution adopted by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1] & 384.95 through 384.102)
CHAPTER 17 COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
6. Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
7. Records. The Council shall require the Clerk to maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
8. Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a regular City election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council members elected at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03 EXERCISE OF POWER. The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
1. Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment or resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on a public improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure which fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated. (Ord. 07-104 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2. Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor’s veto, the Council may repass the ordinance or resolution by a vote of not less than two-thirds of the Council members, and the ordinance or resolution becomes effective upon repassage and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
3. Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council, other than motions, become effective in one of the following ways:
CHAPTER 17 COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
A. If the Mayor signs the measure, a resolution becomes effective immediately upon signing and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the measure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1])
B. If the Mayor vetoes a measure and the Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the measure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
C. If the Mayor takes no action on the measure a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the date of passage and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when published, but not sooner than fourteen (14) days after the day of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the measure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
17.04 MEETINGS. Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are the following:
1. Regular Meetings. The time and place of the regular meetings of the Council shall be fixed by resolution of the Council.
2. Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or upon the written request of a majority of the members of the Council submitted to the Clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify the date, time, place and subject of the meeting and such notice shall be given personally or left at the usual place of residence of each member of the Council. A record of the service of notice shall be maintained by the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
3. Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
4. Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine the rules of its own proceedings by resolution and the Clerk shall keep such rules on file for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
5. Compelling Attendance. Any three (3) members of the Council can compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned or
CHAPTER 17 COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
duly called meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05 APPOINTMENTS. The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers, duties, compensation and term of office:
1. City Clerk
2. City Attorney
3. Finance Officer
4. Public Works Director
5. Airport Commission, upon recommendation of the Mayor
6. Planning and Zoning Commission, upon recommendation of the Mayor.
17.06 COMPENSATION. The salary of each Council member is eighteen dollars ($18.00) for each meeting attended. Effective January 1, 2008, the salary of each Council member shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month. (Ord. 06-96 – Oct. 06 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
18.01 Appointment and Compensation
18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General
18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Recording and Publication of Meeting Minutes
18.10 Issue Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures Considered
18.11 Notify Appointees
18.05 Publication
18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication
18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certify Measures
18.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL. The Clerk, or in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk, has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances and the law.
18.03 RECORDING AND PUBLICATION OF MEETING MINUTES. The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and within fifteen (15) days following a regular or special meeting shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the gross amount of the claim.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
18.04 RECORDING MEASURES CONSIDERED. The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council, with a statement where applicable, indicating whether the Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1])
18.05 PUBLICATION. The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows:
1. Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is required by the Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at least once, not less than four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days before
the date of the election, hearing or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Manner of Publication. A publication required by the Code of Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general circulation in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])
18.06 AUTHENTICATION. The Clerk shall authenticate all such measures except motions with the Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[3])
18.07 CERTIFY MEASURES. The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08 RECORDS. The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
1. Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
2. Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3. Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least eleven (11) years following the final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])
4. Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments which by ordinance and Code of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7 [4])
5. Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS. At the direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees, boards and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10 ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS. The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose for which issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11 NOTIFY APPOINTEES. The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices in the City government of their position and the time at which they shall assume the duties of their office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12 ELECTIONS. The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 15-157 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
18.13 CITY SEAL. The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be necessary or proper to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of which is the word “CRESTON” and around the margin of which are the words “CITY SEAL” and “IOWA.”
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER
19.01 Appointment
19.03 Duties of Treasurer
19.02 Compensation
19.01 APPOINTMENT. The City Administrator is the Treasurer and performs all functions required of the position of Treasurer.
(Ord. 06-97 – Jan. 07 Supp.)
19.02 COMPENSATION. The Finance Officer receives no additional compensation for performing the duties of the Treasurer.
19.03 DUTIES OF TREASURER. The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the City in the manner provided by law, and Council direction.
2. Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
3. Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from whom, and for what purpose received.
4. Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements, money or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
5. Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received by the Treasurer from special assessments.
6. Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by the Council.
7. Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of each fund and amounts received and disbursed.
8. Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all payments of interest and principal.
9. Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by resolution or ordinance.
CHAPTER 19 CITY TREASURER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
10. Reconciliation with Clerk. Reconcile the Treasurer’s books with the Clerk’s every month.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
20.01 Appointment and Compensation
20.06 Opinion on Contracts
20.02 Attorney for City
20.07 Provide Legal Opinion
20.03 Power of Attorney
20.08 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.04 Ordinance Preparation
20.09 Prepare Documents
20.05 Review and Comment
20.10 Representation of City Employees
20.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve at the pleasure of the Council. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
20.02 ATTORNEY FOR CITY. The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court, tribunal, commission or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03 POWER OF ATTORNEY. The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04 ORDINANCE PREPARATION. The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances which the Council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05 REVIEW AND COMMENT. The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council and interested department heads, giving an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06 OPINION ON CONTRACTS. The City Attorney shall, at the request of the Council, offer a written opinion on and recommend alterations pertaining to contracts involving the City before they become binding upon the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 20 CITY ATTORNEY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
20.07 PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION. The City Attorney shall, upon request, give advice or a written legal opinion upon all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS. The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.09 PREPARE DOCUMENTS. The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms and other writings which may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.10 REPRESENTATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES. The City Attorney shall not appear on behalf of any City officer or employee before any court or tribunal for the purely private benefit of said officer or employee. The City Attorney shall, however, if directed by the Council, appear to defend any City officer or employee in any cause of action arising out of or in the course of the performance of the duties of his or her office or employment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.8)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 21
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
21.01 Office Created
21.03 Duties
21.02 Compensation
21.01 OFFICE CREATED. The office of City Administrator is hereby created, which office shall be filled by a majority vote of Council. The appointee shall hold office during the pleasure of the Council and shall be subject to removal by a majority vote of the Council.
21.02 COMPENSATION. The City Administrator shall receive such annual salary as the Council shall from time to time determine by resolution and the payment shall be made biweekly from the Treasury of the City in the manner provided for payment of other officers and employees.
21.03 DUTIES. The powers and duties of the City Administrator shall include the following:
1. Attend all meetings of the Council unless excused by the Council.
2. Attend meetings of the administrative boards and commissions of the City as required by the Council.
3. Administration of all ordinances, resolutions, Council policies, directives and procedures.
4. Recommend to the Council such measures as he or she deems necessary or expedient for good government and the welfare of the City.
5. Prepare and administer the City’s annual operating budget.
6. Keep the Council fully advised as to financial and other conditions of the City and of its future needs.
7. Prepare and submit to the Council annually the required budgets.
8. Be responsible for all bookkeeping and accounting procedures for the City in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Be responsible for the completion of the annual City audit through outside contractors.
9. Conduct a continuous study of the City government’s operating procedures, organizations and facilities and made recommendations for fiscal and other policy changes to the Council whenever necessary.
10. Supervision of City personnel through department heads.
CHAPTER 21 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
11. Employ, reclassify or discharge all employees, subject to Council approval, subject to the provisions of the Veteran’s Preference law and the Civil Service law, except the City Clerk, Police Chief and Fire Chief.
12. Supervise the official conduct and work response of all officers and employees of the City who are appointed or employed by the City Administrator.
13. Evaluate or oversee the evaluations of the performance of all City employees.
14. Supervise all purchases of material and supplies and see that such materials and supplies are received and are of a quality and character called for and deemed necessary.
15. Supervise the maintenance and management of all City property, excluding streets, alleys and sewers and the property improvements and undertaking managed by the Municipal Utility Board of Trustees.
16. Cooperate with any administrative agency or utility board of trustees.
17. Perform other duties at the Council’s direction.
18. Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered into in accordance with law or ordinance. The City Administrator shall not represent the City where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law, ordinance, or Council direction.
19. Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City such specialized and professional services not already available to the City. In executing the order of the Council, the City Administrator shall act in accordance with the Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.
20. Nuisances. Issue written order for removal, at public expense, any nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
(Subsections 18-20 added by Ord. 00-47 – Apr. 00 Supp.)
(Ch. 21 – Ord. 99-38 – Oct. 99 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
22.01 Public Library
22.07 Nonresident Use
22.02 Library Trustees
22.08 Expenditures
22.03 Qualifications of Trustees
22.09 Annual Report
22.04 Organization of the Board
22.10 Injury to Books or Property
22.05 Powers and Duties
22.11 Theft
22.06 Contracting with Other Libraries
22.12 Notice Posted
22.01 PUBLIC LIBRARY. The free public library for the City is known as the Matilda J. Gibson Memorial Library. It is referred to in this chapter as the Library.
22.02 LIBRARY TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board, consists of four (4) resident members and one nonresident member. All resident members are to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The nonresident member is to be appointed by the County Board of Supervisors.
22.03 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES. All resident members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the City. The nonresident member of the Board shall be a bona fide citizen and resident of the unincorporated County. Members shall be over the age of eighteen (18) years.
22.04 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD. The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
1. Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for six (6) years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July first. Appointments shall be made every two (2) years of one-third (1/3) the total number or as near as possible, to stagger the terms.
2. Vacancies. The position of any resident Trustee shall be vacated if such member moves permanently from the City. The position of a nonresident Trustee shall be vacated if such member moves permanently from the County or into the City. The position of any Trustee shall be deemed vacated if such member is absent from six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the City or County. Vacancies in the Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment except that the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
3. Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.
22.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1. Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary, and such other officers as it deems necessary.
2. Physical Plant. To have charge, control and supervision of the Library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
3. Charge of Affairs. To direct all affairs of the Library.
4. Hiring of Personnel. To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting in favor thereof.
5. Removal of Personnel. To recommend the removal of the librarian, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or employees for misdemeanor, incompetence or inattention to duty, subject however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
6. Purchases. To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
7. Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service exists.
8. Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and management of the Library and the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
9. Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the rules of the Board.
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
10. Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
11. Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the City on behalf of the Library.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)
12. Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
13. County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements with the local County historical association where such exists, and to set apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and pay for the same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
22.06 CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES. The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the following:
1. Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County, or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)
2. Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five (5) percent in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented to the governing body not less than forty (40) days before the election. The proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
22.07 NONRESIDENT USE. The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
1. Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
2. Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
3. Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
4. Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other Library materials to nonresidents.
22.08 EXPENDITURES. All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)
22.09 ANNUAL REPORT. The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library during the year, together with such further information as may be required by the Council.
22.10 INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY. It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to the Library or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
22.11 THEFT. No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with the intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
22.12 NOTICE POSTED. There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices informing the public of the following:
1. Failure To Return. Failure to return Library materials for two (2) months or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or failure to return Library equipment for one (1) month or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
of intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
2. Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be detained and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission
23.04 Compensation
23.02 Term of Office
23.05 Powers and Duties
23.03 Vacancies
23.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. There shall be a City Planning and Zoning Commission, here and after referred to as the Commission, consisting of five (5) members. Commission members shall be qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of a City plan and shall not hold an elective office in the City government. (Ord. 04-76 – Oct. 04 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1)
23.02 TERM OF OFFICE. The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five (5) years. The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03 VACANCIES. If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04 COMPENSATION. All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1. Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the Chair person’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2. Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 23 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
3. Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments, supplements, changes or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4. Recommendations of Improvements. No statuary, memorial or work of art in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixtures, public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or erected, or site therefor obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any department of the City for the erection or location thereof until and unless the design and proposed location of any such improvement shall have been submitted to the Commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except such requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement when the Commission after thirty (30) days’ written notice requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
5. Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivision or re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to the Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
6. Review and Comment of Street and Park Improvements. No plan for any street, park, parkway, boulevard, traffic-way, river front, or other public improvement affecting the City plan shall be finally approved by the City or the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first have been submitted to the Commission and the Commission shall have had thirty (30) days within which to file its recommendations thereon.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
7. Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete and exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the City all sums of money appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts, donations or payments whatsoever which are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
8. Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 23 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
9. Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts, disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 24
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
24.01 Park and Recreation Board Created
24.04 Reports
24.02 Board Organization
24.05 Rules
24.03 Duties of the Board
24.06 Penalties
24.01 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD CREATED. A Park and Recreation Board is hereby created to advise the Council on the needed facilities to provide open space such as parks, playgrounds and community facilities for other forms of recreation. It shall, through the Director of the Park and Recreation Department, plan and oversee City programs, facilities and encourage other programs and facilities to enhance the leisure time activities of the City’s residents of all ages.
24.02 BOARD ORGANIZATION. The Board shall consist of three (3) members, all residents of the City, and shall be elected and hold their offices for overlapping terms of six (6) years. Compensation for service shall be at the rate determined by the Council. The Mayor shall designate the first Chairperson and Vice Chairperson and the Board shall choose its Chairperson and Vice Chairperson every two years thereafter. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor and Council.
24.03 DUTIES OF THE BOARD. The duties of the Board are to plan for the facilities and recreational needs of the City and provide policy to the Director for implementation. The Board has authority over the properties and hiring authority over the Director of the department. The Director is responsible to the Board for the total department functions.
24.04 REPORTS. The Board shall make written reports to the Council of its activities by minutes of the monthly meeting as it deems advisable or upon Council request. Its revenues and expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Finance Officer in the manner of other departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each member of the Board and to the department head and in the Finance Officer’s report to the Council.
24.05 RULES. The Board has the power to make rules and regulations for the use of park or other recreational facilities or for the conduct of recreation programs, and any changes of these rules and regulations will be amended by the Board. Such rules shall be either posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide adequate notice to the using public.
CHAPTER 24 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
24.06 PENALTIES. Violations of Board rules may be cause for denial of use of a facility or participation in a program, but such denial which extends more than one day may be appealed to the Board for a hearing. The violation may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 25
CREST AREA ARTS AND RECREATION CENTER BOARD
25.01 Board Created
25.04 Reports
25.02 Board Organization
25.05 Rules
25.03 Duties of the Board
25.06 Penalties
25.01 BOARD CREATED. A Crest Area Arts and Recreation Board is hereby created to operate and maintain the needed facilities for the Crest Area Arts and Recreation Center. The Board shall also plan and oversee the operation of the Crest Area Arts and Recreation Center program and encourage other programs to be operated in the Crest Area Arts and Recreation Center.
25.02 BOARD ORGANIZATION. The Board shall consist of five (5) members, with three (3) members being residents of the City appointed by the Mayor, with approval of the Council, for overlapping five-year terms. The Mayor shall appoint one member from the City Council, one Arts Council member and one at-large member. The fourth and fifth members shall be appointed by the Creston Community Betterment Foundation and Southwestern Community College, respectively. The Mayor shall designate the terms of the first appointed members and the first Chairperson and Vice Chairperson and the Board shall choose its Chairperson and Vice Chairperson every one or two years thereafter. Members shall serve without compensation but may receive their actual expenses. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor and Council.
25.03 DUTIES OF THE BOARD. In addition to its duties to operate and maintain the Crest Area Arts and Recreation Center, and oversee and plan programs for the Center, the Board shall have the authority over the property and personnel for the Crest Area Arts and Recreation Center, subject to limitations of expenditures for salaries and supplies, contracts and capital outlay set forth in the annual budget provided for by the Council for the Crest Area Arts and Recreation Center. The Board shall also cooperate with the Mayor in the allotment of time for City employees for use of the Crest Area Arts and Recreation Center. The Chairperson shall warrant by the Clerk for invoices submitted and approved by the Board.
25.04 REPORTS. The Board shall make written reports to the Council of its activities from time to time as the Council requests. Its revenues and expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Finance Officer in the manner of other departmental revenues and expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each member of the Board and in the Finance Officer’s report to the Council.
CHAPTER 25 CREST AREA
ARTS AND RECREATION CENTER BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
25.05 RULES. The Board has the power to make rules and regulations for the use of the Crest Area Arts and Recreation Center subject to the approval of the rules by the Council. Such rules shall be either posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide adequate notice to the using public.
25.06 PENALTIES. Violations of Board rules which have been approved by the Council and adopted by ordinance may be cause for denial of use of a facility or participation in a program. The violation of Board rules may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 26
UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
26.01 Purpose
26.06 Control of Funds
26.02 Appointment of Trustees
26.07 Accounting
26.03 Compensation
26.08 Discriminatory Rates Illegal
26.04 Vacancies
26.09 Discontinuance of Board
26.05 Powers and Duties of the Board
26.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the municipally owned Waterworks Utility by a Board of Trustees.
26.02 APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, five (5) persons to serve as trustees for staggered six (6) year terms. No public officer or salaried employee of the City may serve on the Utility Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
26.03 COMPENSATION. The Council shall by resolution set the compensation of Board members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
26.04 VACANCIES. An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Board of Trustees shall be made in the same manner as an original appointment except that such appointment shall be for the balance of the unexpired term.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
26.05 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD. The Board of Trustees may exercise all powers of the City in relation to the utility, with the following exceptions:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4)
1. Taxes, ordinances and bonds. The Board may not certify taxes to be levied, pass ordinances or amendments, or issue general obligation or special assessment bonds.
Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[1])
2. Property. Title to all property must be in the name of the City but the Board has full control of such property subject to limitations imposed by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[2])
3. Reports to Council. The Board shall make a detailed annual report to the Council including a complete financial statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[3])
CHAPTER 26 UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. Proceedings Published. Immediately following a regular or special meeting, the Board Secretary shall prepare and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a condensed statement of proceedings including a list of all claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[4])
26.06 CONTROL OF FUNDS. The Board shall control tax revenues allocated to it as well as all moneys derived from operations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)
26.07 ACCOUNTING. Utility moneys must be held in a separate utility fund.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)
26.08 DISCRIMINATORY RATES ILLEGAL. The utility may not provide use or service at a discriminatory rate, except to the City or its agencies, as provided in Section 384.91, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.6)
26.09 DISCONTINUANCE OF BOARD. A proposal, on motion of the Council or upon receipt of a valid petition, to discontinue the utility board is subject to the approval of the voters of the City, except that the Board may be discontinued by resolution of the Council when the utility is disposed of or leased for a period of over five (5) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 27
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
27.01 Purpose
27.06 Chairperson
27.02 Appointment and Term
27.07 Clerk
27.03 Qualifications
27.08 Records
27.04 Human Rights Commission
27.09 Rooms and Supplies
27.05 Compensation
27.10 Powers and Duties
27.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the appointment, powers and duties of a Civil Service Commission in accordance with the requirements of State law.
27.02 APPOINTMENT AND TERM. A Civil Service Commission consisting of three (3) members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. Following appointment of the initial Commission according to law one member shall be appointed one (1) year after each regular municipal election to hold office for a term of four (4) years commencing the first Monday of April following such municipal election.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.1)
(Ord. 08-110 – Jul. 08 Supp.)
27.03 QUALIFICATIONS. Commissioners must be citizens of Iowa, eligible electors and residents of the City preceding their appointment. No person while on said Commission shall hold or be a candidate for any office of public trust.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
27.04 HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 27.03, when a human rights commission has been established, the director thereof shall ex officio be a member, without vote, of the Civil Service Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
27.05 COMPENSATION. Civil service Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
27.06 CHAIRPERSON. The Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
27.07 CLERK. The City Clerk shall be clerk of the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
CHAPTER 27 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
27.08 RECORDS. The Civil Service Commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and also a complete individual service record of each civil service employee which record shall be permanent and kept up to date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
27.09 ROOMS AND SUPPLIES. The Council shall provide suitable rooms in which the Commission may hold its meetings and supply the Commission with all necessary equipment and a qualified shorthand reporter or an electronic voice recording device to enable it to properly perform its duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.5)
27.10 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall administer the civil service procedure as contained in Chapter 400, Code of Iowa, and amendments thereto and shall have, exercise and perform all powers and duties as provided thereby.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 28
CEMETERY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
28.01 Cemetery Board
28.04 Reports
28.02 Board Organization
28.05 Rules
28.03 Duties
28.06 Veterans
28.01 CEMETERY BOARD. A Cemetery Board of Trustees (hereinafter referred to as the “Board”) is responsible for the maintenance and operation of the municipal cemetery known as Graceland Cemetery, to provide grounds for human interments. The Board also advises the Council from time to time on the need for additional cemetery facilities.
28.02 BOARD ORGANIZATION. The Board consists of three (3) members who are residents of the City, appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council, for overlapping six-year terms. The Chairperson is chosen from and by the members of the Board, and he or she serves in that capacity for a term of two (2) years. Members serve without compensation, but they may receive reimbursement for their actual expenses.
28.03 DUTIES. As a part of its duties for the maintenance and operation of Graceland Cemetery, the Board oversees the cemetery properties and the hiring and discharge of personnel working on cemetery properties, subject to the limitation of expenditures for salaries and supplies, contracts and capital outlays set forth in the annual budget provided by the Council for cemetery operations. The Board may appoint a caretaker who shall have authority to order supplies at the direction of the Board, consistent with the procedures established by the Council for all departments of the City, and payments will be made by warrant/check written by the Secretary of the Board for invoices submitted and approved by the Board.
28.04 REPORTS. The Board shall make written reports to the Council of its activities from time to time as it deems advisable or upon Council request. Its revenues and expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Secretary of the Board to the Council in the manner of other departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be included in the Finance Officer’s report to the Council.
28.05 RULES. The Board has the power to make rules and regulations for the use and operations of the cemetery, subject to the approval of the rules by the Council.
28.06 VETERANS. Any veteran, as defined in Section 35.1 of the Code of Iowa, who is a landowner or who lives within the City shall be allowed to purchase an
CHAPTER 28 CEMETERY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
interment space and to be interred within the cemetery. In addition, any veteran who purchases an interment space within the cemetery shall be allowed to purchase an interment space for interment of the spouse of the veteran if such a space is available, and the surviving spouse of a veteran interred within the cemetery shall be allowed to purchase an interment space and be interred within the cemetery if such a space is available.
(Ord. 13-140 – Dec. 12 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.304)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 29
AIRPORT COMMISSION
29.01 Airport Commission
29.05 Officers
29.02 Appointment and Term
29.06 Powers and Duties
29.03 Vacancies
29.07 Annual Report
29.04 Compensation
29.01 AIRPORT COMMISSION. There shall be an airport commission consisting of five (5) resident voters of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)
29.02 APPOINTMENT AND TERM. Commissioners shall be appointed by the Council for staggered terms of six (6) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)
29.03 VACANCIES. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Council to fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment was made.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)
29.04 COMPENSATION. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)
29.05 OFFICERS. The commission shall elect from its own members a chairperson and secretary who shall serve for such term as the commission shall determine.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)
29.06 POWERS AND DUTIES. The commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties.
1. General. The commission has all the powers in relation to airports granted to cities under State law except powers to sell the airport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.21)
2. Budget. The commission shall annually certify the amount of tax to be levied for airport purposes, and upon such certification the Council may include all or a portion of said amount in its budget.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.21)
3. Funds. All funds derived from taxation or otherwise for airport purposes shall be under the full and absolute control of the commission for the purposes prescribed by law, and shall be deposited with the Treasurer or City Clerk to the credit of the airport commission, and shall be disbursed only
CHAPTER 29 AIRPORT COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
on the written orders of the airport commission, including the payment of all indebtedness arising from the acquisition and construction of airports and the maintenance, operation, and extension thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.21)
29.07 ANNUAL REPORT. The airport commission shall immediately after the close of each municipal fiscal year, file with the Finance Officer a detailed and audited written report of all money received and disbursed by the commission during said fiscal year, and shall publish a summary thereof in an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.22)
CHAPTER 30 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 30
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
30.01 Purpose and Intent
30.03 Structure of the Commission
30.02 Definitions
30.04 Powers of the Commission
30.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purposes of this chapter are to:
1. Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public through the recognition, enhancement and perpetuation of sites and districts of historical and cultural significance;
2. Safeguard the City’s historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage by preserving sites and districts of historic and cultural significance;
3. Stabilize and improve property values;
4. Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the past;
5. Protect and enhance the City’s attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and stimulus to business thereby provided;
6. Strengthen the economy of the City;
7. Promote the use of sites and districts of historic and cultural significance as places for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the City.
30.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Commission” means the Creston Historic Preservation Commission, as established by this chapter.
2. “Historic district” means an area which contains a significant portion of buildings, structures or other improvements which, considered as a whole, possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association, and which area as a whole:
A. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction, or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
CHAPTER 30 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
B. Is associated with events that have made significant contributions to the broad patterns of our local, state or national history; or
C. Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or integrity based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting, workmanship, materials or combinations thereof which is deemed to add significantly to the value and attractiveness of properties within such area; or
D. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
E. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history.
3. “Historic site” means a structure or building which:
A. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or
B. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
C. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
D. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history.
30.03 STRUCTURE OF COMMISSION.
1. The Commission consists of five (5) members who reside within the boundaries of the City of Creston. The Mayor or his appointee shall be the City Council liaison and attend commission meetings as a non-voting member. (Ord. 19-185 – Feb. 19 Supp.)
2. Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. Members shall demonstrate a positive interest in historic preservation, possessing interest or expertise in architecture, architectural history, historic preservation, city planning, building rehabilitation, conservation in general or real estate.
3. The Commission members are appointed for staggered terms of three (3) years. Members may serve for more than one term. Each member shall serve until the appointment of a successor.
CHAPTER 30 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. Vacancies occurring in the Commission, other than expiration of term of office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the member replaced.
5. Members shall serve without compensation.
6. A simple majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
7. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside over all Commission meetings and elect a Secretary who shall be responsible for maintaining written records of the Commission’s proceedings.
8. The Commission shall meet at least three (3) times a year.
30.04 POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
1. The Commission may conduct studies for the identification and designation of historic districts and sites meeting the definitions established by this chapter. The Commission may proceed at its own initiative or upon a petition from any person, group or association. The Commission shall maintain records of all studies and inventories for public use.
2. The Commission may make a recommendation to the State Bureau of Historic Preservation for the listing of an historic district or site in the National Register of Historic Places and may conduct a public hearing thereon.
3. In addition to those duties and powers specified above, the Commission may, with Council approval,
A. Accept unconditional gifts and donations of real and person property, including money, for the purpose of historic preservation;
B. Acquire, by purchase, bequest or donation, fee and lesser interests in historic properties, including properties adjacent to or associated with historic properties;
C. Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the Commission;
D. Lease, sell and otherwise transfer or dispose of historic properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that will preserve the property.
E. Contract, with the approval of the Council, with State or Federal government or other organizations;
CHAPTER 30 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
F. Cooperate with Federal, State and local governments in the pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation;
G. Provide information for the purpose of historic preservation to the Council; and
H. Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic properties within its jurisdiction.
I. Create an Endowment whose interest would be used to fund:
(1) The office of Historic Preservation, including a manager, staff person and day-to-day operational costs such as rent, communications and educational expenses.
(2) A matching grant for rehabilitation of potentially historic properties in and around Creston.
(3) A revolving loan program for rehabilitation of potentially historic properties in and around Creston
(4) Historic preservation education opportunities for anyone interested in rehabilitation of potentially historic properties in and around Creston.
(Ord. 08-108 – Jun. 08 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 31
CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION
31.01 Commission Established
31.02 Term
31.01 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED. A Cable Television Commission is hereby established to consist of five (5) members comprised as follows: one (1) Council person, one (1) representative selected by the Council, and three (3) at large representatives.
31.02 TERM. Each Commission representative shall be appointed for a three (3) year rotating term.
(Ch. 31 – Ord. 98-32 – Jan. 99 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 32
CITY FINANCE COMMITTEE
32.01 Finance Committee
32.03 Vacancies
32.02 Term of Office
32.04 Powers and Duties
32.01 FINANCE COMMITTEE. There shall be created a City Finance Committee, consisting of five (5) members. The standing members of the City Finance Committee shall be the Mayor and the City Administrator. The remaining three (3) members shall be three Council persons, appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 06-93 – June 06 Supp.)
32.02 TERM OF OFFICE. The term of office of the members of the Finance Committee shall be four (4) years. The Finance Committee shall be reappointed in January immediately following each mayoral election, which includes special elections.
32.03 VACANCIES. If an vacancy exists on the Finance Committee, caused by resignation or otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as the original appointee.
32.04 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Finance Committee shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1. The Mayor shall serve as the Chairperson of the Finance Committee and the entire Committee shall elect a Vice-Chairperson. The Chairperson of the Committee will call a meeting at a time in which financial matters must be dealt with concerning City operations. Also, any member of the Committee shall have the right to request a meeting to deliberate any issue pertinent to the Finance Committee as a whole. The request for a meeting shall be given to the City Clerk, who shall make the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson, in the absence of the Chairperson, aware of the request.
2. The Finance Committee is to review the City annual budget, amend the budget document as necessary and determine the tax levy to carry out the budget and report the budget to the City Council, as a whole, for final passage.
3. The Finance Committee shall take appointments from City Department Heads or personnel in order to discuss financial matters deemed important to the City operations.
4. The Finance Committee, as part of their review of the annual City budget, is to receive budget requests, comments and recommendations from
CHAPTER 32 CITY FINANCE COMMITTEE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
any board and/or departments within the City. Due deliberation is to be given to any and all requests submitted to the Finance Committee. The Finance Committee will either deny the request or pass favorable comment to the Council as a whole.
5. The Finance Committee shall review with the City Administrator recommended budget amendments to the current City budget and make recommendations to City Council, as a whole, on such amendments.
6. The Finance Committee will review grant application funding requests if the applicant cannot obtain such funding through appropriate board action due to budgetary constraints in effect.
7. The Finance Committee may approve a funding request, on its own authority, if the total costs are not to exceed $5,000.00 and only if the funding is available through the appropriate Program area of the overall City budget currently in effect.
8. The Finance Committee is responsible for the review of the salaries of all non-bargaining unit employees. Salary recommendations are to be made to the full Council as to merit increases, cost-of-living increases, changes in benefits or starting wages for new hires.
9. The Finance Committee will review all contracts in which the City is engaged at least 120 days prior to the expiration date. Council may approve the contracts as a whole with the recommendation of the Finance Committee. An example is the contract for hauling residential solid waste.
10. The City Council, from time to time, may make certain requests of the Finance Committee, as needs dictate. In each instance, the Finance Committee will only take the role of review and report back to City Council, as a whole, with their findings, unless specifically authorized to take final actions. Any final actions taken shall be reported to City Council.
11. The Finance Committee may be asked to assume other duties or responsibilities by action of City Council, which are not outlined in this chapter. In each instance, the Finance Committee will act accordingly and respond as quickly as possible to any requests made by City Council.
(Ch. 32 – Ord. 04-73 – Mar. 04 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 35
POLICE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Department Established
35.06 Police Chief Appointed
35.02 Organization
35.07 Duty Hours
35.03 Peace Officer Qualifications
35.08 Police Chief: Duties
35.04 Required Training
35.09 Departmental Rules
35.05 Compensation
35.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED. The police department of the City is established to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the corporate limits of the City.
35.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the Council.
35.03 PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS. In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
35.04 REQUIRED TRAINING. All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment. Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11 [2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
35.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
35.06 POLICE CHIEF APPOINTED. The Mayor shall appoint the Police Chief. (Ord. 99-43 – Jan. 00 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.13)
35.07 DUTY HOURS. The Police Chief shall be on call twenty-four (24) hours per day, and shall work a regular shift from seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. to three o’clock (3:00) p.m. from Monday through Friday of each week, unless circumstances warrant a different schedule. All other officers shall work the shifts and hours as directed by the Police Chief.
CHAPTER 35 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
35.08 POLICE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
1. General. Perform all duties required of the police chief or marshal by law or ordinance.
2. Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
3. Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the Police Chief.
4. Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
5. Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
6. Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers, boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
7. Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
8. Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the charge.
9. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
10. Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles, equipment and materials of the department.
35.09 DEPARTMENTAL RULES. The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary for the operation of the department.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 36
FIRE DEPARTMENT
36.01 Establishment and Purpose
36.06 Fire Chief: Duties
36.02 Organization
36.07 Obedience to Fire Chief
36.02A Volunteer Fire Department
36.08 Department Rules
36.03 Training
36.09 Calls Outside Fire District
36.04 Compensation
36.10 Mutual Aid
36.05 Fire Chief Appointed
36.11 Authority to Cite Violations
36.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE. A fire department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there is no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
36.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and personnel as may be authorized and approved by the Creston City Council. The Creston Fire Department shall consist of both professional and volunteer firefighters. (Ord. 03-71 – Dec. 03 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
36.02A VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Volunteer Fire Department Incorporated is recognized as a non-profit corporation to promote the welfare of all firefighting personnel, fire prevention and other civic and social activities as may be specified in the Volunteer Fire Department Incorporated Articles of Incorporation. (Ord. 03-71 – Dec. 03 Supp.)
36.03 TRAINING. All members of the department shall attend and actively participate in regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
36.04 COMPENSATION. Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
36.05 FIRE CHIEF APPOINTED. The Mayor shall appoint the Fire Chief.
36.06 FIRE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 36 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
1. Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
2. Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits and development of fire emergency plans.
3. Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation, investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
4. Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the fire department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
5. Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a scene, place or erect ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent accidents or interference with the fire fighting efforts of the fire department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
6. Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency, discipline and control of the fire department. The members of the fire department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
7. Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the fire department.
8. Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all fires causing an estimated damage of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more or emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within ten (10) days following the end of the month. The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin
CHAPTER 36 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
of the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
9. Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of making such investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance may be necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
10. Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants, caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
11. Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal, and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)
12. Records. Cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel, fire fighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by value, type and location of buildings.
13. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
36.07 OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Chief.
36.08 DEPARTMENT RULES. The Fire Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with this Code of Ordinances and the rules of the Civil Service Commission, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary for the operation of the department.
36.09 CALLS OUTSIDE FIRE DISTRICT. The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the Fire District if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and that such action will not endanger persons and property within the Fire District.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
CHAPTER 36 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
36.10 MUTUAL AID. Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
36.11 AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS. Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for violations of state and/or local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
36.12 EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE. (REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 97-14 - OCT. 97 SUPP.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 37
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
37.01 Purpose
37.06 Site Access
37.02 Definitions
37.07 Incident Commander
37.03 Mitigation and Cleanup Required
37.08 City Liability
37.04 Liability for Mitigation and Cleanup Costs
37.09 Penalty
37.05 Notification
37.01 PURPOSE. In order to reduce the danger to public health, safety and welfare from the storage, transportation, and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated to establish responsibility for the removal and cleanup of spills, leakage or release of hazardous substances which create an immediate and/or a potential danger to the public health or safety within the boundary limits of Creston.
37.02 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, these terms have the following meanings:
1. “Cleanup” means the same as defined in Section 455B.381 (1), Code of Iowa.
2. “Hazardous condition” means any circumstances as defined in Section 455B.381 Subsection 4, Code of Iowa.
3. “Hazardous substance” means any substance as defined in Section 455B.411 Subsection 2, Code of Iowa.
4. “Hazardous waste” means such wastes as defined in Section 455B.411 Subsection 3 (a) and (b), Code of Iowa.
5. “Incident Commander” means the Fire Chief or his or her duly appointed designee, of the Fire Department in whose district said release or potential release has occurred. The Chief or his or her duly appointed designee may also appoint one or more Fire Chiefs or Assistant Fire Chiefs of any municipality or Fire District or Fire Department as his or her temporary deputy, or may delegate the duties of Incident Commander to one or more such Fire Chiefs or Assistant Fire Chiefs, at his or her discretion.
6. “Mitigation” means any action designed to contain, control, stop or eliminate a release or potential release of a hazardous substance or waste or condition.
7. “Release” means a threatened or real emission, discharge, spillage, leakage, pumping, pouring, emptying or dumping of a hazardous substance into or onto the land, air, or waters of Creston as stated in Section 455B.381 Subsection 8, Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 37 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
8. “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles, stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers, and any person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance, as defined in Section 455B.381 (7), Code of Iowa.
9. “Treatment” means a method, technique, or process, including neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of a hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to render the substance non-hazardous, safe for transport, amenable for recovery and for storage, or to reduce it in volume. “Treatment” includes any activity or processing composition designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of a hazardous substance to render it non-hazardous, as defined in Section 455B.411(10), Code of Iowa.
37.03 MITIGATION AND CLEANUP REQUIRED.
1. Whenever a hazardous condition is created so that a hazardous substance or waste or a constituent of a hazardous substance or waste has entered or may enter the environment, be emitted into the air, or discharged into any waters, including ground waters, the person having control over a hazardous substance shall alleviate, or cause to alleviate, the condition by cleanup or treatment, as defined by Section 37.02, and shall restore the affected area to its condition prior to the hazardous condition as far as practicable. The cost of cleanup or treatment shall be borne by the responsible person.
2. If the person having control over a hazardous substance cannot be located within a reasonable period of time, or if the person having control over a hazardous substance does not cause the cleanup or treatment to begin within a time reasonable in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the City of Creston may, by establishment of control of the scene of emergency by the Incident Commander and having rendered the problem as no longer an emergency, give notice to the responsible person, which shall be reasonable considering the character of the hazardous condition. The notice shall state a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup or treatment and state that the City of Creston will proceed to procure cleanup or treatment services if the cleanup or treatment is not accomplished within the deadline. The notice shall state that the person having control over a hazardous substance will be billed for all costs associated with the cleanup or treatment and that the total shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days following the receipt of the bill.
CHAPTER 37 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
3. If the bill for the above services is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City of Creston may proceed, after service of notice, either by certified mail or by one publication in a newspaper having general circulation within Union County, and hearing before the City Council, to obtain payment by all available legal means.
4. If the costs of response, mitigation, cleanup and/or treatment is beyond the capability of the City of Creston, the Incident Commander shall proceed pursuant to Section 455B.387 Subsection (2), Code of Iowa, and immediately seek any state or federal resources that may be available for such mitigation, cleanup or treatment.
5. Whenever a hazardous condition which creates an immediate danger to public health or safety exists and it is necessary to take immediate action to correct this condition in order to protect the public health or safety, the Incident Commander or any Peace Officer may, without prior notice to the responsible person, take any mitigation action necessary to limit the immediate danger to the public health or safety. The responsible person shall be liable for the cost of all such mitigation action.
37.04 LIABILITY FOR MITIGATION AND CLEANUP COSTS. The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City of Creston and/or the Fire Department having jurisdiction whose personnel or equipment is involved, for all of the following:
1. All costs relative to Section 37.03(2) of this chapter, as may be incurred by the County, any city or Fire Department.
2. Reasonable costs incurred by the County, any city, or Fire Department, to evacuate persons from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person having control over a hazardous substance.
3. Reasonable damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of Creston property, including but not limited to, parks, roads and rights of way, resulting from a hazardous condition caused by the person having control over a hazardous substance, including the cost of assessing the injury, destruction or loss.
4. The repair and/or replacement costs for all equipment, material or supplies, lost, contaminated or otherwise rendered unusable, including laboratory analytical costs, transportation costs, disposal costs; costs of repair or decontamination of equipment; medical expense, and personal injury to personnel responding to the hazardous condition; and all such other costs and expenses of the County, City or Fire Department(s) expended to deal with the hazardous condition.
CHAPTER 37 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
37.05 NOTIFICATION.
1. Any person, manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing of a hazardous substance or waste shall notify the Union County Law Enforcement Center via 911 of the occurrence of a hazardous situation as soon as possible, but no later than six (6) hours after the onset or discovery of the hazardous situation. The Law Enforcement Center shall immediately notify the Fire Department having jurisdiction, the appropriate law enforcement agency, the Union County Emergency Coordinator, the operator of any threatened public or private water supply system which may be threatened and the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
2. Any County or municipal employee or member of a law enforcement agency, city or township fire department, or ambulance service who discovers a hazardous condition shall immediately notify the Union County Law Enforcement Communication Center Dispatcher, and upon receipt of such notification the Law Enforcement Communication Center Dispatcher shall proceed in the manner provided in subsection 1 of this section.
37.06 SITE ACCESS. Access to any site, public or private, where a prohibited discharge, whether it is potential, occurring, or after the fact, is indicated, or suspected will be provided to the Incident Commander of the fire department, its officers and personnel, to law enforcement personnel and to the emergency coordinator for the purpose of evaluating the threat to the public, for monitoring, containment, cleanup and restoration activities.
37.07 INCIDENT COMMANDER. If the circumstance so requires, the Incident Commander may:
1. Establish zones or other boundaries at, near or projected from the site of a hazardous condition and limit the access to such zones to persons engaged in the mitigation, cleanup or treatment of the hazardous situation, and/or
2. Order the evacuation of persons to areas away from the site or potential sites of a hazardous condition based on nationally published information and/or the manufacturer’s information.
3. No person shall disobey an order of the Incident Commander or any law enforcement official acting under direction of the Incident Commander issued under this section.
37.08 CITY LIABILITY. Except where the City of Creston is the responsible person as defined in Section 37.02(8) of this chapter, the City of Creston shall not be liable to any person for claims or damages, injuries, or loss resulting from any hazardous condition.
CHAPTER 37 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
37.09 PENALTY. Any person violating any provision, section, or paragraph of this chapter shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor, and upon conviction be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days. Each day of the violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ch. 37 – Ord. 07-100 – Aug. 07 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
40.01 Assault
40.05 Failure to Disperse
40.02 Harassment
40.06 Loitering in Municipal Parking Lots
40.03 Disorderly Conduct
40.07 Loitering in Public Places
40.04 Unlawful Assembly
40.08 Disorderly Houses
40.01 ASSAULT. No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
1. Pain or Injury. Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to, or which is intended to result in physical contact which will be insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [1])
2. Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act which is intended to place another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [2])
However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk or serious injury or breach of the peace, the act is not an assault. Provided, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle, or other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school grounds or at an official school function regardless of the location, the act is not an assault, whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between students or other individuals if the degree and the force of the intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
40.02 HARASSMENT. No person shall commit harassment.
1. A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy or alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
A. Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, or writing without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
B. Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat occupied by another person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
C. Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
D. Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2. A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other. “Personal contact” does not require a physical touching or oral communication, although it may include these types of contacts.
40.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT. No person shall do any of the following:
1. Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [1])
2. Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence, business or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [2])
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2A. Loud Motor Vehicle Stereos or Radios. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a public in a public place or on any public street, highway, or alley in which a stereo (stereo, tape player, compact disc player, radio or any other sound amplification device) can be heard a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more from the vehicle. The provisions of this subsection may be enforced following personal observation or hearing by any police officer or upon receipt of a complaint made or filed with the Police Department by the person disturbed by such noise. (Ord. 01-58 – Sep. 01 Supp.)
3. Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [3])
4. Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [4])
5. False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [5])
6. Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[6])
A. “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
B. “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
C. “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be flown from a pole or mast.
D. “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make imperfect.
E. “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate or trample.
F. “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a machine, vehicle or animal to tread upon.
(Ord. 07-103 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
7. Obstruct Use of Street. Without authority or justification, obstruct any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder its lawful use by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [7])
8. Obstruct Use of Buildings. Harass or intimidate, by word or conduct, individuals attempting to enter or exit businesses or other public places.
9. Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 1,000 feet of the building or other location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within 1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
A. Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the funeral procession.
B. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another.
C. Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
(Ord. 16-161 – Nov. 15 Supp.)
40.04 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY. It is unlawful for three (3) or more persons to assemble together, with them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of them will commit a public offense. No person shall willingly join in or remain part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe it is such.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)
40.05 FAILURE TO DISPERSE. A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse. No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
40.06 LOITERING IN MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS. It is unlawful for any person to congregate, stand, loaf or loiter in any municipal parking lot which is either owned, operated or leased by the City, and it is also unlawful for any person
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
to make any remarks, gestures, noises, signs or to do any other act which will in any way disturb, annoy, insult or interfere with any person using said parking facilities.
40.07 LOITERING IN PUBLIC PLACES. It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
1. Congregate, stand, loaf or loiter upon any street, sidewalk, bridge or crossing so as to obstruct the same or to hinder or prevent persons passing or attempting or desiring to pass thereon;
2. Congregate, stand, loaf or loiter in or in front of any hall, lobby, doorway, passage or entrance of any public building, theatre, hotel, eating house, lodging house, office building, store, shop, office or factory, or in front of persons walking along or into or out of the same or persons attempting or desiring to do so;
3. Sit upon or lean upon or against any railing or other barrier about any area, entrance, basement or window to obstruct the light or to prevent passage of persons or tenants occupying the building to which such area, entrance, basement or window belongs.
40.08 DISORDERLY HOUSES.
1. Definition. The term “disorderly house” means any structure or any room therein, or any part of the premises adjacent thereto, in or upon which occurs any disorderly conduct as defined in Section 723.4 of the Code of Iowa as it now reads or may hereafter be amended or any violation of the provisions of Section 40.03 of this Code of Ordinances or any of the other following prohibited activities:
A. The open storage, use or consumption of a controlled substance as defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, under which possession of such substance would be an offense;
B. Gambling in violation of Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa;
C. Dispensing, selling or consumption of an alcoholic beverage in violation of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa;
D. Acts of prostitution, pimping or pandering as defined in Chapter 725 of the Code of Iowa.
2. Keeping a Disorderly House. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly keep a disorderly house as defined in subsection 1. For purposes of this section, “keep” means ownership or having control of a structure or room therein or any part of the adjacent premises. A person shall not be guilty of this offense if that person had taken steps reasonably calculated to
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
abate, eliminate or prevent further acts of disorderly conduct at that time and place including, but not limited to, calling the police or other law enforcement agency and reporting the disorderly conduct which was occurring.
3. Frequenting or Being Found in a Disorderly House. It is unlawful for any person to frequent or be found in a disorderly house as defined in this section. As used herein, a structure, room or adjacent premises may only be defined as a disorderly house at such time disorderly conduct and other acts, which are included in the definition of disorderly house, may be occurring upon the premises.
4. Violation. A violation of this section will constitute a simple misdemeanor with a scheduled fine of one hundred dollars ($100). Second and subsequent violations will have a scheduled fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250).
(Ord. 10-122 – Mar. 10 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances
41.07 Barbed Wire and Electric Fences
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with
41.08 Discharging Weapons
Public Safety Entities
41.09 Throwing and Shooting
41.03 Refusing to Assist Officer
41.10 Urinating and Defecating
41.04 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees
41.11 Fireworks Permit
41.05 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators
41.12 Wells
41.06 Antenna and Radio Wires
41.01 DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES. No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02 FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES. No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
1. Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department, a law enforcement authority, or other public safety entity knowing that the information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the act did not occur.
2. Telephone an emergency 911 communications center knowing that he or she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or assistance.
3. Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who enters the information on a citation.
41.03 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER. Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause, refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.04 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.05 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS. No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.06 ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES. It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or public building without written consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
41.07 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES. It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless such land consists of ten (10) acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
41.08 DISCHARGING WEAPONS. It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers, pistols, guns, BB guns or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by written consent of the Council.
41.09 THROWING AND SHOOTING. It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks or missiles of any kind or to shoot arrows, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or public building, without written consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
41.10 URINATING AND DEFECATING. It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway or window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
41.11 FIREWORKS PERMIT. It is unlawful for any person to use or explode any fireworks as defined in Section 727.2 of the Code of Iowa; provided the City may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for the display of fireworks by a City agency, fair associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups of individuals approved by City authorities when such fireworks display will be handled by a competent operator. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring organization has filed with the City evidence of insurance in the following amounts:
1. Personal Injury: - $250,000.00 per person.
2. Property Damage: - $50,000.00.
3. Total Exposure: - $1,000,000.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
41.12 WELLS. Any owner, tenant or occupant of any premises within the City on which a well, whether abandoned or in use, is situated shall provide such well with a substantial cover.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
42.01 Trespassing
42.05 Unauthorized Entry
42.02 Criminal Mischief
42.06 Fraud
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices
42.07 Theft
42.04 Posting Notices on Utility Poles
42.01 TRESPASSING. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the property of another. As used in this section, the term “property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent structure whether publicly or privately owned. The term “trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa Sec. 716.7 and 716.8)
1. Entering Property Without Permission. Entering upon or in property without the express permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2a])
2. Entering or Remaining on Property. Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2b])
3. Interfering with Lawful Use of Property. Entering upon or in private property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2c])
4. Using Property Without Permission. Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2d])
None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another,
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
provided that the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7(3))
42.02 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally damage, deface, alter or destroy tangible property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03 DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES. It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement or notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04 POSTING NOTICES ON UTILITY POLES. It is unlawful for any person to post, paste, paint or tack any sign, bill, sale bill or poster on any telephone or electric light pole within the City limits.
42.05 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY. No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building, premises or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an unauthorized entry.
42.06 FRAUD. It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.07 THEFT. It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age
45.03 Public Consumption or Intoxication
45.02 Persons Age Eighteen, Nineteen and Twenty
45.04 Open Container on Streets and Highways
45.01 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. As used in this section, “legal age” means 21 years of age or more.
1. Social Host. A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control over, property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of eighteen, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic beverage. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the property or to a person under legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)
2. Purchase, Consume, or Possess. A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic beverage given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular course of the person’s employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[3])
3. Misrepresentation of Age. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage from any liquor control licensee or wine or beer permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
(Ord. 19-182 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
45.02 PERSONS AGE EIGHTEEN, NINETEEN AND TWENTY. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 15-158 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
45.03 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1. As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of Iowa.
B. “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
C. “Peace Officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the Code of Iowa.
D. “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public or private school which provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten through grade twelve.
2. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine or beer on public school property or while attending any public or private school-related function. A person shall not be intoxicated or simulate intoxication in a public place. A person violating this subsection is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
3. When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.04 OPEN CONTAINER ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. (See Section 62.07 of this Code of Ordinances)
[The next page is 229]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
46.01 Cigarettes and Tobacco
46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Minors in Taverns
46.04 Curfew
46.01 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO. It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to smoke, use, possess, purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes by a person under eighteen years of age shall not constitute a violation of this section if said person possesses the tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
(Ord. 15-154 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
46.02 MINORS IN TAVERNS. It is unlawful for any person under legal age to enter, remain in or frequent a business establishment holding a retail liquor or beer permit unless over fifty percent (50%) of the dollar volume of the business establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods. The provisions of this section do not apply to premises having a Class “C” beer permit.
46.03 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY. It is unlawful for any per-son to encourage any child under eighteen (18) years of age to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
46.04 CURFEW. This matter comes before the Creston City Council and the Council has determined that a curfew for minors is necessary to promote the public health, safety, moral and general welfare of the City and specifically to reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults responsible for minors; to protect the public from the illegal acts of minors committed after the curfew hour; and to protect minors from improper influences and criminal activity that prevail in public places after the curfew hour.
1. Definitions. For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
A. “Emergency errand” means, but is not limited to, an errand relating to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
other situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious illness, bodily injury or loss of life.
B. “Knowingly” means knowledge which a responsible adult should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that responsible adult’s custody. It is intended to continue to hold the neglectful or careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable standard of adult responsibility through an objective test. It is therefore no defense that an adult responsible for a minor was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of the minor.
C. “Minor” means any unemancipated person under the age of sixteen (16) years.
D. “Nonsecured custody” means custody in an unlocked multipurpose area, such as a lobby, office or interrogation room which is not designed, set aside or used as a secure detention area, and the person arrested is not physically secured during the period of custody in the area; the person is physically accompanied by a law enforcement officer or a person employed by the facility where the person arrested is being held; and the use of the area is limited to providing nonsecured custody only while awaiting transfer to an appropriate juvenile facility or to court, for contacting of and release to the person’s parents or other responsible adult or for other administrative purposes; but not for longer than six (6) hours without the oral or written order of a judge or magistrate authorizing the detention. A judge shall not extend the period of time in excess of six hours beyond the initial six-hour period.
E. “Public place” includes stores, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, streets, alleys and sidewalks dedicated to public use; and also includes such parts of buildings and other premises whether publicly or privately owned which are used by the general public or to which the general public is invited commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the general public is permitted without specific invitation; or to which the general public has access. For purposes of this section, a vehicle or other conveyance is considered to be a public place when in the areas defined above.
F. “Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian or other adult specifically authorized by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have custody or control of a minor.
2. Curfew Established. It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any of the alleys, streets or public places or to be in places of business and
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
amusement in the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily Sunday through Thursday; and between the hours of 12:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily Friday and Saturday.
3. Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the curfew:
A. During the summer vacation from school, it is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any of the alleys, streets or public places or to be in places of business and amusement in the City between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.
B. The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.
C. The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or on either side of the place where the minor resides and the adult responsible for the minor has given permission for the minor to be there.
D. The minor is present at or is traveling between home and one of the following:
(1) Minor’s place of employment in a business, trade or occupation in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged or, if traveling, after the end or before the beginning of work;
(2) Minor’s place of religious activity or, if traveling, after the end or before the beginning of the religious activity;
(3) Governmental or political activity or, if traveling, after the end or before the beginning of the activity;
(4) School activity or, if traveling, after the end or before the beginning of the activity;
(5) Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration, sit-in or meeting of an association for the advancement of economic, political, religious or cultural matters, or for any other activity protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution guarantees of free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of assembly or, if traveling, after the end or before the beginning of the activity.
E. The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible adult;
F. The minor is engaged in interstate travel through the City beginning, ending or passing through the City when such travel is by direct route.
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any responsible adult knowingly to permit or to allow a minor to be in any public place in the City within the time periods prohibited by this section unless the minor’s presence falls within one of the above exceptions.
5. Enforcement Procedures.
A. Determination of Age. In determining the age of the juvenile and in the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver’s license, a law enforcement officer on the street shall, in the first instance, use his or her best judgment in determining age.
B. Grounds for Arrest; Conditions of Custody. Grounds for arrest are that the person refuses to sign the citation without qualification; persists in violating the ordinance; refuses to provide proper identification or to identify himself or herself; or constitutes an immediate threat to the person’s own safety or to the safety of the public. A law enforcement officer who arrests a minor for a curfew violation may keep the minor in custody either in a shelter care facility or in any non-secured setting. The officer shall not place bodily restraints, such as handcuffs, on the minor unless the minor physically resists or threatens physical violence when being taken into custody. A minor shall not be placed in detention following a curfew violation.
C. Notification of Responsible Adult. After a minor is taken into custody, the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the minor as soon as possible. The minor shall be released to the adult responsible for the minor upon the promise of such person to produce the child in court at such time as the court may direct.
D. Minor Without Adult Supervision. If a law enforcement officer determines that a minor does not have adult supervision because the law enforcement officer cannot locate the minor’s parent, guardian or other person legally responsible for the care of the minor, within a reasonable time, the law enforcement officer shall attempt to place the minor with an adult relative of the minor, an adult person who cares for the child or another adult person who is known to the child.
6. Penalties.
A. Responsible Adult’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the law enforcement officer shall, by certified mail or personal delivery, send to the adult responsible for the minor, written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew ordinance
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
against both the responsible adult and minor, with applicable penalties.
B. Responsible Adult’s Second Violation. Any responsible adult as defined in this section who, following receipt of a warning, knowingly allows the minor to violate any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a municipal infraction.
C. Minor’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the law enforcement officer shall give the minor a written warning, which states that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew ordinance against the responsible adult and the minor, with applicable penalties, or, at the law enforcement officer’s discretion, may issue the minor a citation for a first violation.
D. Minor’s Second Violation. For the minor’s second and subsequent violations of any of the provisions of this section, the minor is guilty of a municipal infraction.
(Ord. 05-81 – Feb. 05 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
47.01 Purpose
47.05 Parks Closed
47.02 Use of Drives Required
47.06 Camping
47.03 Fires
47.07 McKinley Lake
47.04 Littering
47.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02 USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED. No person shall drive any car, cycle or other vehicle, or ride or lead any horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the City unless written permission has been given by the Park and Recreation Board.
47.03 FIRES. No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and such fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be immediately used by some other party.
47.04 LITTERING. No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose.
47.05 PARKS CLOSED.
1. McKinley Park. The closing hour for the public park situated in the City known as McKinley Park is ten o’clock (10:00) p.m., and the only exceptions to this closing hour shall be for the park custodian and members of the custodian’s family, persons attending or participating in or in any manner connected with athletic contests at the athletic field situated in the park, and persons participating in or attending any carnival, Fourth of July celebration or similar special events held in the park, or attending any meeting at the Izaak Walton Club House in the park or persons staying overnight n the tourist camping area or in the Girl Scout cabin situated in the park.
2. Fishing in McKinley Park. Any person desiring to fish at the Lake situated in McKinley Park may enter the park at any time between the hours of four o’clock (4:00) a.m. and ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. It is unlawful for any person other than said fisherman or persons coming within the
CHAPTER 47 PARK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
exceptions mentioned in subsection 1 hereof to be present in McKinley Park between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m.
3. Rainbow Park. The closing hour for the public park situated in the City known as Rainbow Park is hereby fixed at ten o’clock (10:00) p.m., and it is unlawful for any person, other than the custodian of said park to be present therein between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. It is also unlawful for any child under the age of twelve (12) to be present in the park during the hour of nine o’clock (9:00) p.m. to ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult.
47.06 CAMPING. No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portions prescribed or designated by the Council, and the City may refuse camping privileges or rescind any and all camping privileges for cause.
47.07 McKINLEY LAKE. With the exception of a motor vehicle operated at the direction of the Park and Recreation Board of the City, it is unlawful to operate a motor vehicle of any kind or character on the ice on McKinley Lake in the City.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
50.01 Definition of Nuisance
50.08 Request for Hearing
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated
50.09 Abatement in Emergency
50.03 Other Conditions
50.10 Abatement by City
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited
50.11 Collection of Costs
50.05 Nuisance Abatement
50.12 Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement
50.06 Notice to Abate: Contents
50.13 Failure to Abate
50.07 Method of Service
50.01 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED. The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions which are deemed to be nuisances in the City:
1. Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing or using any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals or the public.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[1])
A. In addition to the foregoing, offensive smells shall include any business trade, manufacture or other operation or condition of property, including, but not limited to residential property, which gives rise to noxious or offensive odors, gases, vapors, smoke, dust, pollen, or fumes which may be injurious, offensive, dangerous or prejudicial, or which threaten the health or safety of individuals or the public. (Ord. 16-164 – Jan. 16 Supp.)
2. Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[2])
3. Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor or collection of water.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[3])
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[4])
5. Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or burying grounds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[5])
6. Billboards. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether erected and constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section 62.08 and Chapter 146)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[7])
7. Cottonwood Trees. Cotton-bearing cottonwood trees and all other cotton-bearing poplar trees. (See also Chapter 151)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[8])
8. Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof construction. (See also Chapter 51)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[10])
9. Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[11])
10. Weeds, Brush. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 05-88 – Jul. 05 Supp.) (See Chapter 56)
11. Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease. (See also Chapter 151)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.12[13])
12. Tree Limbs. All limbs of trees which are less than eight (8) feet above the surface of any public sidewalk or street. (See also Chapter 151)
13. Wires. All wires which are strung less than twenty (20) feet above the surface of any public sidewalk or street.
14. Explosives and Flammable Liquids. All explosives, flammable liquids and other substances which are dangerous, stored in any manner or in any amount other than as provided by law or ordinance.
15. Fireworks. Use or display of fireworks, except as provided by law or ordinance. (See also Section 41.12)
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
16. Noises. All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations. (See also Sections 40.03(2) and 62.04)
17. Excavations. Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under such conditions as are provided by law and ordinance.
18. Obstructing Streets or Sidewalks. Any use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or any use of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the public streets, alleys or sidewalks. (See also Chapters 135 and 136)
19. Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within one thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[9])
20. Lawn Furniture. No person shall use or cause to be used any indoor or automotive couches, sofas, chairs or furniture on porches, decks, gazebos, or in any lawn. All furniture to be used in these areas must be exterior or lawn furniture. (Ord. 11-131 – Jul. 11 Supp.)
50.03 OTHER CONDITIONS. The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations prohibiting or restricting other conditions which are deemed to be nuisances:
1. Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)
2. Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 145)
3. Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
4. Trees (See Chapter 151)
50.04 NUISANCES PROHIBITED. The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT. Whenever the Mayor or other authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such officer shall cause to be served upon the property owner a written notice to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time after notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
50.06 NOTICE TO ABATE: CONTENTS. The notice to abate shall contain:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1. Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the nuisance.
2. Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance, if stationary.
3. Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance.
4. Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement.
5. Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against such person.
50.07 METHOD OF SERVICE. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or sent by certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.08 REQUEST FOR HEARING. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the officer ordering the abatement as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the officer ordering the abatement within the time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a written decision as to whether a nuisance exists. If the officer finds that a nuisance exists, he or she must order it abated within an additional time, which must be reasonable under the circumstances. An appeal from the decision may be had by immediately filing a written notice with the hearing officer. This appeal will be heard before the Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
50.09 ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY. If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any action which may be required under this chapter without prior notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in Section 50.11 after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of Sections 50.05, 50.06 and 50.07 and hearing as provided in Section 50.08.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.10 ABATEMENT BY CITY. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
expense account shall be filed with the Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.11 COLLECTION OF COSTS. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one (1) month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner, as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.12 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT. If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), the City may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten (10) annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property under State law. (Ord. 13-141 – Dec. 12 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
50.13 FAILURE TO ABATE. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
EDITOR’S NOTE
A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is included in the appendix of this Code of Ordinances.
Caution is urged in the use of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly where cost of abatement is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to whether or not a nuisance does in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with abatement and assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court under Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
51.01 Definitions
51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited
51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
51.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
2. “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the County Treasurer or unlicensed and which has any of the following characteristics:
A. Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield, window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
B. Broken or Loose Part. Any vehicle with a broken or loose fender, door, bumper, hood, hood ornament, door handle, window handle, running board, steering wheel, trunk top, trunk handle, radio aerial, tail pipe or decorative piece.
C. Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle which has become the habitat for rats, mice, or snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
D. Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle which contains gasoline or any other flammable fuel.
E. Inoperable. Any motor vehicle if it lacks an engine or two or more wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally inoperable.
CHAPTER 51 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
F. Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle which, because of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to the public health and safety.
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
3. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof.
51.02 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk vehicle.
51.03 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE. It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property, unless excepted by Section 51.04, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall be prima facie liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04 EXCEPTIONS. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk vehicle stored within:
1. Structure. A garage or other enclosed structure; or
2. Salvage Yard. An auto salvage yard or junk yard lawfully operated in compliance with the City’s Zoning Regulations.
3. Other Businesses. The premises of a business enterprise operated in a district properly zoned therefor, when necessary to the operation of said business enterprise, as authorized under the Zoning Regulations of the City.
CHAPTER 51 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
51.05 NOTICE TO ABATE. Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five (5) days initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 52
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
52.01 Definitions
52.03 Deliver, Possess or Manufacture
52.02 Use or Possession
52.01 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, the folowing terms and words are hereby defined:
1. “Drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in manufacturing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance, as defined by Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as amended. It includes, but is not limited to:
A. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances.
B. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana.
C. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body.
D. Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, which shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
(2) Water pipes;
(3) Carburetion tubes and devices;
(4) Smoking and carburetion masks;
(5) Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
(6) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
CHAPTER 52 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(7) Chamber pipes;
(8) Carburetor pipes;
(9) Electric pipes;
(10) Air-driven pipes;
(11) Chillums;
(12) Bongs;
(13) Ice pipes or chillers.
2. “Determination of what constitutes whether an object is drug paraphernalia” means in determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:
A. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use.
B. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object under any State or Federal law in relation to any controlled substance, as defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
C. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
D. The proximity of the object to a controlled substance as defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
E. The existence of any residue of a controlled substance as defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
F. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, delivering it to any person whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, may use the object to facilitate a violation of this chapter. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this chapter shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
G. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.
H. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use.
I. National and local advertising concerning its use.
J. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
CHAPTER 52 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
K. Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items in the County, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
L. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise.
M. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the County.
N. Expert testimony concerning its use.
52.02 USE OR POSSESSION. It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess drug paraphernalia to manufacture, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance as defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as amended. However, it shall not be unlawful to possess drug paraphernalia for the purpose of use as evidence or for use in education.
52.03 DELIVER, POSSESS OR MANUFACTURE. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess or manufacture drug paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used to manufacture, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance as defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as amended. However, it shall not be unlawful to possess drug paraphernalia for the purpose of use as evidence or for use in education.
(Ch. 52 - Ord. 96-12 - Oct. 97 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions
55.12 Potentially Dangerous Animals and Dangerous
55.02 Animal Control Officer
Animals
55.03 Animal Neglect
55.13 Rabies Vaccination
55.04 Livestock Neglect
55.14 Leash Control by Proclamation
55.05 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs
55.15 Owner’s Duty
55.06 At Large Prohibited
55.16 Confinement
55.07 Destruction of Animals at Large
55.17 Catching and Impounding
55.08 Damage or Interference
55.18 Enforcement
55.09 Annoyance or Disturbance
55.19 Penalty
55.10 Sanitation
55.20 Livestock Confinement Operations
55.11 Number of Animals Limited
55.21 Livestock
55.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1. “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
2. “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel. All dogs at large must be on a leash sufficient to restrain the dog.
(Ord. 99-39 – Oct. 99 Supp.)
3. “Commercial” means any operation where the raising and sale of livestock is not for personal, household or family purposes, excluding all sale barn operations.
4. “Confinement” means an operation where animals are raised within a confined area and fed with no area for grazing or pasturing.
5. “Dangerous animal” means any dog or other animal which has committed an unprovoked attack on a person or animal requiring treatment deemed necessary by either a medical professional or doctor of veterinary medicine.
6. “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine, ovine or porcine species; farm deer, as defined in Section 481A.1 of the Code of Iowa; ostriches, rheas, emus, or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
7. “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an animal.
8. “Potentially dangerous animal” means any animal which approaches a person or an animal on any public or private property in a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
55.02 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The Animal Control Officer is appointed by the Mayor and is paid an amount on a regular basis as determined by the Council. The Animal Control Officer is authorized and empowered to seize and impound in the City Pound any animal found at large and may use any humane means or force necessary to impound or catch an animal at large and is further authorized to request assistance from the Police Department if it is needed. The Animal Control Officer is provided a vehicle by the City suitable for the purpose of transporting and impounding animals and which is otherwise outfitted for the purpose of animal control. The Animal Control Officer is responsible for collecting all costs and expenses from the owners for all animals redeemed.
55.03 ANIMAL NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in any place, an animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during confinement with a sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined dog or cat with adequate shelter, or to torture, deprive of necessary sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any means which causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
55.04 LIVESTOCK NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance or to injure or destroy livestock by any means which causes pain or suffering in a manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.05 ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS. A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
55.06 AT LARGE PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within the corporate limits of the City.
55.07 DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS AT LARGE. It is lawful for an Animal Control Officer or peace officer to destroy, if necessary, any animal found at large which cannot be captured.
55.08 DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE. It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference with, the premises.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
55.09 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE. It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons by frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise; or, by running after or chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles.
55.10 SANITATION. It is the duty of every person owning or having custody or control of an animal to clean up, remove and dispose of the feces deposited by such animal upon public property, park property, public right-of-way or the property of another person.
55.11 NUMBER OF ANIMALS LIMITED. It is unlawful for an owner to harbor or house on the same premises more than four (4) animals over the age of six (6) months unless such animals are in a licensed kennel or pet shop, veterinary hospital or animal grooming shop.
55.12 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
1. Any animal which has been deemed potentially dangerous or dangerous shall be seized by the Animal Control Officer or other authorized person and impounded at the City Pound.
2. Any animal which has been deemed potentially dangerous or dangerous is considered to be a nuisance and notice to abate said nuisance shall be filed by the Mayor’s office on the owner of the animal for removal of the animal from the City limits within seventy-two (72) hours from the reception of the notice. Upon payment of pickup and impoundment fees, and upon the animal being tattooed or a microchip being implanted at the owner’s expense, the animal’s owner may remove the animal from the City Pound to outside the City limits. The animal’s owner shall provide a notarized statement designating the place to which the animal has been removed. An animal not removed as required or an animal which has been removed and which is found again within the City limits shall be destroyed with no right of appeal.(Ord. 99-45 – Jan. 00 Supp.)
3. Any owner of an animal deemed potentially dangerous or dangerous may appeal the removal order to the Council by having a written appeal on file at the office of the Clerk within seventy-two (72) hours of reception of the notice.
4. Any owner of an animal which the Council allows to be returned to the owner’s premises shall, while on the owner’s property, be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure must have minimum
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
dimensions of four feet by eight feet (4? by 8?) and must have secure sides and secure top. The bottom shall be constructed of a four-inch (4?) concrete slab. The enclosure must also provide protection from the elements for the animal. A potentially dangerous or dangerous animal may be off the owner’s premises if it is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six feet (6?) in length and under the control of a responsible adult person. Any such animal which is again found to be at large shall be seized by the Animal Control Officer or other authorized person and the animal shall be destroyed, with the owner having no right of appeal.
5. Vicious Dogs. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person owning, possessing, harboring or having the care of a vicious dog shall permit such animal within the City except as provided in this section of the Code.
A. For purposes of this section a “vicious” dog means:
(1) Any dog which has attacked a human being or domestic animal one or more times, without provocation; or
(2) Any dog with a history, tendency or disposition to attack, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or
(3) Any dog that snaps, bites, or manifests a disposition to snap or bite; or
(4) Any dog that has been trained for dog fighting, animal fighting or animal baiting, or is owned or kept for such purposes; or
(5) Any dog trained to attack human beings upon command or spontaneously in response to human activities except dogs owned by and under the control of the police department, a law enforcement agency of the State of Iowa or the United States or a branch of the armed forces of the United States; or
(6) The American pit bull terrier breed of dog; or
(7) The American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog; or
(8) Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being predominantly of the breeds of American Pit Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier.
B. Vicious Animal Exceptions. The owner of any dog defined as a vicious dog shall comply with the following:
(1) Present to the City Clerk a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
State of Iowa, providing personal liability insurance coverage as in a homeowner’s policy, with a minimum amount of liability of $100,000 for the injury or death of any person, for damage to property of others and for acts of negligence by the owner or his other agents, in the keeping or owning of such vicious dog. The certificate shall require notice to the City, in conformity with general standards for certificates of insurance, if the underlying policy of insurance is cancelled for any reason. In lieu of such a certificate, a copy of a current homeowner’s policy designating these requirements shall be sufficient proof of insurance for purposes of this subsection. If a certificate of insurance or policy is not immediately available, a binder indicating the coverage may be accepted for up to thirty (30) days subsequent to the determination that a dog is vicious; however, if after thirty (30) days a certificate of insurance or a policy has not been submitted, the dog shall be removed from the City within ten (10) days.
C. Confinement of Vicious Dogs.
(1) All vicious dogs shall be securely confined within an occupied house or residence or in a secured, enclosed and locked pen or structure. Such pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides, or in lieu of a top, walls at least six feet in height or at least six feet taller than an internal structure, such as a doghouse.
(2) All pens or structures designed, constructed or used to confine vicious dogs must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a four inch thick concrete bottom, attached to the sides of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet so as to prevent digging under the walls by the confined vicious dog.
(3) All structures erected to house vicious dogs must comply with the City zoning and building regulations. All such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on it own volition.
(4) No person shall permit a vicious dog to go outside its pen or structure unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than six (6) feet in length. No person shall
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
permit a vicious dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its pen or structure unless both the dog and leash are under the actual physical control of a person eighteen (18) years of age or older.
(5) Such dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, or any other object or structure.
(6) Violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
D. Seizure, Impoundment and Disposition of Vicious Animals.
(1) In the event that a vicious animal, as defined in this section, is found at large, such animal may, in the sole discretion of the Mayor or his designee be destroyed rather than captured and impounded. The City shall not be under any duty to attempt the capture and impoundment of a vicious animal as defined in this section nor shall the City have a duty to notify any person of the vicious animal at large prior to its destruction.
(2) The Mayor, or his designee, either upon receipt of a complaint or upon his or her action may initiate proceedings to determine whether or not an animal being kept, sheltered or harbored within the City limits is a vicious animal as defined in this section.
(3) If the Mayor or his designee concludes the animal is a vicious animal as defined in this section, then the Mayor or his designee shall order the person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring the animal to comply with this section or remove the vicious animal from the corporate limits of the City or to destroy the vicious animal in a humane manner. This order shall be served upon the person or entity by personal service or registered mail.
(4) Unless appealed, the order of the Mayor or designee shall be deemed final for all purposes three (3) days after the order is served as provided by subparagraph (3) above.
(5) The person or entity against whom the order of the Mayor or his designee is issued shall have the right to appeal the order to the City Council. The order shall be stayed pending Creston City Council action on the appeal. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the office of the City Clerk, within three (3) days of the date of the service of the order as above provided. Failure to timely file such written appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right of appeal and the order of the Mayor or his designee shall be then deemed final for all
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
purposes. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for appeal. The appeal hearing shall be held as expeditiously as reasonably possible. The appellant shall be entitled to at least one (1) day notice of the date of the hearing. Following the hearing, the City Council may affirm or reverse the order of the Mayor or designee. The City Council shall cause notice of its decision to be served upon the appellant by personal service or certified mail. The City Council decision shall be deemed final for all purposes three (3) days after the appellant’s receipt of the City Council notice of decision.
(6) If the City Council affirms the Mayor or designee, then the notice of decision shall order the person or entity owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring such vicious animal to comply with this section or to remove such animal from the corporate limits of the City or to destroy the animal in a humane manner.
(7) The person or entity owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring the vicious animal shall comply with the order of the City Council on or before the date the order becomes final. In the event the person or entity does not timely comply with the order, then the Mayor or designee is authorized to seize and impound such vicious animal and such animal shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If at the end of the impoundment period the person or entity against whom the order has been entered has not petitioned the Iowa District Court of Union County for further review of the order, the Mayor or designee shall then cause the vicious animal to be destroyed in a humane manner.
(8) The failure to comply with a final order issued pursuant to this section shall constitute a municipal infraction.
(Ord. 06-94 - June 06 Supp.)
55.13 RABIES VACCINATION. Every owner of an animal shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It is unlawful for any person to own or have an animal in said person’s possession, six months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies and which is not wearing a current certificate of vaccination tag required under the rules of the Iowa Department of Agriculture. This section does not apply to animals that are under the control of the owner or keeper and in transit and to be in the City for less than thirty (30) days or which are assigned to a research institution or similar facility.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
55.14 LEASH CONTROL BY PROCLAMATION. The Mayor may, by published proclamation, order all animals to be constantly confined or restrained by leash, cord or chain for a period of time not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days. Any animal not confined during the proclaimed time may summarily be disposed of by the Animal Control Officer and the owner thereof shall be subject to a fine.
55.15 OWNER’S DUTY. It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other animal which has bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.16 CONFINEMENT. When a local board of health receives information that any person has been bitten by an animal or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, it shall order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be apprehended and impounded by such board, and after two weeks the board may humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.17 CATCHING AND IMPOUNDING.
1. Any animal found at large, wherever found, shall be seized and impounded or, at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear before the proper court to answer charges. The Animal Control Officer may use any humane means or force necessary to impound or catch the animal at large.
2. The owner of an animal which has rabies vaccination tag or identification tag attached shall be notified in writing or by one publication of said notice in a newspaper published in the City. The payment for the animal shall be made to the Animal Control Officer. The daily holding fee is $5.00, and the payment schedule of pickup fees is as follows:
A. First offense within two (2) years $25.00
A photograph of the dog will be taken for future identification.
B. Second offense within two (2) years $50.00
The dog will be tattooed or a microchip will be implanted at the owner’s expense prior to release.
C. Third offense within two (2) years $100.00
Upon a third offense, the animal shall be removed from the City limits permanently.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
If the impounded animal is not recovered by its owner within seven (7) days after notice, the animal shall be set for adoption and attempts to relocate will be made as prescribed in the Animal Control Policy.
3. Impounded, unlicensed animals may be removed by the owner upon proper identification and presentation to the Animal Control Officer proof that said animal has been currently vaccinated for rabies, by payment of all pickup and impounding costs, and by proof that proper insurance is in place to cover any damages or injuries that may be caused by the animal. If such animals are not claimed within seven (7) days after impounding, they shall be set for adoption and attempts to relocate will be made as prescribed in the Animal Control Policy..
(Subsections 2 and 3 - Ord. 13-139 – Sep. 12 Supp.)
4. If any animal impounded at the Pound is sold, there shall be deducted from the selling price all accrued costs and expenses for impounding the animal. The balance of the sale price, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the animal.
5. Any animal which has bitten and broken skin on any human shall be impounded at the City Pound or with a veterinarian of the owner’s choice for a period of not less than ten (10) days or for a period directed by a veterinarian or at the direction of a medical professional. The animal’s owner shall be liable for all costs accrued during impoundment.
55.18 ENFORCEMENT. Individuals may, and the Animal Control Officer shall, cause enforcement of this chapter upon written or oral complaint. Peace officers shall additionally cause enforcement of this chapter against known violators.
55.19 PENALTY. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter within a two (2) year time limit shall, upon conviction, be subject to imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days and a fine as follows: (Ord. 99-39 – Oct. 99 Supp.)
1. For the first violation, a minimum of $25.00 fine shall be imposed.
2. Upon the second violation, a minimum fine of $50.00 shall be imposed.
3. Upon the third and subsequent offenses, a minimum fine of $100.00 shall be imposed for each violation and the animal removed from the City limits permanently.
4. Each day that the owner of an animal does not comply with this chapter is deemed a separate offense.
55.20 LIVESTOCK CONFINEMENT OPERATIONS. No commercial livestock confinement operations shall be allowed within the City limits. In the
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
event of continued operation after providing notice to cease and desist, a fine may be levied in an amount not to exceed $100.00 per day for each day the violation continues after receiving notice to cease and desist.
55.21 LIVESTOCK. It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except by written consent of the Council. However, any nonconforming use in existence at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this section, or any future nonconforming use approved by the City, shall be allowed to continue under the following restrictions:
1. The number of head of livestock which a person may legally keep within the City shall be limited to the extent that there is adequate continuous acreage for the size and number of the livestock kept. It is unlawful for any person to keep within the City limits such a number of livestock which would tend to disrupt the peace and good order of the community or which becomes a nuisance due to noise, smell or other undesirable characteristics. Any shelter or enclosure will be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free from offensive odors and any fence used for the purpose of confining said livestock shall be of a character to eliminate nuisances or damages to adjoining property.
2. In the event of the sale, gift, conveyance or other transfer, whether by deed, inheritance or any other means, of any property afforded nonconforming use status herein, the right of the subsequent owner to continue such nonconforming use shall be terminated if not exercised within 365 days of the date said subsequent owner takes possession of the property.
3. Animal Control shall investigate complaints and issue citations if needed.
(Ord. 16-167 – Aug. 16 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 56
MOWING OF PROPERTIES
56.01 Mowing of Properties
56.03 Method of Service and Billing
56.02 Penalty
56.01 MOWING OF PROPERTIES. Any property within the City of Creston, whether vacated or non-vacated, is required to be mowed any time the vegetation reaches a height of more than 12 inches by the first (1st) and the fifteenth (15th) day of the month in May, June, July, August, September and October of each year. (Ord. 12-136 – Apr. 12 Supp.)
56.02 PENALTY. The City or their agents may mow any property, which is not mowed by the above dates, and a charge of $75.00 per hour for such mowing, plus a surcharge of $100.00, will be charged to the property owner. Any property owners who fail to mow their properties, thus allowing the same to be mowed by the City of their agents, and who do not provide payment for the mowing as required, will be assessed by the City for such costs, which will be collected in the same manner as general property taxes.
56.03 METHOD OF SERVICE AND BILLING. Annual publication of the ordinance codified by this chapter will serve as notice to property owners. Any billings for mowing done by the City or their agents are to be sent by regular mail and are payable within 30 days of the billing date.
(Ch. 56 – Ord. 05-88 – Jul. 05 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
60.01 Title
60.05 Traffic Accidents: Reports
60.02 Definitions
60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement
60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic
60.08 Parades Regulated
60.01 TITLE. Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as the “Creston Traffic Code.”
60.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law, such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings:
1. “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including the following designated streets:
A. Union Street from New York Avenue to Walnut Street;
B. Walnut Street from Union Street to Mills Street;
C. Mills Street from Walnut Street to Elm Street;
D. Elm Street from Mills Street to Montgomery Street;
E. Montgomery Street from Elm Street to Division Street;
F. Division Street from Montgomery Street to Adams Street;
G. Adams Street from Division Street to New York Avenue;
H. New York Avenue from Adams Street to Union Street.
2. “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
3. “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[45])
4. “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[58])
5. “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either direction from a school house.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[59])
6. “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
7. “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
8. “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or signal.
9. “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in the business, school or residence districts.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[60])
10. “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[62])
11. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1 [1])
60.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. Provisions of this chapter and State law relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
60.04 POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC. A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the fire department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
60.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS. The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
the City for the confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273 & 321.274)
60.06 PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY. Any peace officer is authorized to stop any vehicle to require exhibition of the driver’s motor vehicle license, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, bills of lading or other manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07 OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08 PARADES REGULATED. No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided herein:
1. “Parade” Defined. “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the public as a parade.
2. Permit Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a written permit from the Mayor. Such permit shall state the time and date for the parade to be held and the streets or general route therefor. Such written permit granted to the person organizing or sponsoring the parade shall be permission for all participants therein to parade when such participants have been invited by the permittee to participate therein. A fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be required for such permit.
3. Parade Not A Street Obstruction. Any parade for which a permit has been issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully participating therein, shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
4. Control By Police and Fire Fighters. Persons participating in any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the fire department.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
61.01 Stop and Yield Signs
61.04 Traffic Lanes
61.02 Installation of Other Traffic Control Devices
61.05 Standards
61.03 Crosswalks
61.06 Compliance
61.01 STOP AND YIELD SIGNS. The Council, upon the advice of the Mayor, Public Works Director and Police Chief, shall cause to be placed and maintained appropriate stop signs and yield right-of-way signs. The Police Chief shall keep an official map of the location of all stop and yield signs.
61.02 INSTALLATION OF OTHER TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. Other traffic control devices or emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to regulate, guide or warn traffic shall be placed and maintained when and as required under this Traffic Code or under State law. The City shall keep a record of all such traffic control devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.03 CROSSWALKS. The Public Works Director is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the Council, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such other places as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.04 TRAFFIC LANES. The Public Works Director is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with the traffic code of the City. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.05 STANDARDS. Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
CHAPTER 61 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
61.06 COMPLIANCE. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
62.01 Violation of Regulations
62.08 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.02 Vehicles on Sidewalks
62.09 Reckless Driving
62.03 Clinging to Vehicle
62.10 Excessive Acceleration
62.04 Quiet Zones
62.11 Careless Driving
62.05 Funeral Processions
62.12 Excessive Noise
62.06 Tampering with Vehicle
62.13 Milling
62.07 Open Container of Alcoholic Beverage, Wine or
Beer on Streets and Highways
62.01 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS. Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a fire department officer during a fire, or who shall fail to abide by the provisions of this chapter and the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in violation of this chapter. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by reference and are as follows:
1. Section 321.32 – Registration card carried and exhibited.
2. Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
3. Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
4. Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
5. Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
6. Section 321.174 – Operators licensed.
7. Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses.
8. Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license.
9. Section 321.218 – Driving without valid license.
10. Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
11. Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
12. Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
13. Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
14. Section 321.223 – License inspected.
15. Section 321.224 – Record kept.
16. Section 321.232 – Radar jamming devices – penalty.
17. Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles.
18. Section 321.240 – Altering center of gravity of vehicle.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
19. Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
20. Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
21. Section 321.262 – Damage to vehicle.
22. Section 321.263 – Information and aid.
23. Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
24. Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
25. Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
26. Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
27. Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle – reduced speed.
28. Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
29. Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways – exceptions.
30. Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
31. Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
32. Section 321.302 – Overtaking on the right.
33. Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
34. Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
35. Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
36. Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles – distance requirements.
37. Section 321.309 – Towing – convoys – drawbars.
38. Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
39. Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
40. Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
41. Section 321.314 – When signal required.
42. Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
43. Section 321.316 – Stopping.
44. Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
45. Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
46. Section 321.320 – Left turns – yielding.
47. Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
48. Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
49. Section 321.329 – Duty of driver – pedestrians crossing or working on highways.
50. Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
51. Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
52. Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
53. Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
54. Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal of train.
55. Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings – posting warning.
56. Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
57. Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
58. Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
59. Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
60. Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
61. Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
62. Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous material.
63. Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
64. Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
65. Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
66. Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
67. Section 321.372 – School buses.
68. Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
69. Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls – minimum speed.
70. Section 321.383 – Exceptions – slow vehicles identified.
71. Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
72. Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
73. Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
74. Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
75. Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
76. Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
77. Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
78. Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
79. Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
80. Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
81. Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
82. Section 321.398 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
83. Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
84. Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
85. Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
86. Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
87. Section 321.406 – Cowl lamps.
88. Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
89. Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
90. Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
91. Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
92. Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
93. Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
94. Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
95. Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
96. Section 321.422 – Red light in front.
97. Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
98. Section 321.424 – Sale of lights – approval.
99. Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch and control requirements.
100. Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
101. Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
102. Section 321.433 – Sirens and bells prohibited.
103. Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
104. Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
105. Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
106. Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
107. Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
108. Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
109. Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
110. Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
111. Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
112. Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses – use required.
113. Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
114. Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations.
115. Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation regulations.
116. Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
117. Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
118. Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles – permits.
119. Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
120. Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
121. Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
122. Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
123. Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
124. Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight.
125. Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
126. Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity – reregistration.
127. Section 321.17 – Operating non-registered vehicle.
128. Section 321.91 – Abandonment of a motor vehicle.
129. Section 321.99 – Improper use of registration.
130. Section 321.104 – Operation with cancelled title or suspended/revoked registration.
131. Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicle with expired license.
132. Section 321.180 – Violation of instruction permit limitation.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
133. Section 321.180B – Use of electronic communication device while driving.
134. Section 321.193 – Violation of conditions of a restricted license.
135. Section 321.194 – violation of conditions of a minor’s school license.
136. Section 321.216B – Misuse of license or ID card to acquire alcohol.
137. Section 321.216C – Misuse of license or ID card to acquire tobacco.
138. Section 321.256 – Fail to obey traffic control device.
139. Section 321.277 – Careless driving.
140. Section 321.284 – Open container – passengers.
141. Section 321.288 – Failure to maintain control.
142. Section 321.304 – Passing contrary to highway signs or markings.
143. Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
144. Section 321.311 – Turning from improper lane.
145. Section 321.321 – Fail to yield upon entering a through highway.
146. Section 321.322 – Fail to obey stop or yield sign.
147. Section 321.331 – Soliciting ride from within roadway.
148. Section 321.369 – Depositing or throwing litter.
(Ord. 14-148 – Nov. 13 Supp.)
62.02 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at a driveway.
62.03 CLINGING TO VEHICLE. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for their accommodation. No person shall ride on the running board of a motor vehicle or in any other place not customarily used for carrying passengers. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.04 QUIET ZONES. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.05 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS. Upon the immediate approach of a funeral procession, the driver of every other vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, shall yield the right-of-way. An operator of a motor vehicle which is part
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
of a funeral procession shall not be charged with violating traffic rules and regulations relating to traffic signals and devices while participating in the procession unless the operation is reckless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.324A)
62.06 TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE. It is unlawful for any person, either individually or in association with one or more other persons, to willfully injure or tamper with any vehicle or break or remove any part or parts of or from a vehicle without the consent of the owner.
62.07 OPEN CONTAINER OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE, WINE OR BEER ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. A person driving a motor vehicle shall not knowingly possess in a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage, wine or beer with the intent to consume the alcoholic beverage, wine or beer while the motor vehicle is upon a public street or highway. Evidence that an open or unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage, wine or beer was found during an authorized search in the glove compartment, utility compartment, console, front passenger seat, or any unlocked portable device and within the immediate reach of the driver while the motor vehicle is upon a public street or highway is evidence from which the court or jury may infer that the driver intended to consume the alcoholic beverage, wine or beer while upon the public street or highway if the inference is supported by corroborative evidence. However, an open or unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage, wine or beer may be transported at any time in the trunk of the motor vehicle or in some other area of the interior of the motor vehicle not designed or intended to be occupied by the driver and not readily accessible to the driver while the motor vehicle is in motion.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284)
62.08 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS. It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other object to obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.09 RECKLESS DRIVING. No person shall drive any vehicle in such manner as to indicate a willful or a wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277)
62.10 EXCESSIVE ACCELERATION. It is unlawful for any person in the operation of a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, to so accelerate such vehicle as to cause audible noise by the friction of the tires on the pavement or to cause the
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
tires of the vehicle to leave marks on the pavement or to throw sand and gravel, or to cause the wheel of a motorcycle to leave the ground more than two (2) inches, except when such acceleration is reasonably necessary to avoid a collision.
62.11 CARELESS DRIVING. No person shall drive any vehicle in such a manner as to indicate a disregard for the safety of persons or property.
62.12 EXCESSIVE NOISE. It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle on the streets, alleys, public grounds, parking lots or parks in the City in such a manner as to cause noise from the tires of said vehicle or in such a manner as to cause loud, noisy or unusual engine sounds.
62.13 MILLING. It is unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle, either singly or with others, in any processional milling or repeated movement over any street to the interference with normal traffic use, or to the annoyance or offense of any person.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
64.01 Authority to Mark
64.02 U-turns
64.01 AUTHORITY TO MARK. The Mayor may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions require, that a different course from that specified by the State law be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
64.02 U-TURNS. It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection, however, U-turns are prohibited within the business district, at the following designated intersections and at intersections where there are automatic traffic signals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
— NONE —
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
65.01 Stop or Yield
65.03 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
65.02 School Stops
65.04 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.05 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
65.01 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED. At the intersections of through streets and at intersections upon streets other than through streets where, because of heavy cross traffic or other traffic conditions, particular hazard exists, the Police Chief, Mayor or Public Works Director is hereby authorized to determine whether vehicles shall stop or yield at one or more entrances to any such intersection and shall present such recommendation to the Council, and upon approval by the Council, shall erect an appropriate sign at every such place when a stop or yield is required. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as directed by the signs posted in accordance with this section.
65.02 SCHOOL STOPS. At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle approaching said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten (10) feet from the approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
65.03 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK. The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.04 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED. Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle.
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
65.05 YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS. Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
66.01 Temporary Embargo
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight
66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.01 TEMPORARY EMBARGO. If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)
66.02 PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT. The Police Chief may, upon application and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the maximum specified by State law or City ordinance over those streets named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)
66.03 LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS. No person shall park any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of one (1) ton at any time upon any of the following streets or parts of streets except for the purpose of loading or unloading:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475)
1. Pine Street from Mills Street to Adams Street;
2. Maple Street from Mills Street to Adams Street;
3. Elm Street from Mills Street to Taylor Street;
4. Adams Street from Walnut Street to Division Street;
5. Montgomery Street from Walnut Street to Oak Street;
6. Mills Street from Pine Street to Elm Street;
7. Union Street from Maple Street to Elm Street.
(See also Section 69.09)
CHAPTER 66 LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
66.04 LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES. Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the bridge, the Mayor may cause to be posted and maintained signs on said bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits, and no person shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon said bridge in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
67.01 Walking in Street
67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking
67.04 Use Sidewalks
67.01 WALKING IN STREET. Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk on the left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02 HITCHHIKING. No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03 PEDESTRIAN CROSSING. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04 USE SIDEWALKS. Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent street.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
(REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 99-36 – OCT. 99 SUPP.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Park Adjacent to Curb
69.10 Parking Limited to Two Hours
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb — One-way Street
69.11 Parking Limited to Four Hours
69.03 Diagonal Parking
69.12 Parking Limited As Posted
69.04 Angle Parking — Manner
69.13 Loading Zones
69.05 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal
69.14 Hours of Parking
69.06 Parking Prohibited
69.15 Snow Removal
69.07 Handicapped Parking
69.16 Snow Routes
69.08 Parking and No Parking Zones
69.17 Controlled Access Facilities
69.09 Truck Parking Limited
69.01 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.02 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB — ONE-WAY STREET. No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03 DIAGONAL PARKING. Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
1. Adams Street from Division Street to Walnut Street;
2. Pine Street from Adams Street to Howard Street;
3. Mills Street, on the north side, from Maple Street to Pine Street.
69.04 ANGLE PARKING — MANNER. Upon those streets or portions of streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle, or the load thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of sixteen (16) feet when measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.05 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL. No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than seventy-two (72) hours or for any of the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
2. Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency;
3. Advertising. Displaying advertising;
4. Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code of Ordinances.
69.06 PARKING PROHIBITED. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [5])
2. Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3. Mailboxes. Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a mailbox which is so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
4. Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [1])
5. Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [2])
6. Intersection. Within, or within ten (10) feet of an intersection of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [3])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
7. Fire Hydrant. Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [4])
8. Stop Sign or Signal. Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [6])
9. Railroad Crossing. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [8])
10. Fire Station. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [9])
11. Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [10])
12. Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [11])
13. Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic conditions require, the Public Works Director may cause curbs to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [13])
14. Theatres, Hotels and Auditoriums. A space of fifty (50) feet is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium, hotel having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15. Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in the Business District unless the vehicle is actually engaged in loading or unloading goods or services or passengers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
16. Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
17. Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line. That area of the public way not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line, where curbing has been installed.
69.07 HANDICAPPED PARKING. The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of handicapped parking spaces:
1. Nonresidential Off-street Facilities. Nonresidential off-street parking facilities shall set aside handicapped parking spaces in accordance with the following:
A. Municipal off-street public parking facilities or an entity providing nonresidential parking in off-street public parking facilities shall provide not less than two percent (2%) of the total parking spaces in each parking facility as handicapped parking spaces, rounded to the nearest whole number of handicapped parking spaces. However, such parking facilities having ten (10) or more parking spaces shall set aside at least one handicapped parking space.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3a])
B. An entity providing off-street nonresidential public parking facilities shall review the utilization of existing handicapped parking spaces for a one-month period not less than once every twelve months. If upon review, the average occupancy rate for handicapped parking spaces in a facility exceeds sixty percent (60%) during normal business hours, the entity shall provide additional handicapped parking spaces as needed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3b])
C. An entity providing off-street nonresidential parking as a lessor shall provide a handicapped parking space to an individual
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
requesting to lease a parking space, if that individual possesses a handicapped parking permit issued in accordance with Section 321L.2 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3c])
D. A new nonresidential facility in which construction has been completed on or after July 1, 1991, providing parking to the general public shall provide handicapped parking spaces as stipulated below:
TOTAL PARKING SPACES IN LOT
REQUIRED MINIMUM NUMBER OF HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES
10 to 25
1
26 to 50
2
51 to 75
3
76 to 100
4
101 to 150
5
151 to 200
6
201 to 300
7
301 to 400
8
401 to 500
9
501 to 1000
*
1001 and over
**
*Two percent (2%) of total
**Twenty (20) spaces plus one for each 100 over 1000
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3d])
2. Residential Buildings and Facilities. All public and private buildings and facilities, temporary and permanent, which are residences and which provide ten (10) or more tenant parking spaces, excluding extended health care facilities, shall designate at least one handicapped parking space as needed for each individual dwelling unit in which a handicapped person resides. Residential buildings and facilities which provide public visitor parking of ten (10) or more spaces shall designate handicapped parking spaces in the visitors parking area in accordance with the table contained in subsection (1)(D) of this section.
(IAC, 661-18.7[321L])
3. Business District. With respect to any on-street parking areas provided by the City within the business district, not less than two percent (2%) of the total parking spaces within each business district shall be designated as handicapped parking spaces.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[4a])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. Other Spaces. Any other person may set aside handicapped parking spaces on the person’s property provided each parking space is clearly and prominently designated as a handicapped parking space. No person shall establish any on-street handicapped parking spaces without first obtaining Council approval.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3e])
5. Improper Use. The following uses of a handicapped parking space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of a handicapped parking permit, which is a violation of this Code of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
A. Use by a motor vehicle not displaying a handicapped parking permit;
B. Use by a motor vehicle displaying a handicapped parking permit but not being used by a person in possession of a motor vehicle license with a handicapped designation or a nonoperator's identification card with a handicapped designation (other than a person transporting the handicapped or elderly and the persons being so transported in a vehicle displaying a removable windshield placard in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa);
C. Use by a motor vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section 321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
69.08 PARKING AND NO PARKING ZONES. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic control signal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1. There shall be no parking in all City-owned, off-street parking lots between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. except those areas as designated by resolution from the City Council and as posted by appropriate signage.
2. The City Council shall have the authority to designate no parking areas within the City of Creston.
3. The City Council shall, upon resolution, designate specific areas for no parking and shall require such areas to be posted in such a fashion as to provide notice to all persons that the area has been so designated.
4. The no parking area shall become effective only after the resolution has been adopted, published and the signs posted and in place for the designated area.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
5. The penalty for violation of this section shall be as set forth in Section 70.03 of the Traffic Enforcement Code.
(Ord. 12-134 – Oct. 11 Supp.)
69.09 TRUCK PARKING LIMITED. No person shall park a motor truck, semi-trailer, or other motor vehicle with trailer attached in violation of the following regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to pick-up, light delivery or panel delivery trucks. (See also Section 66.03)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Business District. Excepting only when such vehicles are actually engaged in the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo within the prohibited area, no person shall park or leave unattended such vehicle, on any street within the Business District. When actually receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo such vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere with other traffic.
2. Residential Areas. No such vehicle having a capacity in excess of one (1) ton in weight or with a trailer shall be left unattended or parked upon any street or alley of any residential area of the City at any time except for the purpose of loading and unloading, and then only so long as it is necessary for loading and unloading.
3. Livestock. All such vehicles used for the transportation of livestock and parked in any residential area shall be housed in a garage.
As used in this section, the term “residential area” means any residential area established by the Zoning Regulations of the City.
69.10 PARKING LIMITED TO TWO HOURS. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than two (2) hours upon the following designated streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Pine Street from Mills Street to Adams Street;
2. Maple Street from Mills Street to Adams Street;
3. Elm Street from Mills Street to Adams Street;
4. Oak Street from Montgomery Street to Adams Street;
5. Mills Street from Elm Street to Walnut Street;
(Ord. 03-64 – Jun. 03 Supp.)
6. Montgomery Street from Walnut Street to Division Street;
(Ord. 03-67 – Oct. 03 Supp.)
7. Adams Street from Walnut Street to New York Avenue;
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
8. Adams Street, on the south side, from Pine Street to Walnut Street;
9. Pine Street parking lot (located between the First National Bank and the Robinson Building), between nine o’clock (9:00) a.m. and five o’clock (5:00) p.m.
10. West Depot parking lot (located west of City Hall) between nine o’clock (9:00) a.m. and five o’clock (5:00) p.m.
11. On Pine Street, two parking spaces north of exit driveway of First Federal Savings & Loan Association;
12. On Pine Street, three parking spaces between exit driveway of First Federal Savings & Loan Association and Mills Street;
13. On Mills Street, three parking spaces between Pine Street and the entry driveway of First Federal Savings & Loan Association;
14. On Mills Street, two parking spaces between entry driveway of First Federal Savings & Loan Association and the alley which intersects with Mills Street.
69.11 PARKING LIMITED TO FOUR HOURS. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than four (4) hours upon the following designated streets:
1. East Depot parking lot (located east of City Hall) except for the east side of lot reserved for use by City vehicles;
2. West Depot parking lot (located west of City Hall) — only the back lane of parking closest to the railroad.
69.12 PARKING LIMITED AS POSTED. When any vehicle is parked on the east side of Pine Street from its intersection with Adams Street to the intersection of the east-west alley lying between Montgomery and Adams Street, said vehicles shall be parked in accordance with the signs and street and curb marking lines as provided in such area. Said parking space may be used by such vehicle during the designated time period and said vehicle shall be considered as illegally parked if it remains in said space longer than the period designated on the signs marking the parking area.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
69.13 LOADING ZONES.
1. The first parking space on the north side of Montgomery Street west of Elm Street has been established as a loading zone.
2. There is also a loading zone established in front of Creston Auto on Adams Street, with a 15-minute parking limit, located between the two overhead doors in front of Creston Auto.
69.14 HOURS OF PARKING. Unless otherwise specified, the regulations controlling parking shall pertain only between the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) p.m. on all days except Sunday and legal holidays, and upon order of the Council. During the times in which parking is not being controlled under this chapter, all vehicles shall be parked between the designated lines in the same manner as is required during other times.
For the purpose of facilitating the removal of snow and to assist in the proper cleaning of streets in the area designated in Section 69.10(1-8), the following limitations and restrictions are imposed all year around:
1. On the street sides where buildings bear even numbers, that is, on the south and west sides of all designated streets, parking is prohibited on all odd numbered days from one o’clock (1:00) a.m. to seven o’clock (7:00) a.m.
2. On the street sides where buildings bear odd numbers, that is, on the north and east sides of all designated streets, parking is prohibited on the even numbered days from one o’clock (1:00) a.m. to seven o’clock (7:00) a.m.
(Ord. 03-67 – Oct. 03 Supp.)
69.15 SNOW REMOVAL. For the purpose of facilitating the removal of snow from the streets and making it possible to keep the streets open and free from obstructions, the following limitations and restrictions are imposed from November 15 each year to March 31 of the following year:
1. On the street sides where buildings bear even numbers, that is, on the south and west sides of all streets, parking is prohibited on all odd numbered days from one o’clock (1:00) a.m. to seven o’clock (7:00) a.m.
2. On the street sides where buildings bear odd numbers, that is, on the north and east sides of all streets, parking is prohibited on the even numbered days from one o’clock (1:00) a.m. to seven o’clock (7:00) a.m.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
69.16 SNOW ROUTES. The Council may designate certain streets in the City as snow routes. When conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12])
69.17 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES. Parking restrictions on controlled access facilities are as specified in Chapter 140 of this Code of Ordinances.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
70.01 Arrest or Citation
70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations
70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate
70.06 Impounding Vehicles
70.01 ARREST OR CITATION. Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
1. Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person before a local magistrate, or
2. Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of Public Safety and deliver the original and a copy to the court where the defendant is to appear, two copies to the defendant and retain the fifth copy for the records of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6, 321.485)
70.02 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS. For violations of the Traffic Code which are designated by Section 805.8 of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6, 805.8)
70.03 PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE. Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the office of the Law Enforcement Dispatcher. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for all violations except improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit. If such fine is not paid within thirty (30) days, it shall be increased by five dollars ($5.00). The simple notice of a fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit is one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 10-118 – Oct. 09 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1a] & 321L.4[2])
70.04 PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED. When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
CHAPTER 70 TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT
PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
70.05 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
1. Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and
2. Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the registered owner at the time in question.
70.06 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES. A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
1. Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
2. Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3. Illegally Parked Vehicle in a Permit Required Area. When any vehicle is illegally parked in an area that is designated by signage that requires a parking permit that said vehicle does not have the proper parking permit displayed.
4. Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on parking during snow removal operations.
5. Parked Over Seventy-two Hour Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a continuous period of seventy-two (72) hours or more. A diligent effort shall first be made to locate the owner. If the owner is found the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
6. Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
(Ord. 12-134 – Oct. 11 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
75.01 Purpose
75.05 Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles
75.02 Definitions
75.06 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations
75.07 Accident Reports
75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles
75.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized flotation-tire vehicle, with not less than three (3) and not more than six (6) low pressure tires, that is limited in engine displacement to less than one thousand (1,000) cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than one thousand (1,000) pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
2. “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain. “Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that enable operation over natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
3. “Off-road utility vehicle” means a motorized vehicle, with not less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks, that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road utility vehicle” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
A. “Off-road utility vehicle – type 1” includes vehicles with a total dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
B. “Off-road utility vehicle – type 2” includes vehicles, other than type 1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of 65 inches or less.
C. “Off-road utility vehicle – type 3” includes vehicles with a total dry weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or both.
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND
SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
An operator of an off-road utility vehicle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Ord. 15-155 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
4. “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle weighing less than one thousand (1,000) pounds which uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a width of forty-eight (48) inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain vehicle which has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle or off-road utility vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration, equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)
75.04 OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES. The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
1. Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets which have not been plowed during the snow season and on the following streets for the purpose of getting in and out of the City:
A. Cedar Street from the north City limits to the underpass, then Chestnut Street to Highway 34;
B. Prairie Street from Cedar Street to Lincoln Street;
C. Lincoln Street from Highway 25 to Adams Street; west on Adams Street to west City limits;
D. East McKinley Park Road from Adams Street to south City limits;
E. South Cherry Street from Fremont Street to south City limits;
F. Fremont Street from South Chestnut Street to New York Avenue; north to Adams Street; Adams Street west to City limits; and
G. Townline Street from Cedar Street to Osage Street.
H. On any other street by the utilization of the shortest and most direct route from a point of origin to one of the streets set out above or from one of the streets set out above to a point of destination.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
2. Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under the following circumstances:
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND
SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
A. Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
B. Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a prohibited street provided all of the following occur:
(1) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
(2) The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the street;
(3) The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and
(4) In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
3. Railroad Right-of-way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an operating railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
4. Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])
5. Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.
6. Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is authorized by this chapter.
75.05 OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES. The operators of ATVs shall comply with the following restrictions as to where ATVs may be operated within the City:
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND
SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
1. Streets. ATVs may be operated on streets only in accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on such streets as may be designated by resolution of the Council for the sport of driving ATVs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3])
2. Trails. ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])
3. Railroad Right-of-way. ATVs shall not be operated on an operating railroad right-of-way. An ATV may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])
4. Parks and Other City Land. ATVs shall not be operated in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of the City.
5. Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
75.06 NEGLIGENCE. The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile. The owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s consent to operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)
75.07 ACCIDENT REPORTS. Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand dollars ($1000.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)
(Ch. 75 – Ord. 07-102 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
76.01 Scope of Regulations
76.09 Riding on Sidewalks
76.02 Traffic Code Applies
76.10 Pedestrian Bridge
76.03 Double Riding Restricted
76.11 Towing
76.04 Two Abreast Limit
76.12 Improper Riding
76.05 Bicycle Paths
76.13 Parking
76.06 Speed
76.14 Equipment Requirements
76.07 Emerging from Alley or Driveway
76.15 Special Penalty
76.08 Carrying Articles
76.01 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS. These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.02 TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Whenever such person dismounts from a bicycle the person shall be subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03 DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234 [3 and 4])
76.04 TWO ABREAST LIMIT. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.05 BICYCLE PATHS. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.06 SPEED. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.07 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY. The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.08 CARRYING ARTICLES. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.09 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS. The following shall apply to riding bicycles on sidewalks:
1. Business District. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the Business District, as defined in Section 60.02(1) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
2. Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall disobey the signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
3. Yield Right-of-Way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.10 PEDESTRIAN BRIDGE. It is unlawful for any person to ride a bike or moped on the pedestrian crossing known as the Levy Street crossing located at the intersection of Levy Street and Sycamore Street and which runs to a line east of Sycamore street sixty (60) feet from its intersection with Levy Street. This crossing is a pedestrian bridge only.
76.11 TOWING. It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow any other vehicle upon the streets of the City.
76.12 IMPROPER RIDING. No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding or otherwise so as to disregard the safety of the operator or others.
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
76.13 PARKING. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.14 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS. Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and using equipment as provided herein:
1. Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of three hundred (300) feet to the rear except that a red reflector on the rear, of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
2. Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.15 SPECIAL PENALTY. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of the Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the City for not less than five (5) days for the first offense, ten (10) days for a second offense and thirty (30) days for a third offense.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 77
SCOOTERS, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND IN-LINE SKATES
77.01 Definitions
77.03 Use of Sidewalks
77.02 Operation Prohibited in Certain Areas
77.04 Use on Streets
77.05 Penalty
77.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Roller skates” or “in-line skates” means skates with wheels instead of a runner;
2. “Scooter” means a device having two wheels and a low footboard which is steered by a handlebar and is propelled by pushing one foot against the ground while resting the other on the footboard;
3. “Skateboard” means a device consisting of a short oblong piece of wood, plastic or aluminum mounted on large roller skate wheels used for riding upon while standing.
77.02 OPERATION PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS. No person shall ride or operate any scooter, skateboard or roller skates or in-line skates upon the sidewalks and streets within the Business District as defined in Section 60.02(1) of this Code of Ordinances or in an area described as follows:
Properties on both sides of the streets within the following area:
Adams Street to Broad Street, to Jefferson Street, to New York Avenue, to Adams Street.
77.03 USE ON SIDEWALKS. Whenever any person is using a scooter, skateboard or roller skates or in-line skates on any other sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
77.04 USE ON STREETS. Whenever any person is using a scooter, skateboard or roller skates or in-line skates on any other street, such person shall:
1. Observe all traffic control devices and be subject to all the duties applicable to the use of vehicles as required by statute or ordinance;
2. Stay as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as possible, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
CHAPTER 77 SCOOTERS, SKATEBOARDS,
ROLLER SKATES AND IN-LINE SKATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
77.05 PENALTY. The skateboard, roller skates or in-line skates of any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be impounded by the Police Chief for not less than five (5) days for the first offense, ten (10) days for a second offense and thirty (30) days for each offense thereafter. As used in this section, “impound” means that the Police Chief or any officer of the Police Department shall seize the skateboard, roller skates or in-line skates and hold he same in legal custody for the term required for a violation of this chapter.
(Ch. 77 – Ord. 05-86 – Jul. 05 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
80.01 Definitions
80.06 Fees for Impoundment
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles
80.07 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail
80.08 Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
80.04 Notification in Newspaper
80.09 Proceeds from Sales
80.05 Extension of Time
80.10 Duties of Demolisher
80.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1b])
A. A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more than twenty-four (24) hours and lacks current registration plates or two (2) or more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
B. A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
C. A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
D. A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days. However, a police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the ten-day period by commencing the notification process.
E. Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
F. A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out the impoundment order.
2. “Demolisher” means any city or public agency organized for the disposal of solid waste, or any person whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
3. “Police authority” means the Iowa highway safety patrol or any law enforcement agency of a county or city.
(Code of Iowa Sec. 321.89[1a])
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
80.02 AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person in control of private property may employ a private entity which is a garage keeper (any operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles) to dispose of an abandoned vehicle, and the private entity may take into custody the abandoned vehicle without a police authority’s initiative. If a police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Ord. 10-119 – Oct. 09 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03 NOTICE BY MAIL. The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an abandoned vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail, the last known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known addresses of record, that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, and inform the persons receiving the notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property within ten (10) days after the effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of the notice. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title, claim and interest in the vehicle or personal property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher and to disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction. If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90 of the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle. If the abandoned vehicle
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
was taken into custody by a police authority or by a private entity hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to contest those matters. If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants shall no longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property. A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders or claimants after the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming period.
(Ord. 10-119 – Oct. 09 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.04 NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER. If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, or if the registration contains no address for the owner, or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all lienholders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice under Section 80.03. The published notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be published within the same time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice in Section 80.03.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])
80.05 EXTENSION OF TIME. The owner, lienholders or claimants may, by written request delivered to the police authority or private entity prior to the expiration of the ten (10) day reclaiming period, obtain an additional five (5) days within which the motor vehicle or personal property may be reclaimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3c])
80.06 FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT. The owner, lienholder or claimant shall pay three dollars ($3.00) if claimed within five (5) days of impounding, plus one dollar ($1.00) for each additional day within the reclaiming period plus towing charges if stored by the City, or towing and storage fees, if stored in a public garage, whereupon said vehicle shall be released. The amount of towing charges, and the rate of storage charges by privately owned garages, shall be established by such facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.07 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police authority or private entity shall
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
make a determination as to whether or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.08 DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES. The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two (2) or more wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.09 PROCEEDS FROM SALES. Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing and notification required, in accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and then shall be deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.10 DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER. Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or otherwise demolish such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS
81.01 Definitions
81.03 Obstructing Streets
81.02 Warning Signals
81.04 Crossing Maintenance
81.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1 [29])
2. “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation or other association which owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad train.
81.02 WARNING SIGNALS. Repealed by Ord. 16-162 – Nov. 15 Supp.
81.03 OBSTRUCTING STREETS. Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent vehicular use of Elm Street and New York Avenue for a period of time in excess of ten (10) minutes except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
1. Comply with Signals. When necessary to comply with signals affecting the safety of the movement of trains.
2. Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on the track.
3. Disabled. When the train is disabled.
4. Safety Regulations. When necessary to comply with governmental safety regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed regulations.
5. In Motion. When the train is in motion except while engaged in switching operations.
6. No Traffic. When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the crossing.
Operators violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. An employee shall not be guilty of such violation if the action was necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a railroad corporation or its supervisors. Such guilt shall then be with the railroad corporation.
CHAPTER 81 RAILROAD REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
81.04 CROSSING MAINTENANCE. Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient and safe crossings over any street traversed by their rails.
(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The management of the City’s Waterworks Utility is the responsibility of the Utility Board of Trustees established and operated as described in Chapter 26 of this Code of Ordinances.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 95
MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM
95.01 Definitions
95.25 Oil and Sand Interceptors
95.02 Unsanitary Disposal Unlawful
95.26 Excessive Discharge
95.03 Privies, Septic Tanks and Cesspools Unlawful
95.27 Notification of Changed Discharge
95.04 Sewer Connection Required
95.28 Notification of Discharge of Hazardous Waste
95.05 Sewer Connection Permit Required
95.29 Accidental/Slug Discharges
95.06 Application for Sewer Permit
95.30 Record Keeping Requirements
95.07 Sewer Connection Cost Liability
95.31 Wastewater Contribution Permits
95.08 Separate Building Sewer Required
95.32 Reporting Requirements for Permittee
95.09 Testing and Use of Building Sewers
95.33 Application Signatories and Certification
95.10 Building Sewer Construction Standards
95.34 Monitoring Facilities
95.11 Building Sewer Elevation
95.35 Testing Methods
95.12 Connection of Surface Runoff Sources to Sanitary
95.36 Pretreatment
Sewer Prohibited
95.37 Unusual Discharges - Special Arrangements
95.13 Sewer Connection Standards
95.38 Confidential Information
95.14 Inspection Required
95.39 Revocation of Permit
95.15 Excavations
95.40 Notification of Violations
95.16 Unpolluted Water Prohibited in Sanitary Sewer
95.41 Harmful Contributions
95.17 Discharge of Runoff or Unpolluted Water
95.42 Damaging or Tampering with Sewage Works
95.18 Storm Sewers - Prohibited Discharges
95.43 Inspection of Properties
95.19 Prohibited Discharges
95.44 Violation; Penalty
95.20 National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
95.45 Storm Water
95.21 Modification of National Categorical Pretreatment
95.46 Surface Waters Exception
Standards
95.47 Assurance of Compliance
95.22 Trucked/Hauled Wastes
95.48 Backflow Valve
95.23 Specific Pollutant Limitations
95.49 Certificate of Inflow and Infiltration (I & I)
95.24 State Requirements
Compliance
95.01 DEFINITIONS. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows.
l. “Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et. seq.
2. “Approval authority” means the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
3. “Authority representative of industrial user” means:
A. A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy-making or decision-making functions for the corporation;
B. A manager of a manufacturing, production and/or operation facility employing more than 30 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $2 million (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures;
C. A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively;
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
D. A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection A, B or C of this section if:
(1) The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsection A, B or C;
(2) The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and
(3) The written authorization is submitted to the City.
4. “BOD” (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty degrees C.
5. “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal pipe of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
6. “Building sewer” means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal including the connection device and tap of the main.
7. “CFR” means Code of Federal Regulations.
8. “Categorical Standards” means National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment Standards.
9. “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
10. “Composite sample” means a sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either time or flow.
11. “Cooling water” means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
12. “Customer” means any person who makes application for sewer service to the premises and is responsible for payment of the water and sewer charges for such premises.
13. “Direct discharge” means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Iowa.
14. “Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
15. “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
16. “Grab sample” means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
17. “Holding tank waste” means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
l8. “Industrial user” means a person who discharges industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system.
19. “Industrial waste” means any liquid, gaseous, radioactive, or solid waste substance from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from normal domestic wastewater.
20. “Infiltration/inflow (I/I)” means the invasion of water into the sanitary system from broken, cracked or misaligned mains, leaking manholes or manholes that have water flow over their covers. Other sources of I & I include private (resident and business) services that are cracked or broken and storm water connections from sump pits and roof drains, or other sources into sanitary sewers. (Ord. 13-137 – Sep. 12 Supp.)
21. “Interference” means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both inhibits or disrupts the treatment works, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processed, uses or disposal and therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the NPDES Permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or causes the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in accordance with State or Federal statutory provisions and regulation or permits issued thereunder.
22. “National Categorical Pretreatment Standards,” “Pretreatment Standards,” or “Standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) and 40 CFR Chapter 1, subchapter N, Parts 405-471, which applies to a specific category of industrial users.
23. “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (or NPDES Permit)” means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).
24. “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
25. “New source” means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under section
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
A. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
B. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
C. The production of wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsections A, B or C of this section but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.
26. “Normal domestic wastewater” means wastewater that has a BOD5 concentration of not more than two hundred and fifty milligrams
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
per liter and a suspended solids concentration of not more than two hundred and fifty milligrams per liter.
27. “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution.
28. “Pass through” means a discharge which exits the treatment works into waters of the State in quantities or concentrations which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the NPDES permit (including any increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
29. “Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns.
30. “Pollution” means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
31. “Pollutant” means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.
32. “Pretreatment” or “treatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a treatment works. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR section 4033.6(d).
33. “Pretreatment requirements” means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an industrial user.
34. “Pretreatment standards” means National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and/or any other pretreatment requirements.
35. “Properly shredded garbage” means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
36. “Public sewer” means the sewer in which all owners of served property have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority and is deemed to include mains but not to include any of the building sewer from the main to the connected building or the connection device, tap or wye.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
37. “Sanitary sewer” means the sewer in which carries sewage and to which storm waters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
38. “Sanitary sewer system” includes main sewers, sewage pumping stations, treatment and disposal plants, lateral sewers, drainage conduits or channels and sewer connections in public streets or private property.
39. “Sewage,” also termed “wastewater,” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface waters and storm waters as may be present.
40. “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage or storm water.
41. “Significant industrial user” means any industrial user of the City’s wastewater disposal system who has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more of process wastewater per average work day, or has a discharge which is regulated by a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, or has a process discharge that makes up 5 percent or more of the dry weather average hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment works, or has a process discharge that makes up 5 percent or more of the dry weather average hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment works, or has in its wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or State statutes and rules, or is found by the City, State, or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have reasonable potential, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, for adversely affecting the treatment works, for violating a pretreatment standard or requirement, for impacting quality of sludge, the system’s effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system.
42. “Significant noncompliance” means a violation which meets one or more of the following:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which sixty-six percent or more all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
B. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the Superintendent or Public Works Director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of treatment works personnel or the general public);
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
D. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the exercise of emergency authority under this Code of Ordinances to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing compliance, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90 day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
H. Any other violation or group of violations which the Superintendent or Public Works Director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
43. “Slug” means any discharge of water sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than fifteen minutes, more than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
44. “Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)” means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.
45. “Toxic pollutant” means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of Section 307(a) of the Act or other Acts.
46. “Storm drain,” sometimes termed “storm sewer,” means a sewer which carries storm waters, surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
47. “Superintendent” means the Public Works Director of the City or an authorized deputy, agent or representative.
48. “Suspended solids (SS)” means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
49. “Treatment works” means any devices and systems for the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or liquid industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers; outfall sewers; sewage collection systems; individual systems; pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvement, remodeling, additions and
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal or the residues resulting from such treatment (including land for composting sludge, temporary storage of such compost, and land used for storage of treated wastewater in land treatment systems before land application); or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined storm water and sanitary sewer system. Also regulation 503 Federal Register Sludge Requirements.
50. “Treatment plant” means that portion of the treatment works designed to provide treatment to wastewater.
51. “U.S.C.” means United State Code.
52. “User” means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the City’s treatment works.
53. “Waters of the State” means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State or any portion thereof.
54. “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
95.02 UNSANITARY DISPOSAL UNLAWFUL. It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, sewage, or objectionable waste.
95.03 PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS AND CESSPOOLS UNLAWFUL. Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
95.04 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer of the City, is hereby required at said owner’s expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official notification to do so, provided that said public sewer is within two hundred (200) feet of the property line.
95.05 SEWER CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb away public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a tapping permit form the Public Works Department.
95.06 APPLICATION FOR SEWER PERMIT. The owner or agent shall make application for a permit on a special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Public Works Director. All tapping permit fees and inspection fees shall be estimated by the Public Works Director annually, for each such service required, subject to Council approval.
95.07 SEWER CONNECTION COST LIABILITY. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
95.08 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER REQUIRED. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. Each new service shall have a BACK-
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
FLOW prevention device approved by the Public Works Director or his/her representative according to the Building and Plumbing Codes of the City.
95.09 TESTING AND USE OF BUILDING SEWERS. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Public Works Department, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
95.10 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements of Division 4 of the State Building Code or the City Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
95.11 BUILDING SEWER ELEVATION. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
95.12 CONNECTION OF SURFACE RUNOFF SOURCES TO SANITARY SEWER PROHIBITED. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, sump pumps, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. Connections of this type that are discovered shall be subject to removal per Section 95.43 of this code, or may be subject to penalties as outlined in the City of Creston’s I & I Policy in effect at that time. (Ord. 13-137 – Sep. 12 Supp.)
95.13 SEWER CONNECTION STANDARDS. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
95.14 INSPECTION REQUIRED.
1. The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the Public Works Department when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Public Works Director or his/her representative.
2. Any repair or replacement of sewer service lines that requires a sewer permit, an inspection is required for Inflow and Infiltration (I & I) in accordance with the City of Creston’s Inflow and Infiltration Policy.
(Ord. 13-137 – Sep. 12 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
95.15 EXCAVATIONS. All excavation for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded by the contractor or owner with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Public Works Director.
95.16 UNPOLLUTED WATER PROHIBITED IN SANITARY SEWER. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters into any sanitary sewer.
95.17 DISCHARGE OF RUNOFF OR UNPOLLUTED WATER. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Public Works Director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Public Works Director, into a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet if the user has obtained a NPDES Permit from the State.
95.18 STORM SEWERS — PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. It is unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged, any sewage or other pollutant into any storm sewer within the City or within any area under the jurisdiction of the City.
95.19 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. A user may not introduce into the treatment works any pollutants which cause pass through or interference. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any of the following substances to the treatment works:
1. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the treatment works or to the operation of the treatment works. Waste streams with a closed-cap flashpoint of less than 60 degrees Celsius (as specified in 40 CFR 261.21) are prohibited. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides chlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the City, the State or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
2. Solids or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(1/2") in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
3. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred mg/l, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (0-65 degrees Celsius), unless approved by the Public Works Director.
4. Any wastewater having a pH greater than 9.5, unless approved by the Public Works Director, or any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable or causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the treatment works.
5. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not unless approved by the Public Works Director.
6. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to cause interference with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the treatment works, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
7. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
8. Any substance which may cause the treatment works effluent or any other product of the treatment works such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the treatment works cause the treatment works to be in noncompliance with the sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act, or new 503 Federal regulations; or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or State criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
9. Any substance which will cause the treatment works to violate its NPDES and/or State Disposal System Permit or the receiving water quality standards.
10. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
11. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment works plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater or vapor having a temperature higher than 65 degrees Celsius (150 degrees Fahrenheit), unless approved by the Public Works Director; and in no case wastewater or vapor with a temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit).
12. Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the treatment works. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operations.
13. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Public Works Director in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
14. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride sodium sulfate) unless approved by the Public Works Director.
15. Any discharge of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
16. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
17. Any wastewater which will cause interference with the operation or performance of the treatment works. Any discharges listed above as requiring approval of the Public Works Director shall be evaluated by the Public Works Director based upon such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. When the Public Works Director determines that a user is contributing to the treatment works, any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the treatment works, adversely affect sludge or effluent quality, cause hazard to human life, or create a public nuisance, the Public Works Director shall:
A. Advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution;
B. Develop effluent limitation(s) for such user to correct the problem; and
C. Require a compliance schedule.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
95.20 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Upon the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, for a particular industrial subcategory, the National Standards, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter. The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, revised as of July 1, 1993, are hereby adopted as part of this chapter. The Public Works Director shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Section 403.12.
95.21 MODIFICATION OF NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREAT-MENT STANDARDS. Where the City’s wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the City may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. “Consistent removal” means reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in 95 percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations; Part 403 - “General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution” promulgated pursuant to the Act. The City may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the Federal Pretreatment Standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, Part 403, Section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained.
95.22 TRUCKED/HAULED WASTES. The discharge of hauled or trucked wastes, except at points designated by the treatment works, is prohibited.
95.23 SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS. No person shall discharge wastewater containing pollutants which in combination with other discharges would cause the concentrations at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed the following limits:
0.025 mg/l arsenic
0.003 mg/l cadmium
0.142 mg/l chromium, total
0.153 mg/l copper
0.061 mg/l cyanide
0.233 mg/l lead
0. 000 mg/l mercury
0.118 mg/l nickel
0.057 mg/l silver
0.1 10 mg/l zinc
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
The Public Works Director shall develop limits for each significant industrial user on a user specific basis to ensure that the above limitations are not exceeded. To ensure that the above limitations are not exceeded the Public Works Director may impose limitations more stringent than those in this chapter.
95.24 STATE REQUIREMENTS. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than Federal requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.
95.25 OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid waste containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Public Works Director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
95.26 EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable Pretreatment Standard, no user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a categorical Pretreatment Standard.
95.27 NOTIFICATION OF CHANGED DISCHARGE. All industrial users shall promptly notify the Public Works Director in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p).
95.28 NOTIFICATION OF DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE. All industrial users shall notify the Public Works Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR, Part 261.
95.29 ACCIDENTAL/SLUG DISCHARGES. Each significant industrial user, or any other user as deemed necessary by the City, shall provide protection from accidental/slug discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental/slug discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s or user’s own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for review, and shall be approved by the City before construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan within 120 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. No user who commences contribution to the treatment
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
works after the effective date of such ordinance shall be permitted
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental/slug discharge procedures has been approved by the City. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. The slug control plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements.
1. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;
2. Description of stored chemicals;
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the Public Works Director of slug discharges, including the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions, and follow up this notification with:
A. Within five (5) days following an accidental/slug discharge, the user shall submit to the Public Works Director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the treatment works, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
B. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a accidental/slug discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a accidental/slug discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
4. If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment necessary for emergency response.
95.30 RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS. Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements established in this section shall be required to retain for a minimum of 3 years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this section) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the Public Works Director, the approval authority, or EPA. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or when requested by the Public Works Director, the approval authority, or EPA.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
95.31 WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMITS. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the treatment works shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit before connecting to or contributing to the treatment works.
1. Permit Application. All significant industrial users shall complete and file with the City an application, in the form prescribed by the City. Proposed new significant industrial users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the treatment works. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
A. Name, address, location (if different from the address), and telephone number;
B. SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
C. Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in this chapter as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended;
D. Time and duration of contribution;
E. Average daily and 30 minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;
F. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation;
G. Description of activities, facilities, plant processes and pretreatment facilities on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged;
H. The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any City, State, or Federal pretreatment standards, and a statement defining pretreatment standards and whether or not they are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards;
I. Each product produced by type, amount, process or processed and rate of production;
J. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
K. Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
L. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by a Professional Engineer with the State of Iowa indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet the pretreatment standards;
M. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.)
(2) No increment referred to in paragraph (1) shall exceed 9 months.
(3) No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the Public Works Director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the Public Works Director.
N. Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. The City will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the City may issue or deny a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
2. Permit Modifications. The Public Works Director may modify the wastewater contribution permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:
A. After promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit, such user shall do so within the time period identified in the Standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the Public Works Director within the time period identified in the Standard the information required by subsection (C) through (M) of subsection 1 of this section. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the City during the term of the permit as City, State or Federal limitations or requirements are modified or if other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in the permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the permit issuance.
C. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the treatment works, personnel or the receiving waters.
D. Violation of terms or conditions of the permit.
E. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the permit application or in any reporting.
F. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.
G. To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.
3. Permit Conditions. Wastewater contribution permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the City.
A. Permits shall contain the following:
(1) A statement of duration of the permit, not to exceed five years;
(2) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge a minimum of three years or as specified by the City, and affording City access there to;
(3) A statement regarding the transferability of the permit;
(4) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the treatment works and copy with applicable pretreatment standards;
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(5) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violations of the permit.
B. Permits may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;
(2) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(3) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
(4) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule;
(5) Compliance schedules for installation of technology to meet applicable Standards;
(6) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
(7) Requirements for notification of the City or any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system;
(8) Requirements for notification of accidental/slug discharges or any other potential problem discharges;
(9) Requirements for notification of the Public Works Director, State or EPA of any discharge which would be considered a hazardous waste if disposed of in a different manner; and
(10) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure compliance with this chapter.
4. Permit Duration. Wastewater contribution permits shall normally be issued for a period of five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a lesser period or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for a permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing permit.
5. Permit Transfer. Wastewater contribution permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the City. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
95.32 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE. The following reports are required for wastewater contribution permit holders:
1. Compliance Date Report. Within 90 days following the effective date of an applicable pretreatment standard, any user subject to the pretreatment standard shall submit to the Public Works Director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user’s facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional.
2. Periodic Compliance Reports.
A. Any significant industrial user shall submit to the Public Works Director during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the Public Works Director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow. At the discretion of the Public Works Director and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Public Works Director may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.
B. The Public Works Director may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection A of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass, where requested by the Public Works Director, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the approval authority pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the approval authority. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the approval authority.
3. Categorical Pretreatment Standard — Baseline Report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical Pretreatment Standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under 40
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical Pretreatment Standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the treatment works shall be required to submit to the Public Works Director a report which contains the information required under 40 CFR 403.13(b)(1)-(7). Where reports containing this information already have been submitted to the State or EPA in compliance with the requirement of 40 CFR 128.140(b), the industrial user will not be required to submit this information again. At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical Standard, shall be required to submit to the Public Works Director a report which contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1)-(5). New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in 40 CFR 403.12(b) (4) and (5).
95.33 APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION. All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user.
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direct supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
95.34 MONITORING FACILITIES. All significant industrial users shall be required to provide and operate at their own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but the City may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There will be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and all sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the City’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the City.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
95.35 TESTING METHODS. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with methods specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and shall be determined at the monitoring facility provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said monitoring facility. In the event that no special monitoring facility has been required, the monitoring facility shall be considered to the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples.
95.36 PRETREATMENT. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all National Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall be provided, operated, and maintained continuously and in satisfactory and effective operation at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for review, and shall be acceptable to the City before construction of the facilities. Design and installation of such facilities shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the City under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the City prior to the user’s initiation of the changes. The City shall annually publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City a list of the users which were in significant noncompliance with pretreatment requirements or standards during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user during the same 12 months.
95.37 UNUSUAL DISCHARGES — SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. Special arrangements shall not be allowed which will cause violation of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or NPDES permit.
95.38 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the release
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, State Disposal System permit and/or the Pretreatment Programs. Wastewater monitoring results will not be recognized as confidential information. Information accepted by the City as confidential will be provided to the State and EPA upon request without prior notification to the user.
95.39 REVOCATION OF PERMIT. A user is subject to having his/her wastewater contribution permit revoked for any of the following conditions:
1. Failure of a user to report factually the wastewater constituents and characteristics of the discharge;
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
3. Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or,
4. Violation of conditions of the permit.
95.40 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATIONS. Whenever the City finds that any user has violated or is violating this chapter, wastewater contribution permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the City may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within a specified period of the date of the written notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the City by the user.
95.41 HARMFUL CONTRIBUTIONS. The City may suspend wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater contribution permit of a user when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the City, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or environment, causes interference to the treatment works or causes the City to violate any condition of its NPDES Permit. Any user notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment service and/or its wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the treatment works or endangerment to any individuals. The City shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater treatment service, upon payment to the City of all costs of such disconnection and reconnection and upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the City within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
95.42 DAMAGING OR TAMPERING WITH SEWAGE WORKS. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
95.43 INSPECTION OF PROPERTIES.
1. Authorized Official; Jurisdiction. The City may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Owners or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the City or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records or in the performance of any of their duties. The City shall have the right to set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
2. Deaths Or Damages; Liability. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Section 95.43, the Public Works Director or duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to City employees. The City shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by City employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.
3. Easements. The Public Works Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
95.44 VIOLATION; PENALTY. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the I & I policy in effect at that time. (Ord. 13-137 – Sep. 12 Supp.)
95.45 STORM WATER. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as a storm sewer, or to natural outlet approved by the Public Works Director.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Public Works Director to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
95.46 SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION. Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may be issued by the Council upon recommendation to the Public Works Director where such discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to the best interests of the sewer system.
95.47 ASSURANCE OF COMPLIANCE. Special assessment shall be imposed against property for the costs incurred by the City to bring any particular property into compliance.
95.48 BACKFLOW VALVE. A valve will be required for new construction as outlined under current ordinance and will be required only at location(s) shown to be problem areas that have a history of flooding or poor sewer conditions.
95.49 CERTIFICATE OF INFLOW AND INFILTRATION (I & I) COMPLIANCE. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 19-180 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
-
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
[The next page is 413]
CHAPTER 96 SEWER USE SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 96
SEWER USE SERVICE CHARGES
96.01 Comprehensive Sewer Service Charge
96.08 Measurement by Meters
96.02 Accounts Established
96.09 Penalty
96.03 Year-end Balances
96.10 (Repealed by Ordinance No. 98-26)
96.04 Rates
96.11 Service Charge for Schools Serving Food
96.05 Billing and Collection Charges
96.12 Lien for Nonpayment
96.06 Debt Service Charges
96.13 Monthly Rates
96.07 Industrial Cost Recovery
96.14 Lawn and Garden Watering Systems
96.15 Lien Exemption
96.01 COMPREHENSIVE SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. Every person whose premises is served by connection to the Sanitary Sewer System of the City, either directly or indirectly, shall pay to the City a comprehensive sewer service charge for the use of and for services supplied by the Water Pollution Control Facilities of the City, which charges consist of:
1. Basic user charge for the O & M of the Water Pollution Control Plant.
2. A surcharge for the O & M of the Water Pollution Control Plant for wastes contributed of strengths greater than domestic wastewater.
3. A basic user charge for the O & M of the Sanitary Sewer System.
4. A billing and collection charge.
5. A debt service charge.
6. An industrial cost recovery charge, where applicable.
96.02 ACCOUNTS ESTABLISHED. That portion of the total user charge collected which is designated for operation and maintenance including replacement purposes, shall be deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund known as the Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund and will be kept in two primary accounts as follows:
1. Operation and Maintenance Account. An account designated for the specific purpose of defraying operation and maintenance costs (excluding replacement) of the treatment works.
2. Replacement Account. An account designated for the specific purpose of ensuring replacement needs over the useful life of the treatment works. Deposits in the Replacement Account shall be made at least annually from the Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund.
CHAPTER 96 SEWER USE SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
96.03 YEAR-END BALANCES. Fiscal year-end balances in the Operation and Maintenance Account and the Replacement Account shall be carried over to the same accounts in the subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other purposes than those designated for these accounts. Moneys which have been transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund shall be returned to their respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user charge rates for operation, maintenance and replacement. The user charge rate shall be adjusted such that the transferred moneys will be returned to their respective accounts within the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the moneys were borrowed.
96.04 RATES. The rates for the comprehensive sewer service charge shall be established every July by Council resolution and shall be as follows:
1. Water Pollution Control Plant. The basic user charge for the O & M cost of the Water Pollution Control Plant shall be based on the total number of services and on the quantity of flow of domestic wastewater recorded by water meters. The plant O & M budget is composed of the following basic budget items:
A. Salaries and fringe benefits;
B. Insurance, conference and billing expenses;
C. Maintenance and operation of equipment and vehicles;
D. Buildings and grounds operating supplies and maintenance;
E. Utilities and laboratory expenses;
F. Reserve for payment of bonds and equipment replacement.
2. Unit Cost Charges/Water Pollution Control Plant. The unit cost for all users shall be the sum of the unit cost for (a) flow, (b) B.O.D., and (c) Suspended Solids per gallon multiplied by the flow from each user. The unit cost for flow, B.O.D. and SS shall be determined as follows:
A. Reserve for unit flow costs, as applied for industrial waste — $1.00/100 cu. ft.
B. Reserve for unit B.O.D. costs, as applied for industrial waste — depending on industrial discharge set by Council.
C. Reserve for unit SS costs, as applied for industrial waste.
CHAPTER 96 SEWER USE SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
3. Surcharge. A surcharge for the O & M cost of the Water Pollution Control Plant shall be collected from those users who contribute wastes with strengths greater than domestic wastewater. These users shall be sampled and the sample analyzed at least once per quarter. A moving average of excess B.O.D. and SS, expressed in pounds, shall be used to compute the quarterly surcharge.
A. Quarterly Excess B.O.D. The quarterly excess B.O.D., expressed in mg/l, shall be calculated by subtracting the B.O.D. of domestic wastewater (250 mg/l) from the quarterly average B.O.D. of a user. If the value is less than zero, zero shall be used to compute the moving average of excess B.O.D.
B. Moving Average Excess B.O.D. Value. The moving average of excess B.O.D., expressed in pounds, shall be computed by adding the latest quarterly excess B.O.D., expressed in pounds, to the previous three (3) quarters’ excess B.O.D., expressed in pounds, and divided by four (4).
C. B.O.D. Surcharge Amount. The surcharge for B.O.D. shall be calculated by multiplying the moving average excess B.O.D. value expressed in pounds by the unit B.O.D. cost per pound as developed in subsection 2(B) of this section.
D. Quarterly Excess SS. The quarterly excess SS, expressed in mg/l, shall be calculated by subtracting the SS of domestic wastewater (250 mg/l) from the quarterly average SS of a user. If the value is less than zero, zero shall be used to compute the moving average of excess SS.
E. Moving Average Excess SS Value. The moving average of excess SS, expressed in pounds, shall be computed by adding the latest quarterly excess SS, expressed in pounds, to the previous three (3) quarters’ excess SS, expressed in pounds, and divided by four (4).
F. SS Surcharge Amount. The surcharge for SS shall be calculated by multiplying the moving average excess SS value expressed in pounds by the unit SS cost per pound as developed in subsection 2(C) of this section.
The total surcharge shall be a sum of the surcharge for B.O.D. and the surcharge for SS.
4. Sanitary Sewer System. The basic user charge for the O & M of the sanitary sewer system shall be based on the minimum monthly charge and on the quantity of flow. The sanitary sewer system O & M budget is composed of the following basic budget items:
CHAPTER 96 SEWER USE SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
A. Repair and maintenance of sewer lines;
B. Repair and maintenance of vehicles and equipment;
C. Reserve for future sewer extensions and equipment.
5. Unit Costs and Flow Charge/Sanitary Sewer System.
A. Unit Costs. The unit cost for flow shall be calculated by dividing the anticipated budget by the quantity of flow billed to all users of the sanitary sewer system.
B. Flow Charge. The charge for flow shall then be calculated by multiplying the unit cost for flow by the users’ flow measured in cubic feet.
96.05 BILLING AND COLLECTION CHARGES. The cost of determining the amount due from each user and the collection of the same shall be borne by the user. Each user shall be billed on a regular basis, i.e., monthly or quarterly, for the amount of the comprehensive sewer service charges. Such bill shall be part of a combined service account as authorized by Section 384.84 of the Code of Iowa. Each regular bill shall be increased by a charge to defray the cost of computing and mailing said bill. The cost per bill will be determined by dividing the anticipated cost of billing and collection by the total number of bills mailed to users.
96.06 DEBT SERVICE CHARGES. A debt service charge shall be collected to pay principal and interest as they become due on bonds now issued and hereafter to be issued for sanitary sewer purposes.
1. Unit Costs. The charge for the total annual debt service for such bonds shall be based on quantity of flow recorded by meters. The unit costs for flow shall be calculated by dividing the total debt service by the quantity of flow billed to all users.
2. Flow Charges. The charge for flow shall then be calculated by multiplying the unit cost for flow by the users’ flow measured in cubic feet. That portion of the total user charge collected which is designated for debt service shall be deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund known as the Sewer Debt Service Fund. The funds shall be used to pay the principal and interest on debt issued for sewer operations, maintenance and improvements. Fiscal year-end balances in the sewer debt service fund shall be carried over to the same account in the subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other purpose than the designated purpose of the fund. Moneys which have been transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the sewer debt service fund shall be returned to their respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the
CHAPTER 96 SEWER USE SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
user charge rates for sewer debt service. The user charge rate shall be adjusted such that the transferred moneys will be returned to their respective accounts within the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the moneys were borrowed.
96.07 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
1. Rates. The rates to be charged each industrial user that contributes process waste to the sanitary sewer system will be based on the total yearly contribution from that user. A unit cost for flow, B.O.D. and SS shall be computed as follows:
F = Unit flow charge in dollars per $1.00/100 cu. ft.
B = Unit B.O.D. charge in dollars per pound, set by industrial discharge
S = Unit SS charge in dollars per pound, set by industrial discharge
2. Monitoring and Review. Selected industrial users connected to the sewer system shall be monitored by the City at least monthly, all others yearly, to determine their hydraulic and organic contribution. The results of these tests, if more than one is conducted, shall be averaged and used as the individual industry’s total flow, B.O.D. and SS for the industrial cost recovery computation. Prior to July 1 of each year, the City shall conduct a review to determine what industrial users are connected to said system and therefore subject to these charges.
3. Billing; Payment; Collection. All industrial users subject to this section will be billed by the City in accordance with the terms and conditions established by the Council for the industrial user. All payments of industrial cost recovery charges shall be due and payable on or before one year from date of billing. Any industrial users subject to this section may make arrangements with the City to pay said annual billing in periodic installments, either monthly or quarterly. In all cases where payment has not been made on or before one year following the date of billing, the annual industrial cost recovery charges shall thereafter bear interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum.
96.08 MEASUREMENT BY METERS. Rates or charges are based upon the amount of water supplied by the Municipal Utilities as shown by the water meter readings of that company. All persons required to pay the comprehensive sewer service charge established in Section 96.01 of this chapter shall receive billing for such charge separately stated on the Municipal Utilities’ bill and shall pay such charges to the Municipal Utilities as billed.
CHAPTER 96 SEWER USE SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Those users who are billed by the Municipal Utilities monthly shall pay their comprehensive sewer user charges monthly.
CHAPTER 96 SEWER USE SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
96.09 PENALTY. All comprehensive sewer user charges are due and payable thirteen (13) days after the date of billing. Accounts not paid within thirteen (13) days will be assessed a delinquency charge of five percent (5%) of the amount due, except tax.
96.10 USER CHARGE RATE. (REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 98-26 - JUN. 98 SUPP.)
96.11 SERVICE CHARGE FOR SCHOOLS SERVING FOOD. Because of the excessive strength and flow of discharge waters into the City sanitary sewer system from schools serving food, the monthly service charge as specified in the above sections shall be increased by a rate to be set by the Council for all schools serving food and discharging wastes into the City’s sanitary sewer system.
96.12 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sanitary sewer use charges to the premises. Charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes. The Council may order suspension of service to those premises for which the comprehensive sewer use charge is delinquent, after notice and opportunity for hearing, except for the winter months of November, December, January, February and March, when provision of State law shall be followed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84 [1])
96.13 MONTHLY RATES.
1. Billing.
A. $5.78 per month for meter rate;
B. $3.86 per 100 cubic feet (Ord. 19-187 – Feb. 19 Supp.)
2. Allowable Limits.
A. Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD5), 5-day test - 250 mg/l
B. Suspended Solids (SS) - 250 mg/l
C. Ammonia Nitrogen (NH3-N) - 25 mg/l
3. Sewer Connection Charge.
A. Inspection and hook-up fee - $50.00, to be reviewed yearly
(Ord. 99-33 – Apr. 99 Supp.)
B. Capital Cost Recovery Fee.
(Repealed by Ord. 99-33 – Apr. 99 Supp.)
CHAPTER 96 SEWER USE SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. Collection of residential solid waste.
A. Collection fees - $21.50 per month
(Ord. 16-165 - Mar. 16 Supp.)
5. Each contributor who has a residential or commercial footing tile or sump pump connection to the City sanitary sewer system or a leaking sanitary sewer service shall pay an additional amount as outlined in the City of Creston’s Inflow and Infiltration Policy. By reference the City of Creston’s Inflow and Infiltration Policy, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby incorporated into this subsection and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 13-138 – Sep. 12 Supp.)
96.14 LAWN AND GARDEN WATERING SYSTEMS.
1. Definitions.
A. “Lawn and garden watering systems” are defined as those systems which are closed or restricted and used solely for watering a lawn and/or garden.
B. “Closed systems” are those which are not capable of being used for any other purpose than as set forth herein; and have no open faucet, no hose bib, no hydrant or any other type of extension capable of connecting to a hose or to run water out of the system.
C. “Restricted systems” are those which are a direct system from a separate meter and used solely for watering a lawn and garden. This system is connected to all outside bibs/faucets. No separate bib/faucet will be allowed. The sewer taxed portion of the system may not have an outside bib/faucet when used with this restricted system.
2. The lawn and/or garden watering system shall be connected to an independent second meter, which shall not be subject to any sewer surcharge or minimum sewer charge.
3. In order to install the second meter, the user must have an active primary service in place which is subject to all minimum fees and charges.
4. All expense for installation and maintenance for the entire system and the secondary meter shall be borne by the user requesting the service.
CHAPTER 96 SEWER USE SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
5. The user shall comply with all City Waterworks requirements regarding that portion of the system from the City main to and including the meter.
6. The user shall comply with all Public Works Department requirements for that portion of the system from the meter thereafter. The user may establish an external meter pit for the secondary meter. The pit shall be completely on private property and not on any public right-of-way, unless an easement is secured from the City.
7. In all other respects the system shall comply with all other requirements of Chapter 96 of this Code of Ordinances.
8. The Public Works Department shall be allowed to check, any time, the connection to verify compliance. Any unauthorized use of the water from a lawn and garden water system shall be a violation of this section. Users who violate any provisions of this section may be subject to the sewer charge being added to the usage, and/or removal of the second meter.
(Ord. 98-26 - Jun. 98 Supp.)
96.15 LIEN EXEMPTION. Residential rental property where a charge for any of the services of sewer systems, storm water drainage systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection and solid waste disposal is paid directly to the City by the tenant is exempt from a lien for delinquent rates or charges associated with such services, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of ninety (90) days of such services to be paid to the City. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the occupancy begins. Upon receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and deposit. A change in tenant shall require a new written notice to be given to the City within thirty (30) business days of the change in tenant. When the tenant moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in full. A change in the ownership of the residential rental property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City within thirty (30) business days of the completion of the change of ownership. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services. (Ord. 13-142 – Dec. 12 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 100
SEWER EXTENSIONS
100.01 Permit Required
100.03 Acceptance of Private Sewers
100.02 Permit Condition; Inspection Required
100.01 PERMIT REQUIRED. Persons desiring to construct a private sewer connecting with any public sanitary sewer shall file an application for a permit to build and connect such sewer with the City Engineer’s office. Such application shall have attached to it a complete plan and details of construction with all pertinent data relating thereto. Such application shall be presented to the Council for its consideration, and in the event the same is allowed, the Council will furnish to the applicant detailed specifications as to the type of construction and materials required to be used therein and provide for the construction of manholes or other cleanouts as shall be necessary to properly maintain and service such private sewer. All specifications furnished by the Council shall be according to approved construction standards and practices.
100.02 PERMIT CONDITIONS; INSPECTION REQUIRED. Any application allowed for permit granted for the construction of a private sanitary sewer shall be upon the condition that the owner thereof allow any adjacent or abutting property owner to make connection thereto or at any time thereafter upon such reasonable terms of compensation as the Council may by resolution decide and fix, including all connection fees imposed under the provisions of this chapter. After allowance of such application, an inspection shall be made of such private sanitary sewer during the construction thereof at such times as in the City Inspector’s judgment shall be necessary to require compliance with the provisions of the permit.
100.03 ACCEPTANCE OF PRIVATE SEWERS. Any private sewer constructed or laid out within the City limits and paid for out of private funds, and which private sewer is to be offered to the City as a public sewer, may be accepted by the City as a public sewer provided:
1. Such sewer so proposed to be dedicated meets the requirements of the City as to construction; and
2. At the time of the proposed dedication to the City of such private sewer, there shall be no hookups or connections made to the private sewer by abutting property owners.
CHAPTER 100 SEWER EXTENSIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
In the discretion of the Council, any such private sewer offered to be dedicated to the City which has at such time one or more hookups or connections to such private sewer may be accepted by the City upon payment to the City of all hookup or connection fees which may have been paid to the owner or owners of said private sewer or due to the City as a hookup or connection fee.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
105.01 Purpose
105.08 Separation of Yard Waste Required
105.02 Definitions
105.09 Littering Prohibited
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required
105.10 Open Dumping Prohibited
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard
105.11 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.05 Open Burning Restricted
105.12 Waste Storage Containers
105.06 Open Burning Prohibited During Fire Emergency
105.13 Prohibited Practices
105.07 Incinerators
105.14 Sanitary Disposal Project Designated
105.15 Penalties
105.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Solid Waste Control is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the City from such hazards to their health, safety and welfare as may result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
1. “Air pollution” means the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more air contaminants in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as is or may reasonably tend to be injurious to human, plant or animal life, or to property, or which unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life and property.
2. “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from public and private places.
3. “Director” means the director of the State Department of Natural Resources or any designee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.101[2b])
4. “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
5. “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
6. “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(IAC, 567-100.2)
7. “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
8. “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials or debris.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
9. “Owner” means in addition to the record titleholder any person residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
10. “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings, market and industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry or semisolid form.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
11. “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiple-family dwelling up to and including four (4) separate dwelling units.
12. “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires and trade waste.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
13. “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
14. “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
15. “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances including all real and personal property connected with such facilities, which are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved, extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and which are approved by the Director.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
16. “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities. Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa. Solid waste does not include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
A. Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
B. Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa, except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
C. Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
D. Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable State or federal standards.
E. Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a discarded material.
(Ord. 15-156 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
105.03 SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED. It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than thirty (30) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
105.04 HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD. It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.
105.05 OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED. No person shall allow, cause or permit open burning of combustible materials where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without passing through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the following circumstances, provided that no fire emergency is in effect pursuant to Section 105.06:
(IAC, 567-23.2[455B] and 567-100.2)
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
1. Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially declared emergency condition exists.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3a])
2. Trees and Tree Trimmings. The open burning of trees and tree trimmings at a City-operated burning site, provided such burning is conducted in compliance with the rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3b])
3. Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3c])
4. Landscape Waste. The disposal by open burning of landscape waste originating on the premises, provided that the waste is contained in a burn barrel or other receptacle and does not cause air pollution. The burning of landscape waste produced in clearing, grubbing and construction operations shall be limited to areas located at least one-fourth (¼) mile from any building inhabited by other than the landowner or tenant conducting the open burning. Rubber tires shall not be used to ignite landscape waste.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3d])
5. Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation and ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air contaminants established by the State Department of Natural Resources. Outdoor fireplaces, grills or charcoal pits shall not be used for the burning of residential waste or yard waste.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3e])
6. Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of bona fide training of public or industrial employees in fire fighting methods, provided that the training fires are conducted in compliance with rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3g])
7. Pesticide Containers and Seed Corn Bags. Paper or plastic pesticide containers and seed corn bags resulting from farming activities occurring on the premises if burned in accordance with rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3h])
8. Agricultural Structures. The open burning of agricultural structures if in accordance with rules and limitations established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(IAC, 567-23.2[3i])
9. Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not permitted herein may make application for a variance to the Director.
(IAC, 567-23.2[2])
105.06 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED DURING FIRE EMERGENCY. The Fire Chief or a duly authorized representative shall have the authority to declare a fire emergency for a period of up to sixty (60) days, during which no open burning, including open burning permitted by Section 105.05 of this chapter, shall be permitted due to climatic or manmade conditions which make open burning dangerous to the health and safety of the citizens of the community. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to extend the fire emergency for an indefinite period should conditions warrant said extension.
105.07 INCINERATORS. Any person desiring to install an incinerator or burning container shall first file with the City Public Works Department the plans concerning said incinerator. The City Building Department shall approve in writing the plans for said incinerator prior to its installation. Any incinerator installed without the prior approval of the City Building Department may be subject to removal at the owner’s cost. All incinerators or burning containers in use on April 14, 1992, are not subject to this restriction.
105.08 SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED. All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid waste accumulated on the premises and shall be composted on the premises or delivered to the City-run compost site by the owner or occupant. Yard waste may be burned on residential premises provided that the fire is contained in a burn barrel or other receptacle and the burning does not cause air pollution. As used in this section, “yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden waste, brush and trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
105.09 LITTERING PROHIBITED. No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.10 OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED. No person shall dump or deposit or permit the dumping or depositing of any solid waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or stream of water at any place other than a sanitary disposal project
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
approved by the Director, unless a special permit to dump or deposit solid waste on land owned or leased by such person has been obtained from the Director. However, this section does not prohibit the use of dirt, stone, brick or similar inorganic material for fill, landscaping, excavation, or grading at places other than a sanitary disposal project.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.307 and IAC, 567-100.2)
105.11 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE. No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported and disposed of as prescribed by the Director. As used in this section, “toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including but not limited to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological waste, flammable or explosive materials and similar harmful waste which requires special handling and which must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
(IAC, 567-102.14[2] and 400-27.14[2])
105.12 WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises, dwelling unit or any place where refuse accumulates shall provide and at all times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in accordance with the following:
1. Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with the following specifications:
A. Residential waste containers. Person shall use only the refuse waste storage containers provided by the Waste Management Services of either the 96-gallon size or the 35-gallon size depending on which has been issued to the residents. Residents may use heavy-duty disposal garbage bags not to exceed 30 gallons in capacity which are leakproof and waterproof and which also must display a sticker for garbage pickup purchased from designated locations. (Ord. 99-42 – Jan. 00 Supp.)
B. Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any commercial premise where an excessive amount of refuse accumulates and where its storage in portable containers as required above is impractical, shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved by the City.
2. Magazines and Papers. Occupants of residential premises may tie magazines and papers securely in bundles and need not place the bundles into residential waste containers except during inclement weather.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
3. Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. The storage site shall be well drained; fully accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and yard waste to prevent materials from escaping from the containers and blowing around neighboring yards and streets.
4. Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of solid waste awaiting collection shall be placed at the alley. If there is no alley behind the dwelling, containers may be placed at the curb in front of the dwelling.
5. Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste containers which are not adequate will be collected together with their contents and disposed of after due notice to the owner.
105.13 PROHIBITED PRACTICES. It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of such containers.
2. Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service.
3. Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the Environmental Protection Commission and as approved in writing pursuant to Section 105.07 of this chapter.
4. Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste which has been placed out for collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste collector.
105.14 SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED. The sanitary landfill facilities operated by Union County are hereby designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal Project” for the disposal of solid waste produced or originating within the City.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
105.15 PENALTIES. A person, business, individual or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter shall commit a simple misdemeanor punishable as follows, to-wit:
1. Upon first offense, a minimum fine shall be imposed of not less than $50.00, and the offender shall be required to reimburse the City for the costs of properly disposing of any waste or correction of any situation caused by the offender;
2. Upon second offense, a minimum fine of $100.00, and the offender shall be required to reimburse the City for the costs of properly disposing of any waste or correction of any situation caused by the offender;
3. Upon third or subsequent offense, a minimum of $200.00, and the offender shall be required to reimburse the City for the costs of properly disposing of any waste or correction of any situation caused by the offender.
(Ord. 99-42 – Jan. 00 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
106.01 Collection Service
106.06 Right of Entry
106.02 Collection Vehicles
106.07 Contract Requirements
106.03 Loading
106.08 Collection Fees
106.04 Frequency of Collection
106.09 Lien for Nonpayment
106.05 Bulky Rubbish
106.01 COLLECTION SERVICE. The City shall provide by contract for the collection of solid waste, except bulky rubbish as provided in Section 106.05, from residential premises only. The owners or operators of commercial, industrial or institutional premises shall provide for the collection of solid waste produced upon such premises.
106.02 COLLECTION VEHICLES. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be leakproof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair.
(IAC, 567-104.9[455B])
106.03 LOADING. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION. All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least twice each week and from commercial, industrial and institutional premises as frequently as may be necessary, but not less than once each week.
106.05 BULKY RUBBISH. Bulky rubbish which is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal manner of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in accordance with procedures therefor established by the Council.
106.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this chapter; however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential buildings.
CHAPTER 106 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
106.07 CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS. No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste from residential premises for the City without first entering into a contract with the City. This section does not prohibit an owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises owned, occupied or used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of properly in an approved sanitary disposal project. Furthermore, a contract is not required for the removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities, provided that all such materials are conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the material being transported is spilled upon any public right-of-way.
106.08 COLLECTION FEES. The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter are declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and there shall be levied and collected fees therefor in amounts set by resolution of the Council. All fees are billed and collected under the same terms and conditions provided for payment for water service.
106.09 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. Except as provided for in Section 96.15 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for solid waste collection and disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Ord. 13-142 – Dec. 12 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[1])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.01 Franchise Granted
110.04 Uninterrupted Service
110.02 Safe Operation Required
110.05 Nonexclusive
110.03 Construction and Excavations
110.06 Term of Franchise
110.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED. There is hereby granted to IES UTILITIES, INC., hereinafter referred to as the “Company,” its successors and assigns, the right, franchise and privilege for the term of twenty-five (25) years from and after the passage, adoption, approval and acceptance of the ordinance codified by this chapter, to lay down, maintain and operate the necessary pipes, mains and other conductors and appliances in, along and under the streets, avenues, alleys and public places in the City as now or hereafter constituted for the purpose of distributing, supplying and selling gas to the City and the residents thereof and to persons and corporations beyond the limits thereof. The term “gas” as used in this chapter shall be construed to mean natural gas only.
110.02 SAFE OPERATION REQUIRED. The mains and pipes of the Company must be so placed so as not to interfere unnecessarily with water pipes, drains, sewers and fire plugs which have been or may hereafter be placed in any street, alley and public places in the City nor unnecessarily interfere with the proper use of the same, including ordinary drainage or with the sewers, underground pipe and other property of the City, and the Company, its successors and assigns shall hold the City free and harmless from all damages arising from the negligent acts or omissions of the Company in the laying down, operation and maintenance of the natural gas distribution system.
110.03 CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATIONS. In making any excavations in any street, alley, avenue or public place, Company, its successors and assigns, shall protect the site while work is in progress by guards, barriers or signals, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of the streets, shall backfill all opening in such manner as to prevent settling or depressions in the surface, and shall replace the surface, pavement or sidewalk of such excavations with same materials, restoring the condition as nearly as practical and if defects are caused shall repair the same.
110.04 UNINTERRUPTED SERVICE. The Company, its successors and assigns, shall throughout the term of the franchise distribute to all consumers gas of good quality and shall furnish uninterrupted service, except as interruptible service may be specifically contracted for with consumers; provided, however, that any prevention of service caused by fire, act of God or unavoidable event or accident
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
shall be a breach of this condition if the Company resumes service as quickly as is reasonably practical after the happening of the act causing the interruption.
110.05 NONEXCLUSIVE. The franchise granted by this chapter shall not be exclusive.
110.06 TERM OF FRANCHISE. The term of the franchise granted by this chapter and the rights granted thereunder shall continue for the period of twenty-five (25) years from and after its acceptance by the Company, its successors and assigns.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 4 adopting a gas franchise for the City was passed and adopted on September 5, 1995. Voters approved the franchise at an election held October 17, 1995. The Company accepted the franchise on December 15, 1995.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
111.01 Franchise Granted
111.05 Nonexclusive
111.02 Construction; Maintenance; Indemnification
111.06 Service Provided
111.03 Meters — Service Lines
111.07 Term of Franchise
111.04 System Requirements
111.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED. There is hereby granted to IES UTILITIES, INC., hereinafter referred to as the “Company,” its successors and assigns, the right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the City, works and plants for the manufacture and generation of electricity and a distribution system for electric light, heat and power and the right to erect and maintain the necessary poles, lines, wires, conduits and other appliances for the transmission of electric current along, under and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public places in the City; also the right to erect and maintain upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public places, transmission lines through the City, to supply individuals, corporations, communities and municipalities both inside and outside of the City with electric light, heat and power for the period of twenty-five (25) years; also the right to eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the Code of Iowa.
111.02 CONSTRUCTION; MAINTENANCE; INDEMNIFICATION. The poles, wires and appliances shall be placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily interfere with the travel on said streets, alleys and public places in the City or unnecessarily interfere with the proper use of the same, including ordinary drainage or with the sewers, underground pipe and other property of the City, and the Company, its successors and assigns shall hold the City free and harmless from all damages arising from the negligent acts or omissions of the Company in the erection or maintenance of said system.
111.03 METERS — SERVICE LINES. The Company, its successors and assigns shall furnish and install all meters at its own expense and shall provide the service wire to buildings as set forth in the Company’s tariff filed with the Iowa Utilities Board.
111.04 SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS. The system authorized by this chapter shall be modern and up-to-date and shall be of sufficient capacity to supply all reasonable demands of the City and the inhabitants thereof and shall be kept in a modern and up-to-date condition.
111.05 NONEXCLUSIVE. The franchise granted by this chapter shall not be exclusive.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
111.06 SERVICE PROVIDED. Service to be rendered by the Company under this chapter shall be continuous unless prevented from so doing by fire, acts of God, unavoidable accidents or casualties, or reasonable interruptions necessary to properly service the Company’s equipment, and in such event service shall be resumed as quickly as is reasonably possible.
111.07 TERM OF FRANCHISE. The term of the franchise granted by this chapter and the rights granted thereunder shall continue for the period of twenty-five (25) years from and after its acceptance by the Company.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 3 adopting an electric franchise for the City was passed and adopted on September 5, 1995. Voters approved the franchise at an election held October 17, 1995. The Company accepted the franchise on December 15, 1995.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 112
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
112.01 Grant of Franchise
112.02 Assignment or Transfer
112.01 GRANT OF FRANCHISE. A nonexclusive right is hereby granted to Heritage Cablevision, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as the “Grantee”), its successors and assigns, to establish, construct, operate, maintain, repair, replace, renew, reconstruct and remove a cable television system across public property in the City limits for a term of twenty-five (25) years, in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States of America and the State of Iowa and the ordinances and regulations of the City, including the nonexclusive right, privilege and authority:
1. to sell and supply audio and video communication service to persons within the City;
2. to use public property within the City;
3. to engage in such further activities within the City as may now or hereafter be consistent with the generally accepted principles applicable to the operation of a cable television system.
112.02 ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER. The Grantee shall not assign or transfer any right granted under the franchise to any other person, company or corporation without prior consent of the Council, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, provided that the Grantee shall have the right to assign the franchise to a corporation wholly owned by the Grantee or to a limited partnership of which the Grantee is a general partner without prior consent of the City.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 3.6 adopting a cable television franchise for the City was passed and adopted on October 5, 1982.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 113
CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
113.01 Definitions
113.28 Use of Educational and Local Government
113.02 Bond
Access Channels
113.03 Use of Property
113.29 Television Broadcast Signals
113.04 Taxes
113.30 Local Programming
113.05 Insurance
113.31 Automated Services
113.06 Repairs
113.32 Use of Studio and Other Production Facilities
113.07 Hold Harmless
113.33 Telecast of Educational Activities
113.08 Change of Structure or Ownership
113.34 Program Alteration
113.09 Insolvency of Grantee
113.35 FM Bands
113.10 Default of Grantee
113.36 Subscriber Rates and Charges
113.11 Termination
113.37 Service Rules and Regulations
113.12 Compliance with Applicable Laws
113.38 Service Agreements
113.13 Certificate of Compliance
113.39 Office of the Grantee
113.14 Construction and Operation Schedule
113.40 Procedure to Handle Complaints and Grievances
113.15 Installation and Maintenance of Property of Grantee
113.41 Injury to Property of Grantee
113.16 Interference
113.42 Intercepting Signals of Grantee
113.17 Installation of Cables
113.43 Filing of Reports
113.18 City Use of Existing Poles
113.44 Filing of Audit
113.19 Prior Approval of Underground Installations
113.45 Filing of Maps and Plats
113.20 Restoration of Ground Surface
113.46 Filing of Communications with Regulatory Agencies
113.21 Alteration of Grade
113.47 Access
113.22 Temporary Removal of Cables
113.48 Discrimination Prohibited
113.23 Tree Trimming
113.49 Other Business Activities Prohibited
113.24 Service Requirements
113.50 Defense of Grantee
113.25 Performance Standards
113.51 Arbitration
113.26 Channel Capacity and Performance
113.27 Installation and Maintenance of Subscriber
Terminals in City Buildings and Schools
113.01 DEFINITIONS. The following words and phrases, when used herein, shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
1. “Cable television system” means any facility that, in whole or in part, receives directly, or indirectly over the air, and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television or radio stations and distributes such signals, by wire or cable, to subscribing members of the public who pay for such services.
2. “Channel” means the segment of the electromagnetic spectrum to which a source of television transmission is assigned.
3. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.
4. “Franchise” means the rights, privileges, and authority granted by the City to the Grantee hereunder and includes all of the terms and conditions of this chapter.
5. “Grantee” means any company granted a cable television franchise in the City, its successors and assigns. When the context so requires, the term
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
“Grantee” means and includes the Grantee, its officers, agents, employees, servants and independent contractors.
6. “Private property” means all property, real, personal or mixed, owned by a private person, including property owned by a public utility not owned or operated by the City.
7. “Property of the Grantee” means all property, real, personal or mixed, owned or used by the Grantee however arising from or related to or connected with the franchise.
8. “Public property” means all property, real or personal or mixed, owned or used by the City, including property owned or used by a public utility owned or operated by the City.
113.02 BOND. A Grantee shall, concurrently with its acceptance of a franchise, file with the Clerk and at all times thereafter, maintain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise or any renewal thereof, at Grantee’s sole expense, a corporate surety bond in a responsible company licensed to do business in Iowa, in the amount of $10,000.00, renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Grantee and compliance by the Grantee with all provisions of this chapter and upon further condition that in the event Grantee fails to comply with any one or more of the provisions of this chapter, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the City as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the Grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for Attorney’s fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond, said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of the franchise and any renewal thereof and thereafter until the Grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with the City that may have arisen from the acceptance of the franchise or renewal by the Grantee or from its exercise of any privilege or right granted. The bond shall provide that at least 30 days’ prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation or material change be given to the City by filing the same with the Clerk. Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Council may in its sole discretion, waive said bond or reduce the required amount thereof after three (3) years of operation of the cable television system under a franchise by the Grantee, which the Council has found to be satisfactory.
113.03 USE OF PROPERTY. The Grantee may use public property within the City and, with the written consent of the owner thereof, private property within the City, in furtherance of such activities within the City as may now or hereafter be consistent with generally accepted principles applicable to the operation of a cable television system subject, however, to the following restrictions:
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
1. Laws and Regulations. The Grantee shall comply with all governmental laws, ordinances, rules or regulations as may now or hereafter be applicable thereto.
2. Restrictions. The Grantee shall not use or occupy or permit public property or private property to be used or occupied or do or permit anything to be done on or about public property or private property which will, in any manner:
A. Impair the owner’s interest in or title thereto;
B. Impair any mortgage or lease as may now or hereinafter be applicable thereto;
C. Adversely affect the then value or character thereof;
D. Cause or be likely to cause structural damage thereto, or any part thereof;
E. Cause or be likely to cause any damage or injury to any utility service available thereto;
F. Create a public or private nuisance, cause any offensive or obnoxious vibrations, noise, odor or undesirable effect or interfere with the safety, comfort or convenience of the owner thereof, and persons lawfully on or about the same;
G. Violate the rules, regulations and requirements of any person furnishing utilities or services thereto; or
H. Make void or voidable any insurance then in force affecting the same or cause an increase in the rates applicable thereto.
113.04 TAXES. The Grantee shall pay all real estate taxes, special assessments, personal property taxes, license fees, permit fees and other charges of a like nature which may be taxed, charged, assessed, levied, or imposed upon the property of the Grantee and upon any services rendered by the Grantee.
113.05 INSURANCE. The Grantee shall, at all times during the term of the franchise, carry and require their contractors to carry:
1. General Liability. Insurance in such forms and in such companies as shall be approved by the City to protect the City and Grantee from and against any and all claims, injury or damage to persons or property, both real and personal, caused by the construction, erection, operation and maintenance of any structure, equipment or appliance. The amount of such insurance shall be not less than $100,000 as to any one person, $300,000 as to any one
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
occurrence for injury or death to persons, and $100,000 for damages to property, with so-called umbrella coverage of at least $1,000,000.
2. Worker’s Compensation. Worker’s Compensation Insurance as provided by the laws of the State of Iowa, as amended.
3. Automobile. Automobile Insurance with limits of not less than $100,000/$300,000 of public liability coverage and automobile property damage insurance with a limit of not less than $100,000 covering all automotive equipment, with so-called umbrella coverage of at least $1,000,000.
All of said insurance coverage shall provide a ten (10) day notice to the City in the event of material alteration or cancellation of any coverage afforded in said policies prior to the date said material alteration or cancellation shall become effective. Copies of all insurance policies required hereunder shall be furnished to and filed with the City prior to the commencement of operations or the expiration of prior policies, as the case may be. The Grantee shall pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the City in defending itself with regard to all damages, penalties or other claims resulting from the acts of the Grantee, its assigns, employees, agents, invitees, or other persons. Said expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses such as attorney’s fees, and shall include the value of any service rendered by the City Attorney or any other officers or employees of the City.
113.06 REPAIRS. During the term of the franchise, the Grantee shall, at its own expense, make all necessary repairs and replacements to the property of the Grantee. Such repairs and replacements, interior and exterior, ordinary as well as extraordinary, and structural as well as nonstructural, shall be made promptly, as and when needed.
113.07 HOLD HARMLESS. During the term of the franchise, the Grantee absolutely assumes and agrees to pay the City for, and the Grantee forever agrees to indemnify the City against, and agrees to hold and save the City harmless from, any and all damage, injury, costs, expenses, liability, claims, settlements, judgments, decrees and awards of every kind and nature whatsoever, including attorney’s fees, costs and disbursements, that may ever be claimed against the City by any person whatsoever, or on account of any actual or alleged loss, damage or injury to any property or person whatsoever, however arising from or related to or connected with, directly or indirectly, (a) injury to or death of any person, or loss, damage or injury to any property of the Grantee, and/or (b) the nonobservance by the Grantee of the provisions of any laws, statutes, ordinances, resolutions, regulations or rules duly promulgated by any governmental entity which may be applicable directly or indirectly, to rights, privileges, and authority, and the obligations and liabilities, assumed by the Grantee under the franchise, (c) the nonobservance by the Grantee
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
of any of the terms and conditions of the franchise, and/or (d) the granting of the franchise.
113.08 CHANGE OF STRUCTURE OR OWNERSHIP. The Grantee shall not change its corporate structure or change the ownership of its capital stock outstanding on the effective date of the franchise to the extent of twenty-five percent (25%) or more without the written consent of the City.
113.09 INSOLVENCY OF GRANTEE. In the event that the Grantee shall become insolvent, or be declared a bankrupt, or the property of the Grantee shall come into the possession of any receiver, assignee or other officer acting under an order of court, and any such receiver, assignee or other such officer shall not be discharged within sixty (60) days after taking possession of such property, the City may, at its option, terminate the franchise by giving written notice thereof to the Grantee.
113.10 DEFAULT OF GRANTEE. In the event the Grantee shall fail to comply with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice in writing from the City specifying the failure or default, the City may, at its option, terminate the franchise by giving written notice thereof to the Grantee. This section shall not apply to failures or defaults beyond the reasonable control of the Grantee.
113.11 TERMINATION. Upon termination of the franchise for any cause, the Grantee shall remove the property of the Grantee from all public property and private property within the City and shall return such public property and private property to the owner thereof in the same condition as when the property of the Grantee was placed thereon, ordinary wear and tear excepted.
113.12 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS. During the term of the franchise, the Grantee shall comply with all governmental laws, ordinances, rules or regulations as may be applicable to the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement, renewal, reconstruction, and removal of a cable television system, the sale and supply of audio and video communications services, the use of public property and private property and the engagement in such further activities as may now or hereafter be consistent with generally accepted principles applicable to the operation of a cable television system. Any modification to Section 76.31 of Subpart C of the regulations of the FCC applicable to the cable television system shall be incorporated into the franchise by amendment to this chapter within one (1) year after the effective date of such modification, or at the time of renewal of the franchise, whichever occurs first.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
113.13 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the franchise, the Grantee shall make application to the FCC for a Certificate of Compliance.
113.14 CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION SCHEDULE. Within one year of the grant of a Certificate of Compliance by the FCC, the Grantee shall complete significant construction of its basic trunk line; within one year thereafter, if not sooner, the Grantee shall extend energized trunk cable to at least 90% of the potential subscriber terminals in the City; within three (3) years thereafter, Grantee shall extend energized trunk cable to the remainder of the City area. Within two (2) years after receiving FCC certification, the Grantee shall complete its studios and cablecasting facilities within the City and the same shall be fully operational.
113.15 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY OF THE GRANTEE. During the term of the franchise, the property of the Grantee shall be constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, replaced, renewed, reconstructed, and removed in accordance with generally accepted engineering principles so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or to interfere with improvements which the City may deem proper to make or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic or use of public property or private property.
113.16 INTERFERENCE. The Grantee’s cable television system shall be so designed, engineered and maintained so as not to interfere with the radio and television reception of persons who are not subscribers of the Grantee.
113.17 INSTALLATION OF CABLES. The Grantee shall have the right, privilege, and authority to lease, rent or in any other manner obtain the use of wooden poles with overhead lines, conduits, trenches, ducts, lines, cables, and other equipment and facilities from any and all holders of public licenses and franchises with the City, and to use such poles, conduits, trenches, ducts, lines, and cables in the course of its business. The Grantee shall install its cable on the existing poles owned by other holders of public licenses and franchises with the City whenever possible for the installation of its cable. When installation of cable on poles is insufficient, or when holders of other public licenses or franchises have installed underground cable, then in that event, the cable used by the Grantee shall be installed underground.
113.18 CITY USE OF EXISTING POLES. The City shall and does hereby retain the right to utilize the existing poles for future City use, and to require the removal of the cable by the Grantee where existing poles are not sufficient to adequately handle the proposed City use and the Grantee’s cable.
113.19 PRIOR APPROVAL OF UNDERGROUND INSTALLATIONS. The Grantee shall submit detailed drawings of all proposed underground cable
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
installations to the City for approval prior to the commencement of construction and shall not deviate therefrom without approval of the City.
113.20 RESTORATION OF GROUND SURFACE. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good a condition as before said work was commenced.
113.21 ALTERATION OF GRADE. In the event that during the term of the franchise, the City shall elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley, or public way, the Grantee, upon reasonable notice by the City, shall remove, relay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense.
113.22 TEMPORARY REMOVAL OF CABLES. The Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its cables to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering of cables shall be paid by the person requesting the same and the Grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Grantee shall be given not less than five (5) days’ advance notice to arrange for such temporary cable changes.
113.23 TREE TRIMMING. The Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the cables of the Grantee. All trimming shall be done at the expense of the Grantee.
113.24 SERVICE REQUIREMENTS. During the term of the franchise, the Grantee shall furnish reasonable, adequate and efficient cable television service to subscriber terminals. This requirement may be temporarily suspended due to circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the Grantee.
113.25 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. The Grantee shall produce a picture in black and white or in color that is of high quality accompanied by proper sound on typical standard television sets in good repair. The Grantee shall also transmit signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures with good sound at all subscriber terminals throughout the City without causing cross modulation in the cables or interfering with other electrical or electronic systems.
113.26 CHANNEL CAPACITY AND PERFORMANCE. During the term of the franchise, the cable television system of the Grantee shall conform to the channel
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
capacity and performance requirements contained in the then current regulations of the FCC.
113.27 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SUBSCRIBER TERMINALS IN CITY BUILDINGS AND SCHOOLS. During the franchise, the Grantee shall at its sole cost, install and maintain a subscriber terminal in such buildings owned or used by the City, and in such buildings owned or used by recognized educational authorities within the City, both public and private, as may be designated by the governing body having jurisdiction thereof. If service to more than one television receiver in a school building is requested by the recognized educational authorities, the cost of the installation (defined as “Grantee’s actual cost of labor and materials”) will be borne by the school district.
113.28 USE OF EDUCATIONAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS. During the term of the franchise, the Grantee shall, at its sole cost, make available to the City and recognized educational authorities within the City, both public and private, at reasonable times and on reasonable notice, the use of its studio, other production facilities and related equipment for origination cablecasting. In addition thereto, the Grantee shall provide, at its sole cost, such technical assistance as may be reasonably necessary to produce such origination cablecasting.
113.29 TELEVISION BROADCAST SIGNALS. Grantee shall provide as part of its cable television service the signals of all television broadcast signals presently available off-the-air in the City and the maximum number of additional television signals consistent with the rules and regulations of the FCC and all other applicable laws, rules or regulations. Grantee may provide such automated video services and such audio services as it wishes and as are consistent with the terms of this chapter. Grantee’s cable television system will be so designated, engineered and maintained by the Grantee so as not to interfere with the television and radio reception of residents of the City who are not subscribers to its service.
113.30 LOCAL PROGRAMMING. Grantee shall provide cablecasting in such a manner and in such amount and shall maintain such studio facilities and equipment as may be required by the regulations of the FCC.
113.31 AUTOMATED SERVICES. Grantee may make available such automated video services and such audio services as it wishes.
113.32 USE OF STUDIO AND OTHER PRODUCTION FACILITIES. Grantee shall allow the City and recognized educational authorities located in the City, both public and private, to use its studio and other production facilities, equipment and materials, on reasonable notice, at reasonable times and at a reasonable charge, if any, but in no event shall such charge exceed actual Grantee’s
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
costs. Grantee shall provide at no charge such technical assistance as may be reasonably required in the production of instructional, educational and civic programs.
113.33 TELECAST OF EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES. The Grantee shall not cablecast, tape, reproduce or otherwise convey to its subscribers the activities of any recognized educational authority, public or private, without the written consent of the governing body of such authority.
113.34 PROGRAM ALTERATION. Any signal received by the Grantee from a television broadcast station shall be cablecast by the Grantee in its entirety, as received, without alteration.
113.35 FM BANDS. Uses of the FM bands for other than delivery of radio station signals may be applied by the Grantee only after approval has been granted by the Council, subject to FCC approval. The system should stay abreast of the state of the art as regards equipment, channel and systems capacity.
113.36 SUBSCRIBER RATES AND CHARGES. All rates for service shall be reasonable, compensatory and nondiscriminatory. Except as otherwise provided in the franchise, the Grantee shall have the right, privilege and authority to change the rates and charges.
113.37 SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Grantee shall have the right to prescribe reasonable service rules and regulations and operating rules for the conduct of its business. Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of the franchise. The Grantee shall file such rules and regulations, and all amendments thereto, with the City.
113.38 SERVICE AGREEMENTS. The Grantee shall have the right to prescribe a reasonable form of service agreement for use between the Grantee and its subscribers. Such service agreement shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of the franchise. The Grantee shall submit its proposed form of service agreement and all proposed amendments thereto to the City for approval.
113.39 OFFICE OF THE GRANTEE. Grantee shall establish and maintain within the City a local business office, which office shall be open for business between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. and five o’clock (5:00) p.m., Monday through Friday, except on holidays, and said office shall be appropriately staffed to receive and answer all subscriber complaints. Grantee shall make a monthly report to the City of all consumer complaints, and the action taken to remedy the complaints. This report shall state the names and addresses of the complainants, the
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
date the complaint was received and the nature of the complaint and the specific action taken to remedy each complaint.
113.40 PROCEDURE TO HANDLE COMPLAINTS AND GRIEVANCES. The procedure to handle complaints and grievances with respect to the quality of the services rendered by the Grantee, equipment malfunctions and other similar matters pertaining to the cable television system of the Grantee are as follows:
1. Within thirty (30) days after the occurrence of the facts and circumstances giving rise to a complaint or grievance, and not thereafter, the complainant shall state his or her complaint or grievance to the Grantee in writing. In the event that a complaint or grievance is received by the City, the City shall forward such complaint or grievance to the Grantee in writing.
2. Within five (5) days after the receipt of a complaint or grievance by the Grantee, the Grantee shall state to the complainant its intentions with respect to the complaint or grievance in writing.
3. In the event that the complaint or grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of the complainant within fifteen (15) days after the receipt thereof by the Grantee, the complaint or grievance shall be settled by arbitration. Such arbitration shall be before three (3) disinterested arbitrators, one named by the complainant, one named by the Grantee, and one named by the two thus chosen. The decision of the arbitrators shall be conclusive and shall be enforced in accordance with the laws of the State.
113.41 INJURY TO PROPERTY OF THE GRANTEE. No person shall wrongfully or unlawfully injure the property of the Grantee.
113.42 INTERCEPTING SIGNALS OF THE GRANTEE. No person shall wrongfully or unlawfully intercept the signals of the Grantee.
113.43 FILING OF REPORTS. On or before April 1 of each year, the Grantee shall file with the City copies of FCC Form 325 and FCC Form 326 for the preceding calendar year.
113.44 FILING OF AUDIT. On or before April 1 of each year, the Grantee shall file with the City an audit of its gross subscriber receipts within the City during the preceding calendar year. This audit shall be made by a Certified Public Accountant.
113.45 FILING OF MAPS AND PLATS. On or before April 1 of each year, the Grantee shall file with the City maps and plats showing the location and nature of all new property of the Grantee within the City as of the end of the preceding calendar year.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
113.46 FILING OF COMMUNICATIONS WITH REGULATORY AGENCIES. The Grantee shall file with the City, copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the Grantee to any regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the Grantee.
113.47 ACCESS. The Grantee shall and does hereby grant to the City the right to enter upon the property of the Grantee, upon reasonable notice, at any and all reasonable times to inspect the same for purposes pertaining to the rights of the City.
113.48 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED. The Grantee shall not grant any undue preference of advantage to any person, nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage with respect to rates, charges, services, service facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other respect.
113.49 OTHER BUSINESS ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED. During the initial term of the franchise, or any extension thereof, the Grantee shall not engage in the business of selling, leasing, renting or servicing television or radio receivers, or their parts and accessories, and the Grantee shall not require or attempt to direct its subscribers to deal with any particular person or firm with respect to said activities.
113.50 DEFENSE OF GRANTEE. In the event that the Grantee should set up against the City any claim that any term or condition of the franchise is unreasonable, arbitrary, illegal or void, or that the City did not have the power or authority to make such term or condition, the City may, at its option, terminate the franchise in the manner herein provided.
113.51 ARBITRATION. Except as otherwise provided herein, any controversy between the City and the Grantee regarding the rights, duties and liabilities of either party under the franchise shall be settled by arbitration. Such arbitration shall be before three (3) disinterested arbitrators, one named by the City, one named by the Grantee, and one named by the two thus chosen. The decision of the arbitrators shall be conclusive and shall be enforced in accordance with the laws of the State.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 114
REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION RATES AND ESTABLISHMENT OF CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
114.01 Administration of Rules and Regulations
114.05 Delegation of Powers Permitted
114.02 Rate Regulation Proceedings
114.06 Enforcement of Customer Service Standards
114.03 Certification to FCC and Cable Operator
114.07 Rules and Procedures
114.04 Cable Programming Service Tier
114.08 Reduction of Rate
114.01 ADMINISTRATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City has the legal authority to administer and shall enforce against any non-municipally owned cable television system operator, as permitted therein, the provisions of Part 76, Subpart N of the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), concerning Cable Rate Regulation, 47 C.F.R. §§76.900 et. seq., as they currently read and hereafter may be amended, which are herewith incorporated by reference.
114.02 RATE REGULATION PROCEEDINGS. Any rate regulation proceedings conducted under Section 114.01 shall provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested party, including but not limited to, the City or its designee, the Cable Operator, subscribers, and residents of the franchise area. In addition to all other provisions required by the laws of the State of Iowa and by the City, and in order to provide for such opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested party, the City shall take the following actions:
1. The City shall publish notice as provided in Section 362.4 of the Code of Iowa and shall mail, by certified mail, to the Cable Operator a notice of the intent to conduct a public proceeding on basic service tier rates and/or charges for equipment to receive such basic service tier, as defined by the FCC.
2. The public notice shall state, among other things, that cable television rates are subject to municipal review and explain the nature of the rate review in question; that any interested party has a right to participate in the proceeding; that public views may be submitted in the proceeding, explaining how they are to be submitted and the deadline for submitting any such views; that a decision concerning the reasonableness of the cable television rates in question will be governed by the Rules and Regulations of the FCC; and that the decision of the City is subject to review by the FCC.
CHAPTER 114 REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION
RATES AND ESTABLISHMENT OF
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
3. The City shall conduct a public proceeding to determine whether or not the rates or proposed rate increases are reasonable. The City may delegate by resolution the responsibility to conduct the proceeding to any duly qualified and eligible individual(s) or entity. If the City or its designee cannot determine the reasonableness of a proposed rate increase within the time period permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, it may announce the effective date of the proposed rates for an additional period of time as permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, and issue any other necessary or appropriate order and give public notice accordingly.
4. In the course of the rate regulation proceeding, the City may request additional information from the Cable Operator that is reasonably necessary to determine the reasonableness of the basic service tier rates and equipment charges. Any such additional information submitted to the City shall be verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system supervising the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and submitted by way of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the response is true and accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge, information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry.
5. The City may request proprietary information, provided that the City shall consider a timely request from the Cable Operator that said proprietary information shall not be made available for public information, consistent with the procedures set forth in Section 0.459 of the FCC Rules and Regulations. Furthermore, said proprietary information may be used only for the purpose of determining the reasonableness of the rates and charges or the appropriate rate level based on a cost-of-service showing submitted by the Cable Operator.
6. The City may exercise all powers under the laws of the State of Iowa and by this Code of Ordinances to discover any information relevant to the rate regulation proceeding, including, but not limited to, subpoena, interrogatories, production of documents, and deposition.
7. Upon termination of the rate regulation proceeding, the City shall adopt by resolution and release a written decision as to whether or not the rates or proposed rate increase are reasonable or unreasonable, and, if unreasonable, its remedy, including prospective rate reduction, rate prescription, and refunds.
8. The City may not impose any fines, penalties, forfeitures or other sanctions, other than permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, for charging an unreasonable rate or proposing an unreasonable rate increase.
CHAPTER 114 REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION
RATES AND ESTABLISHMENT OF
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
9. Consistent with FCC Rules and Regulations, the City’s decision may be reviewed only by the FCC.
10. The City shall be authorized, at any time, whether or not in the course of a rate regulation proceeding, to gather information as necessary to exercise its jurisdiction as authorized by the laws of the State of Iowa, the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC Rules and Regulations. Any information submitted to the City shall be verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system supervising the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and submitted by way of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the response is true and accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge, information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry.
114.03 CERTIFICATION TO FCC AND CABLE OPERATOR. The City filed with the FCC the required certification form (FCC Form 328) and notified the Cable Operator that the City has been certified by the FCC and that it has adopted all necessary regulations so as to begin regulating basic service tier cable television rates and equipment charges.
114.04 CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE TIER. With regard to the cable programming service tier, as defined by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC Rules and Regulations, and over which the City is not empowered to exercise rate regulation, the Cable Operator shall give notice to the City of any change in rates for the cable programming service tier or tiers, any change in the charge for equipment required to receive the tier or tiers, and any changes in the nature of the services provided, including the program services included in the tier or tiers. Said notice shall be provided within five (5) business days after the change becomes effective.
114.05 DELEGATION OF POWERS PERMITTED. The City may delegate by resolution its powers to enforce this chapter to municipal employees or officers (the “cable official”). The cable official will have the authority to:
1. Administer oaths and affirmations;
2. Issue subpoenas;
3. Examine witnesses;
4. Rule upon questions of evidence;
5. Take or cause depositions to be taken;
6. Conduct proceedings in accordance with this chapter;
CHAPTER 114 REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION
RATES AND ESTABLISHMENT OF
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
7. Exclude from the proceeding any person engaging in contemptuous conduct or otherwise disrupting the proceedings;
8. Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues by consent of the parties; and
9. Take actions and make decisions or recommend decisions in conformity with this chapter.
114.06 ENFORCEMENT OF CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS. The City shall enforce the customer service standards for the cable television system in the City as permitted by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992. Upon review of the customer service standards adopted by the FCC on March 11, 1993, by MM Docket No. 92-263 of the FCC, and deeming it in the best interests of the City, the Council hereby adopted by reference the above mentioned customer service standards.
114.07 RULES AND PROCEDURES. The Council shall establish rules and procedures regarding the process to remedy possible violations of the customer service standards by the Cable Operator. The Council shall provide for notice and opportunity for hearing for both the customers and the Cable Operator in such process.
114.08 REDUCTION OF RATE. If after notice and opportunity for hearing, the City determines that the Cable Operator is not in complete compliance with all the provisions of the customer service standards, the Cable Operator shall reduce the rate for the basic tier of cable service by ten percent (10%) until such time that the City has been satisfied that the Cable Operator is in compliance with all the provisions of the customer service standards. In addition, the Cable Operator shall pay to the City the sum of $100.00 for each day that the Cable Operator fails to be in compliance with all the provisions of the standards after the date that the Council has passed a resolution stipulating the sections where the Cable Operator is in noncompliance.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 115
OPERATING A PERPETUAL CARE CEMETERY
115.01 Trusteeship
115.03 Sale of Interment Rights
115.02 Establishment of Trust Fund
115.04 Perpetual Care Registry
115.01 TRUSTEESHIP. Pursuant to Section 523I.502 of the Code of Iowa, the City of Creston hereby states its willingness and intention to act as the trustee for the perpetual maintenance of internment spaces in Graceland Cemetery.
115.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUST FUND.
1. A perpetual trust is hereby established for Graceland Cemetery in accordance with Iowa Code, Chapter 523I, the Iowa Cemetery Act. A restricted fund is created, to be known and designated as the “cemetery perpetual care fund,” which shall be funded by the deposit of an amount equal to or greater than twenty percent (20%) of the gross selling price, or fifty dollars ($50.00), whichever is greater, for each sale of lot within the cemetery. The fund shall be administered in accordance with the purposes and provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 523I.
2. The cemetery perpetual care fund shall be maintained separate from all operating funds of the cemetery and the principal of the fund shall not be reduced voluntarily except as specifically permitted by the Iowa Cemetery Act and applicable administrative regulations.
115.03 SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS. The sale or transfer of interment rights in the cemetery shall be evidenced by a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the conveyance of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the purchase price. The agreement for interment rights shall disclose information required by the Iowa Cemetery Act, including the amount or percentage of money to be placed in the perpetual care cemetery fund.
115.04 PERPETUAL CARE REGISTRY. The cemetery shall maintain a registry of individuals who have purchased interment rights in the cemetery subject to the care fund requirements of the Iowa Cemetery Act, including amounts deposited in the cemetery perpetual care fund.
(Ch. 115 – Ord. 16-163 – Jan. 16 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
120.01 License or Permit Required
120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition
120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation
120.01 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)
120.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION. It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)
120.03 INVESTIGATION. Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer permit by the Clerk, it shall be forwarded to the Police Chief, who shall conduct an investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the application and a recommendation to the Council as to the approval of the license or permit. It is the duty of the Fire Chief to inspect the premises to determine if they conform to the requirements of the City, and no license or permit shall be approved until or unless an approving report has been filed with the Council by such officers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04 ACTION BY COUNCIL. The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application, necessary fee and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce for such further action as is provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32 [2])
120.05 PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS. A person or club holding a liquor license or retail wine or beer permit and the person’s or club’s agents or employees shall not do any of the following:
1. Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating intoxication, any alcoholic beverage. (Ord. 19-182 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [1])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the premises covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) a.m. on Sunday and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a license or permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, beer or wine on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, beer or wine between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. of the following Monday, and further provided that a holder of any class of liquor control license or the holder of a class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer for consumption off the premises between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New Year’s Day.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2b and 2k] & 123.150)
3. Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests or to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, or events center. (Ord. 19-182 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2c])
4. Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
(Ord. 19-182 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2f])
5. Sell, give or otherwise supply any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer to any person, knowing or failing to exercise reasonable care to
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
ascertain whether the person is under legal age, or permit any person, knowing or failing to exercise reasonable care to ascertain whether the person is under legal age, to consume any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2h])
6. In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Ord. 19-182 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2i])
7. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2a])
8. Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2j]
9. Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate consumption.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2d])
10. Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original package which has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2e])
11. Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or employees of the licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or other container which is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2g]
12. Permit or allow any person under legal age to remain upon licensed premises unless over fifty percent (50%) of the dollar volume of the business establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods. This provision does not apply to holders of a class “C” beer permit only.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE PERMITS
121.01 Definitions
121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required
121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application
121.08 Permit Suspension and Revocation
121.04 Fees
121.09 Effect of Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
121.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1. “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes, tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
2. “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or any other material. However, this definition is not to be construed to include cigars.
3. “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes or tobacco products are sold, stored or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
4. “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption, cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products to ultimate consumers.
5. “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement, or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location.
6. “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
7. “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
(Ord. 15-154 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
121.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
2. Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a retail tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, during such time.
(Ord. 15-154 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
121.03 APPLICATION. A completed application on forms provided by the State Department of Revenue and Finance and accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed at least five (5) days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
121.04 FEES. The fee for a retail cigarette permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING: FEE:
July, August or September
$ 75.00
October, November or December
$ 56.25
January, February or March
$ 37.50
April, May or June
$ 18.75
121.05 ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION. Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within 30 days of issuance of a permit. (Ord. 19-183 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
121.06 REFUNDS. A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the City, except during April, May or June, in accordance with the schedule of refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13)
121.07 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. No person shall sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. The provision of this section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a vending machine. (Ord. 15-154 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
121.08 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the provisions of Section 121.07, the Council shall, after written notice and hearing, and in addition to the standard penalty, assess the following:
1. For a first violation, the violator shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.
2. For a second violation within a period of two (2) years, the violator’s permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days.
3. For a third violation within a period of five (5) years, the violator’s permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.
4. For a fourth violation within a period of five (5) years, the violator’s permit shall be revoked.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
121.09 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. If a permit is revoked, no new permit shall be issued to the retailer or for the place of business for one (1) year after the date of revocation unless good cause to the contrary is shown to the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22[3])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose
122.11 Revocation of License
122.02 Definitions
122.12 Notice
122.03 License Required
122.13 Hearing
122.04 Application for License
122.14 Record and Determination
122.05 License Fees
122.15 Appeal
122.06 Bond/License Required
122.16 Effect of Revocation
122.07 License Issued
122.17 Rebates
122.08 Display of License
122.18 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable
122.19 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
122.10 Time Restriction
122.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against fraud, unfair competition and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants.
122.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house or upon the public street.
2. “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any order for goods, services, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date.
3. “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires, leases or occupies any building, stand or structure whatsoever, or who operates out of a vehicle which is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer does not exempt any person from being considered a transient merchant.
122.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the business of a transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided is in violation of this chapter.
122.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association not exempt from the application of the chapter shall file an application in writing with the Police Chief for a license under this chapter. A non-refundable application fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid at the time of filing such application to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein. The application shall contain the following information:
1. Applicant’s name, permanent and local address and local phone number;
2. Applicant’s date of birth and physical description;
3. Applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address;
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. A place for the applicant to indicate whether or not the applicant has an Iowa retailer’s sales tax permit and, if so, the applicant’s sales tax permit number;
5. Applicant’s motor vehicle description;
6. The nature of the applicant’s business;
7. Last three places of such business; and
8. Length of time to be covered by the license.
Applicants must also furnish photo identification and criminal history data from the Department of Criminal Investigation updated within one year from license/permit request.
(Ord. 10-115 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
122.05 LICENSE FEES. The following license fees shall be paid to the Police Chief prior to the issuance of any license.
1. Non-refundable application fee $ 10.00
2. One day license $ 50.00
3. One week $ 150.00
4. Six months $ 500.00
3. One year or major part thereof $1,000.00
(Ord. 10-115 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
122.06 BOND/LICENSE REQUIRED.
1. Transient Merchants. Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an applicant shall provide to the Police Chief evidence that the applicant has filed a bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of Iowa.
2. Peddlers. Before a license under this chapter is issued to a peddler who is engaged in selling food items as a mobile food unit, an applicant shall provide to the Police Chief evidence that the applicant possesses a State of Iowa Mobile Food License as required by Section 137F.4 of the Code of Iowa.
(Ord. 10-115 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
122.07 LICENSE ISSUED. If the Police Chief finds the application is completed in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately. Upon issuance of license, the Police Chief shall provide a copy to the City Clerk and Chamber of Commerce.
(Ord. 10-115 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
122.08 DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the application.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
122.10 TIME RESTRICTION. All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are in force and effect only between sunrise and sunset.
122.11 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. After notice and hearing, the Police Chief may revoke any license issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
2. Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3. Endangered Public Welfare, Health or Safety. The licensee has conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order or morals.
(Ord. 10-115 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
122.12 NOTICE. The Police Chief shall send a notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local address or hand deliver the notice, not less than ten (10) days before the date set for a hearing on the possible revocation of a license. Such notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter. (Ord. 10-115 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
122.13 HEARING. The Police Chief shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative, fail to appear without good cause, the Police Chief may proceed to a determination of the complaint.
(Ord. 10-115 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
122.14 RECORD AND DETERMINATION. The Police Chief shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Police Chief finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or State law. (Ord. 10-115 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
122.15 APPEAL. If the Police Chief revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Police Chief shall make a part of the record the reasons therefor. The licensee, or the applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the Police Chief by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Police Chief shall carry out the decision of the Council.
(Ord. 10-115 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
122.16 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the revocation.
122.17 REBATES. Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to a rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it expires. The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued and then multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at least one-half (½) of the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover administrative costs.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
122.18 LICENSE EXEMPTIONS. The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
1. Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for or selling subscriptions to newspapers.
2. Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America and similar organizations.
3. Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer products for sale. (Ord. 10-115 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
4. Students. Students representing schools located in Union County, Iowa, conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
(Ord. 08-107 – Mar. 08 Supp.)
5. Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit additional business or make special sales (i.e. Schwans, Avon). (Ord. 10-115 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
6. Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional use.
122.19 CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS. Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations which have a place of business in Union County, Iowa, operating under the provisions of Chapter 504A of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of Sections 122.04, 122.05 and 122.06. All such organizations are required to submit in writing to the Police Chief the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions, fees or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If the Police Chief finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit organization, the Police Chief shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the above information to the applicant. In the event the Police Chief denies the exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the decision to the Council, as provided in Section 122.15 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-115 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
123.01 House Mover Defined
123.07 Public Safety
123.02 Permit Required
123.08 Time Limit
123.03 Application
123.09 Removal by City
123.04 Bond Required
123.10 Protect Pavement
123.05 Insurance Required
123.11 Above Ground Wires
123.06 Permit Issued
123.01 HOUSE MOVER DEFINED. A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or similar structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the building or structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies or any other specialized moving equipment.
123.02 PERMIT REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building or similar structure to be moved. Buildings of less than one hundred (100) square feet are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
123.03 APPLICATION. Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk. The application shall include:
1. Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and if a corporation the names and addresses of its principal officers.
2. Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
3. Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, street superintendent, and public utility officials. The route approved shall be the shortest route compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety.
123.04 BOND REQUIRED. The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the course of moving the building or structure.
123.05 INSURANCE REQUIRED. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:
CHAPTER 123 HOUSE MOVERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
1. Bodily Injury - $50,000 per person; $100,000 per accident.
2. Property Damage - $50,000 per accident.
123.06 PERMIT ISSUED. Upon approval of the application and filing of bond and insurance certificate, the Clerk shall issue a permit.
123.07 PUBLIC SAFETY. At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain flagmen at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure.
123.08 TIME LIMIT. No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than twelve (12) hours or such additional time as determined by the Council to be reasonable depending on the circumstances without having first secured the written approval of the City.
123.09 REMOVAL BY CITY. In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of Section 123.08 the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit holder’s bond.
123.10 PROTECT PAVEMENT. It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement, unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at least one (1) inch in width for each one thousand (1,000) pounds of weight of such building. If there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of the City as to such weight shall be final.
123.11 ABOVE GROUND WIRES. The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone, cable television and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 124
LICENSING PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS
124.01 Purpose
124.10 Hearing
124.02 Definitions
124.11 Appeal
124.03 License Required
124.12 Effect of Revocation
124.04 Application for License
124.13 Rebates
124.05 Fees
124.14 Transfer of License Prohibited
124.06 Issuance of License
124.15 Display of License
124.07 Power to Inspect and Investigate
124.16 Exemptions
124.08 Revocation of License
124.17 Special Requirements
124.09 Notice
124.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to assure that in the conduct of the public amusements licensed and regulated under this chapter the public health, safety and welfare will be protected and maintained.
124.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Open to the public” means a place in which a public amusement is conducted for, engaged in or performed by the general public and to which the general public is admitted or is in attendance. It does not include places that the general public is not free to enter and to which admission is restricted to members of a club, fraternal organization or religious or educational group.
2. “Public amusement” means any public dance hall, skating rink, swimming pool, billiard hall, bowling alley or shooting gallery that is open to the public.
3. “Public dance hall” means any place of public amusement in which dancing is engaged in or performed, even though food is served and the operator holds a State restaurant license under Section 170.2 of the Code of Iowa.
124.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the operation of any public amusement regulated by this chapter without first obtaining a license as herein provided.
124.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. An application for a license under this chapter shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the Clerk. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s full name and address, address of the local business establishment and the nature of the applicant’s business. If the applicant is not the owner of the place where the business is to be conducted, the name and address of the owner shall be included on the application. If the applicant is a corporation or other association, the application shall also list the names and addresses of its
CHAPTER 124 LICENSING PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
principal officers. A receipt from the City showing payment of all fees shall be attached to the application.
124.05 FEES. Application may be made for an annual or a daily license. The annual license is valid for one year after the date on which it is issued. The daily license is valid for only one twenty-four hour period, but the applicant may apply for and receive five daily licenses at one time. However, no daily license shall be issued more than thirty (30) days before the date for which the license is valid. The following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk prior to the issuance of any license.
1. For one day $ 5.00
2. For one year or major part thereof $ 50.00
The Clerk shall give the applicant a written receipt showing the sum received and the time of receipt. The Clerk shall pay to the Finance Officer all such fees no later than ten (10) days following the issuance of a license.
124.06 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE. If the Clerk finds that all of the prescribed conditions for the issuance of a license have been satisfied, that no grounds for revocation under Section 124.08 of this chapter exist, and that any special requirements under Section 124.17 of this chapter have been complied with, the license shall be issued immediately. The Clerk shall make a determination whether to issue the license within ten (10) days after the date a completed application is submitted. If the Clerk refuses to act within this ten-day period, the applicant shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting on whether the license should be issued.
124.07 POWER TO INSPECT AND INVESTIGATE. Upon receipt of an application for a license, the Clerk shall forward it immediately to the Police Chief, who shall conduct an investigation and submit a written report concerning the truth of the facts stated in the application and a recommendation concerning whether or not a license should be issued. The Clerk shall notify the local health officer, the Building Inspector and the Fire Chief immediately, and they shall inspect the premises immediately to determine whether they meet the applicable standards of this Code of Ordinances and State law. These officials shall submit written reports of the results of their investigations. No license shall be issued until these reports have been submitted to the Clerk and such reports shall be submitted within seven (7) days after the Clerk receives the application.
124.08 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. After notice and hearing, the Clerk may revoke any license issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
CHAPTER 124 LICENSING PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3. Endangered Public Welfare, Health or Safety. The licensee has conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order or morals.
124.09 NOTICE. The Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local address or hand deliver, not less than ten (10) days before the date set for a hearing on the possible revocation of a license. Such notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter.
124.10 HEARING. The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative, fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination of the complaint.
124.11 APPEAL. If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a part of the record the reasons therefor. The licensee, or the applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall carry out the decision of the Council.
124.12 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the revocation.
124.13 REBATES. Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to a rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it expires. The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued and then multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at least one-half (½) of the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover administrative costs.
124.14 TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the application.
124.15 DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Every person who is issued a license under the provisions of this chapter shall display the license in a conspicuous place on the premises on which the business is being conducted.
CHAPTER 124 LICENSING PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
124.16 EXEMPTIONS. This chapter shall not be construed to require licensing of each employee or agent of a person engaged in a public amusement occupation. Only the owner, manager or agent of such public amusement needs to possess a license.
124.17 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS. Every person who is granted a license under this chapter shall also comply with the following regulations which specifically apply to such person’s business:
1. Public Dance Halls. Any holders or owner of a Class “B” or “C” liquor license or wine or beer permit who wishes to obtain a license to permit dancing in connection with the operation of such beer, wine and liquor business must comply with all the requirements of this Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State in connection with the operation of such business. Said license to permit dancing shall be signed by the Mayor and such license may be revoked and canceled upon the conviction of the owner or holder of such beer or wine permit or liquor license for any violation of the beer, wine or liquor laws of the State or any ordinance of the City governing establishments where beer, wine or liquor is sold.
2. Shooting Gallery. A shooting gallery shall display a written certificate from the Police Chief that it is equipped with a safe and adequate backstop and shooting equipment.
3. Billiard Hall. No minor shall be allowed to be in any billiard hall in which beer is sold.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 125
LICENSING AND REGULATING TAXIS
125.01 Definitions
125.11 Appeal
125.02 License Required
125.12 Supervision
125.03 Application for License
125.13 Display of License and Rates
125.04 Fees
125.14 Liability Insurance
125.05 Investigation and Report
125.15 Driver’s Qualifications
125.06 Issuance of License
125.16 Maximum Working Hours
125.07 Disposition of Fee
125.17 Soliciting Business
125.08 Transfer of License Prohibited
125.18 Restriction on Number of Passengers
125.09 Revocation of License
125.19 Duty to Carry
125.10 Notice and Hearing
125.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Operator” means any person, whether or not the owner of a taxi, that will profit financially by the operation of a taxi, but does not include a person hired to drive a taxi.
2. “Taxi” means any motor vehicle that is used on the streets of the City for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire.
125.02 LICENSE REQUIRED. It is unlawful to operate a taxi without a valid taxi license issued under this chapter. Taxis that are operated principally in other cities and towns and that use the streets of the City only temporarily and on isolated occasions need not have a license under this chapter.
125.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. A taxi operator shall apply in writing to the Clerk for a license for each taxi. The application shall include the name and residential and business addresses of the operator, and the make, model, serial number, motor number and State license plate number of each taxi.
125.04 FEES. The application shall be accompanied by a license fee in the following amount:
1. For one year $10.00
2. For six months $ 6.00
3. For three months $ 4.00
4. Less than three months $ 1.00 per day.
125.05 INVESTIGATION AND REPORT. Before the Clerk acts on the issuance of the license, the Police Chief shall investigate the character of the applicant and shall inspect the taxis to be licensed for possible violations of the State motor vehicle law or of this chapter, and shall report on these matters to the Council.
CHAPTER 125 LICENSING AND REGULATING TAXIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
125.06 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE. The Clerk shall review each application promptly and shall issue a license if it finds that such issuance will be consistent with public convenience, health, safety and welfare. The license shall contain the signatures of the Mayor and Clerk, the date of issuance, the period for which the license is valid, the passenger seating capacity of the taxi and the information contained in the application.
125.07 DISPOSITION OF FEE. Immediately after acting on a license application, the Clerk shall transmit the license fee to the Finance Officer, or return the disapproved application and fee to the applicant.
125.08 TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED. Each taxi license shall be issued for one specific taxi only and shall not be transferable from taxi to taxi or to a different operator.
125.09 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. The Clerk may revoke or suspend any license issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent Statements. The operator has made fraudulent statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
2. Violation of Law. The operator has substantially violated the requirements of this chapter or of the State motor vehicle laws.
3. Endangered Public Welfare, Health or Safety. The operator has conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare or safety.
125.10 NOTICE AND HEARING. The Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee not less than ten (10) days before the date set for a hearing on the possible revocation of a license. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served personally or as required for personal service by the Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the reasons for the intended revocation or suspension. The Clerk shall conduct the hearing on the possible revocation of the license. Should the licensee, or authorized representative, fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination of the complaint.
125.11 APPEAL. If the Clerk revokes (or refuses to issue) a license, the Clerk shall make a part of the record the reasons therefor. The licensee (or the applicant) shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall carry out the decision of the Council.
CHAPTER 125 LICENSING AND REGULATING TAXIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
125.12 SUPERVISION. The Police Chief has the power at any time to investigate the conduct of any taxi business and the operation of the licensed taxis and to inspect the licensed taxis for possible violations of the State motor vehicle laws or this chapter, and shall report on these matters to the Council. The Police Chief shall inspect all taxis at least once every two (2) months.
125.13 DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND RATES. Operators shall display within the taxi, in full view of passengers, the taxi license and a schedule of rates.
125.14 LIABILITY INSURANCE. Before beginning operation of any taxi, the operator shall file with the Clerk evidence of liability insurance in a suitable amount as approved by the City to cover possible liabilities rising out of the operations of each licensed taxi.
125.15 DRIVER’S QUALIFICATIONS. Every driver of a licensed taxi shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age and shall possess a valid Iowa commercial driver’s license.
125.16 MAXIMUM WORKING HOURS. No operator shall require or permit any person to drive a taxi in excess of these maximum periods:
1. No more than twelve (12) consecutive hours in any twenty-four hour period except that, after completing such a period of work, a driver may begin work again if he or she has been off duty for ten (10) hours.
2. No more than twelve (12) non-consecutive hours in any twenty-four hour period except that, after completing such a period of work, a driver may begin work again if he or she has been off duty for eight (8) hours.
125.17 SOLICITING BUSINESS. Taxi drivers shall not stop, park or drive about the City streets or public places to solicit passengers by words, signs or signals, but they may take a passenger anywhere in the City at the passenger’s request.
125.18 RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF PASSENGERS. No driver shall permit more passengers to be carried in a taxi than the rated seating capacity of the taxi as fixed by the Council and stated in the license.
125.19 DUTY TO CARRY. No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons, upon request, unless previously engaged, or unless the driver is unable or forbidden to do so by the provisions of this chapter.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 126
LICENSING OF ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
126.01 Purpose and Scope
126.08 Revocation of License
126.02 Definitions
126.09 Notice
126.03 License Required
126.10 Hearing
126.04 Issuance of Permits
126.11 Record and Determination
126.05 Expiration Dates
126.12 Effect of Revocation
126.06 Accounting for Fees
126.13 Summary Suspension
126.07 Insurance or Bond
126.14 Transfer of License
126.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the examination and licensing of electrical contractors and for the issuance of permits in order to protect the public safety, health and welfare.
126.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Electrical contracting” means undertaking or offering to undertake the planning or supervision of electrical work.
2. “Electrical contractor” means any person who has the necessary qualifications, training, experience and technical knowledge to plan or supervise electrical work.
3. “Electrical equipment” means all electrical materials, wiring, conductors, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures, signs and apparatus or parts thereof.
4. “Electrical work” means all installations, alterations, repairs, removals, renewals, replacements, disturbances, connections, disconnections and maintenance of all electrical equipment.
5. “Licensed” means licensed under this chapter unless otherwise specified.
126.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall engage in electrical contracting within the City unless such person has obtained from the City or the State of Iowa an electrical contractor’s license. No person shall engage in doing electrical work unless licensed in accordance with Section 103 of the Iowa Code. The license fees for those electricians licensed by the City shall be established by resolution of the Council. (Ord. 16-168 – Aug. 16 Supp.)
126.04 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS. Permits to do electrical work as required by the Electrical Code of the City (Chapter 157 of this Code of Ordinances) shall be issued only to electrical contractors licensed by the State of Iowa or the City of Creston. However, any permit required by the Electrical Code may be issued to the
CHAPTER 126 LICENSING OF ELECTRICAL
CONTRACTORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
owner of a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, to do any work regulated by the Electrical Code in that dwelling, including the usual accessory buildings located on the same lot as the dwelling, provided that the dwelling will be occupied by the owner, that the owner appears before the City Building Inspector and shows competency to do the specific work for which the owner desires a permit, and that the owner personally shall purchase all materials and perform all labor in connection with the work. All work done in accordance with this exception must meet all the requirements of the Electrical Code and shall be inspected like other work.
126.05 EXPIRATION DATES. All City issued licenses shall expire on June 30 and shall be renewed annually upon application of the licensee and payment of the license fee to the Clerk. Any license not renewed prior to July 31 shall expire on July 31 and may not be renewed by the City.
126.06 ACCOUNTING FOR FEES. License fees shall be turned over to the City Clerk not later that the tenth day of the month following the month in which they were received, with a written report of the amounts and sources of the fees. The resulting fund shall be used to pay the costs of issuance of licenses and enforcement of this chapter.
126.07 INSURANCE OR BOND. Any person who has been issued a license by the City of Creston as an electrical contractor shall execute and deposit with the Clerk a bond in the sum of $100,000.00 or insurance certificate with sureties approved by the Clerk and Mayor. This bond or insurance is to be held as surety that the licensee will fulfill these conditions:
1. All electrical work performed by the licensee or under his or her supervision shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the Electrical Code of the City.
2. He or she will pay all fines and penalties imposed upon the contractor for violation of this chapter or the Electrical Code.
3. The City shall be held free from any liability sustained by reason of the negligence or incompetence of such electrical contractor or other person working under his or her supervision.
126.08 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. After notice and hearing, the Council may revoke any license issued by the City under this chapter for the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
CHAPTER 126 LICENSING OF ELECTRICAL
CONTRACTORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or the Electrical Code or has otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3. Endangered Public Welfare, Health or Safety. The licensee has conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare or safety.
126.09 NOTICE. The Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local address or hand deliver the notice not less than ten (10) days before the date set for a hearing on the possible revocation of a license. Such notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter.
126.10 HEARING. The Council shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint and notice. The licensee shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to testify and present witnesses in his or her own behalf, and to cross-examine adverse witnesses. Should the licensee, or authorized representative, fail to appear without good cause, the Council may proceed to a determination of the complaint.
126.11 RECORD AND DETERMINATION. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Council finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or State law.
126.12 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of any license issued by the City shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any license renewal by the City.
126.13 SUMMARY SUSPENSION. If the Council finds that the public health or safety requires emergency action, and incorporates a finding to that effect in its order, summary suspension of a license may be ordered pending suspension or revocation proceedings under this chapter. Immediately upon issuance of an order of summary suspension, the Council shall institute proceedings pursuant to Sections 126.09 and 126.10.
126.14 TRANSFER OF LICENSE. It is unlawful for any license holder to transfer his or her license or to allow it to be used, directly or indirectly, by any other person.
(Ch. 126 – Ord. 13-144 – Jan. 13 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 127
LICENSING OF PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS
127.01 Purpose
127.09 Revocation of License
127.02 Definitions
127.10 Notice
127.03 License Required
127.11 Hearing
127.04 Issuance of Permits
127.12 Record and Determination
127.05 Apprentices and Helpers
127.13 Effect of Revocation
127.06 License Fees
127.14 Use of Licensee’s Name by Another
127.07 Expiration of License
127.15 Inspections and Investigations
127.08 Insurance or Bond
127.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the examination and licensing of plumbing and mechanical contractors in order to protect the public safety, health and welfare.
127.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Apprentice” or “plumber/mechanic’s helper” means any person who, while learning the trade of plumbing or mechanical work, is assisting in the installation, alteration or repair of plumbing or mechanical work and is actually with and in the presence of a plumbing or mechanical contractor.
2. “Mechanical” has the meaning given in the Uniform Mechanical Code.
3. “Plumbing” has the meaning given in the Uniform Plumbing Code.
4. “Plumbing or mechanical contractor” means any person engaged in planning, supervising and contracting for the installation of plumbing and who is licensed as a plumbing or mechanical contractor.
5. “Exterior Plumbing Contractor” means any person engaged in planning, supervising and contracting for the installation of plumbing only on the exterior of buildings and who is licensed as a plumbing or mechanical contractor.
127.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall engage in the business of plumbing or mechanical work unless licensed as a plumbing or mechanical contractor in accordance with Chapter 105 of the Iowa Code. No person shall engage in the practice of installing, repairing or altering plumbing on the exterior of buildings unless licensed as a plumbing contractor by the State of Iowa or as an “Exterior Plumbing Contractor” by the City of Creston.
127.04 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS. Permits to do plumbing and mechanical work as required by the Plumbing and Mechanical Code of the City (Chapter 156
CHAPTER 127 LICENSING OF
PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL
CONTRACTORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
of this Code of Ordinances) shall be issued only to plumbing or mechanical contractors licensed by the City. However, any permit required by the Plumbing and Mechanical Code may be issued to the owner of a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, to do any work regulated by the Plumbing and Mechanical Code in that dwelling, including the usual accessory buildings located on the same lot as the dwelling, provided that the dwelling will be occupied by the owner, that the owner appears before the City Building Inspector and shows competency to do the specific work for which the owner desires a permit, and that the owner personally shall purchase all materials and perform all labor in connection with the work. All work done in accordance with this exception must meet all the requirements of the Plumbing and Mechanical Code and shall be inspected like other work.
127.05 APPRENTICES AND HELPERS. Apprentices and helpers employed to assist a City licensed plumbing contractor to do exterior work need not be licensed, provided, however, that such apprentices and helpers perform their work under the direct supervision of a licensed plumbing contractor.
127.06 LICENSE FEES. Any person who desires to be licensed as an exterior plumbing contractor shall make a written, signed application to the Clerk on forms provided by the Building Department. The annual license fee shall be paid to the Clerk and the amount shall be established by resolution of the Council. The license fees shall be used for the payment of the costs of issuing such licenses and the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 16-169 – Aug. 16 Supp.)
127.07 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE. All licenses shall expire on June 30 and shall be renewed annually upon application of the licensee and payment of the license fee to the Clerk. Any license not renewed prior to July 31 shall expire on July 31.
127.08 INSURANCE OR BOND. Any person who has been issued a license as an exterior plumbing contractor shall execute and deposit with the Clerk a bond in the sum of $100,000.00 or insurance certificate with sureties approved by the Clerk and Mayor. This bond or insurance is to be held as surety that the licensee will fulfill these conditions:
1. All exterior plumbing performed by the licensee or under his or her supervision shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the Plumbing Code of the City.
CHAPTER 127 LICENSING OF
PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL
CONTRACTORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. He or she will pay all fines and penalties imposed upon the contractor or person working under his or her supervision for violation of this chapter or the Plumbing Code.
3. The City shall be held free from any liability sustained by reason of the negligence or incompetence of such exterior plumbing contractor or other person working under his or her supervision.
4. The contractor shall indemnify the City for work done by the City to correct any condition during excavation or backfilling, including safety measures required therefor.
127.09 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. After notice and hearing, the Council may revoke any exterior plumbing license issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
2. Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or the Plumbing Code or has otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3. Endangered Public Welfare, Health or Safety. The licensee has conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare or safety.
127.10 NOTICE. The Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local address or hand deliver the notice not less than ten (10) days before the date set for a hearing on the possible revocation of a license. Such notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter.
127.11 HEARING. The Council shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint and notice. The licensee shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to testify and present witnesses in his or her own behalf, and to cross-examine adverse witnesses. Should the licensee, or authorized representative, fail to appear without good cause, the Council may proceed to a determination of the complaint.
127.12 RECORD AND DETERMINATION. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke a license only when
CHAPTER 127 LICENSING OF
PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL
CONTRACTORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
upon review of the entire record the Council finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or State law.
127.13 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the revocation.
127.14 USE OF LICENSEE’S NAME BY ANOTHER. No licensee shall allow his or her name to be used by another person either for the purpose of obtaining permits or for the purpose of doing business or work under the license. Every licensee shall notify the Building Department of the address of his or her place of business and the name under which such business is carried on and shall give immediate notice to the Building Department of any change in either. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
127.15 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS. It is the duty of the Building Inspector to make any investigations or inspections which he or she believes necessary or any investigations or inspections required or requested by the Council to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(Ch. 127 – Ord. 13-146 – Jan. 13 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices
135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing
135.09 Excavations
135.03 Placing Debris On
135.10 Maintenance of Parking or Terrace
135.04 Playing In
135.11 Failure to Maintain Parking or Terrace
135.05 Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
135.12 Dumping of Snow
135.06 Use for Business Purposes
135.13 Driveway Culverts
135.07 Washing Vehicles
135.14 Paving of Driveway Access
135.15 Right-of-way Easements
135.01 REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES. It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any street or alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03 PLACING DEBRIS ON. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, leaves, grass, soil, mud, rocks or any other debris, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle or which, if washed into the storm sewer, could clog the storm sewer.
Should any City employee or Official notice or be made aware of a violation of this section the employee or Official shall take pictures and document the date and time. The landowner of the adjacent property to the street or alley shall then be assessed a cleanup or storm sewer assessment fee of a minimum of $200.00 plus a charge of $100 per hour required for any street cleanup or storm sewer cleaning. Any property owners who do not provide payment as required will be assessed by the City for such costs, which will be collected in the same manner as general property taxes.
(Ord. 17-171 – Sep. 17 Supp.)
135.04 PLAYING IN. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on streets or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05 TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY. It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon by the
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
authority or permission of any City official, police officer or member of the fire department.
135.06 USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES. It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering same for sale, without permission of the Council.
135.07 WASHING VEHICLES. It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street or alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08 BURNING PROHIBITED. No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish or other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09 EXCAVATIONS. No person shall dig, excavate or in any manner disturb any street, parking or alley unless such person first obtains a permit therefor as hereinafter provided:
1. Application. Before such permit is granted, the person shall file with the City a written application. The application shall contain the following:
A. An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
B. A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is to be made;
C. The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and restoration of the street or alley surface; and
D. Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
2. Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street
3. Barricades, Fencing and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing and warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or maintaining adequate barricades, fencing or warning lights shall be paid to the City by the permit holder/property owner.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. Bond Required. The applicant shall post with the City a penal bond in the minimum sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the course of administration of this section. In lieu of a surety bond, a cash deposit of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be filed with the City.
5. Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:
A. Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
B. Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
6. Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner.
7. Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City. Backfill shall not be deemed completed, nor resurfacing of any improved street or alley surface begun, until such backfill is inspected and approved by the City. The permit holder/property owner shall provide the City with notice at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is desired.
8. Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after the approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses therefor to the permit holder/property owner.
9. Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. Charges remaining unpaid and delinquent 30 days after date on statement shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner, as general property taxes.
(Ord. 12-135 – Apr. 12 Supp.)
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
10. Permit Fee. A permit fee of three dollars ($3.00 ) shall be payable at the time of filing the application with the City. A separate permit shall be required for each excavation.
11. Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate, and payment of any required fees, a permit shall be issued.
135.10 MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE. It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon the public streets, except that the abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs and picking up litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[1c])
135.11 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE. If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12 DUMPING OF SNOW. It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, blow or place or cause to be thrown, pushed, placed or blown any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed promptly by the property owner or agent, and only after first making arrangements for such prompt removal at the owner’s cost of the accumulation within a reasonably short time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
135.13 DRIVEWAY CULVERTS. The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City. In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially assessed against the property as by law provided.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
135.14 PAVING OF DRIVEWAY ACCESS. Whenever a property owner is permitted a driveway access by the City onto a public street which is improved with either a curb and gutter or a full width concrete street with integral curb, such owner shall pave all area within the right-of-way with a minimum of four (4) inches of Portland cement concrete along the entire length of that portion of the curb removed. The installation of the paving along the curb cut shall be completed within 120 days after the issuance of a permit for the curb cut. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cut or remove any curbing for any purpose without first securing a written permit therefor from the Creston Public Works Department. All construction of this minimum concrete slab shall be in accordance with this Code of Ordinances and with good construction practices. (Ord. 05-89 – Feb. 06 Supp.)
135.15 RIGHT-OF-WAY EASEMENTS. All non-governmental agencies shall place their lines or underground services in a designated corridor within the City right-of-way. All non-governmental agencies will be required at their own expense to remove or relocate their lines or services in the event their services interfere with a governmental use, i.e. sewer, water or street construction. Whenever a non-governmental agency installs any service within a City right-of-way, the agency involved shall be responsible for verification that no damage has been caused to any City system located within the same right-of-way.
(Ord. 01-51 – May 01 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose
136.12 Failure to Repair or Barricade
136.02 Definitions
136.13 Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice and Accumulations
136.14 Awnings
136.04 Responsibility for Maintenance
136.15 Encroaching Steps
136.05 City May Order Repairs
136.16 Openings and Enclosures
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered
136.17 Fires and Fuel on Sidewalks
136.07 Permit Required
136.18 Defacing
136.08 Sidewalk Standards
136.19 Debris on Sidewalks
136.09 Failure to Obtain Permit; Remedies
136.20 Merchandise Display
136.10 Inspection and Approval
136.21 Sales Stands
136.11 Barricades and Warning Lights
136.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the sidewalk when it is hardening.
2. “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
3. “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
4. “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
5. “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
6. “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or suburban areas.
7. “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair, replacement or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling or depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
8. “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
136.03 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND ACCUMULATIONS. It is the responsibility of the abutting property residents/owners to remove snow, ice and accumulations promptly from sidewalks. If a property resident/owner does not remove snow, ice or accumulations within twenty-four (24) hours after a snowfall, ice and accumulations event ends, the following procedure shall be implemented: (Ord. 14-151 – Apr. 14 Supp.)
1. The Creston Police Department shall issue a notice and leave it at the residence that the snow, ice or accumulations shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours.
2. Upon failure to remove the snow, ice or accumulations by the resident/owner, the Creston Police Department will issue a City of Creston citation, which shall provide for a fine of $25.00, payable to the Creston Police Department within thirty (30) days of issuance. If the fine is not paid within the thirty (30) day time period, the fine will automatically double on the thirty-first day. Failure to pay the fine within forty-five (45) days will result in a summons being filed with Union County Magistrate’s Court and all costs associated with this action are to be paid by the defendant.
3. A resident/owner may contest these proceedings by filing a request for hearing with the Union County Magistrate within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the citation.
(Ord. 04-74 – Apr. 04 Supp.)
4. The City or their agents may remove snow, ice and accumulations from sidewalks if not removed by property resident/owner within the allotted 48 hour period, and a charge of $75.00 per hour for such removal, plus a surcharge of $100.00, will be charged to the property owner.
5. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred by regular mail to the property owner who has failed to remove snow, ice and accumulations from sidewalks, thus allowing the same to be removed by the City or their agents, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one (1) month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner, as general property taxes.
(Ord. 14-151 – Apr. 14 Supp.)
136.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE. It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or traveled portion of the public street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2c])
136.05 CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS. If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the Council may serve notice on such owner, by
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
certified mail, requiring the owner to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e])
136.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED. The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall remove, reconstruct or install a sidewalk unless such person has obtained a permit from the City Engineer and has agreed in writing that said removal, reconstruction or installation will comply with all ordinances and requirements of the City for such work. All such permits shall be issued without charge and a copy thereof, with the application, shall be filed and preserved in the office of the City Engineer. The permit shall state when the work is to be commenced and when the work is to be completed. The time of completion of the sidewalk improvements may be extended by the City Engineer. All permits for sidewalk improvements not ordered by resolution of the Council shall be issued in compliance with this chapter. The City Engineer may withhold the issuance of any permit for any sidewalk improvements for a sufficient period to determine the necessity for the proposed improvements or when weather conditions will adversely affect the sidewalk improvements.
136.08 SIDEWALK STANDARDS. Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall meet the standards for sidewalk construction and repair as prepared and adopted by the City and on file in the office of the Clerk. All sidewalk improvements on public property, whether performed by the owner of the abutting property or by the City, shall be performed under the supervision and inspection of the City Engineer and in accordance with the plans and specifications adopted by the City.
136.09 FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT; REMEDIES. Whenever any sidewalk improvements are made that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter and with the specifications or when any sidewalk improvements are made without a permit, the City Engineer shall serve notice to obtain a permit upon the property owner and upon the contractor doing the work. If the sidewalk is in the course of construction, the notice shall order the work to stop until a permit is obtained and the work is corrected to comply with the specifications. If the sidewalk work has been completed, the owner shall obtain a permit immediately and perform
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
any needed corrections within five (5) days from receipt of the permit. If the owner fails to comply with this notice, the engineer shall have the work completed and the costs assessed to the property owner.
136.10 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL. Upon final completion, the City Engineer shall inspect the work. The City Engineer may order corrections if the work does not meet specifications. When the work does meet all requirements of this chapter, the specifications and the permit, the City Engineer shall indicate this on both copies of the permit.
136.11 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS. Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions hereof.
136.12 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE. It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.13 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.14 AWNINGS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight (8) feet above the surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened to
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
136.15 ENCROACHING STEPS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the Council.
136.16 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES. It is unlawful for a person to:
1. Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the Council.
2. Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
3. Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on or within six (6) feet of any sidewalk.
136.17 FIRES OR FUELS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.18 DEFACING. It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or writing on any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.19 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
136.20 MERCHANDISE DISPLAY. It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk.
136.21 SALES STANDS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
CHAPTER 137 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
137.01 Power to Vacate
137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission
137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing
137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
137.01 POWER TO VACATE. When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of the City to vacate a street or alley or portion thereof, the Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2a])
137.02 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. Any proposal to vacate a street or alley shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council. The Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the Council within thirty (30) days after the date the proposed vacation is referred to the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03 NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING. The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
137.04 FINDINGS REQUIRED. No street or alley, or portion thereof, shall be vacated unless the Council finds that:
1. Public Use. The street or alley proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore, its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
2. Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.15)
137.05 DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS. When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, or portion thereof, the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
CHAPTER 137 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
137.06 DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED. The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental body for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] & 364.7[3])
(Ord. 10-120 – Oct. 09 Supp.)
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets and/or alleys and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO.
ADOPTED
ORDINANCE NO.
ADOPTED
9.2
No. 89, 1887
9.40
12-21-64
9.3
No. 99, 1889
9.41
5-17-65
9.4
No. 111,
9.42
8-16-65
9.5
No. 113, 1890
9.43
5-22-67
9.6
No. 114, 1890
9.44
11-6-67
9.8
No. 195, 1899
9.45
5-6-68
9.9
No. 203, 1900
9.46
12-15-69
9.10
No. 205, 1901
9.47
12-15-69
9.11
No. 218, 1902
9.48
3-2-70
9.12
No. 319, 1915
9.49
4-19-71
9.14
No. 228, 1904
9.50
6-21-71
9.16
No. 246, 1905
9.51
8-16-71
9.17
No. 250, 1906
9.52
10-4-71
9.19
No. 334, 1917
9.53
12-6-71
9.20
9.54
6-5-72
9.22
No. 269, 1925
9.55
9.23
No. 375
9.56
9.24
No. 384, 1928
9.57
2-18-74
9.25
No. 385, 1928
9.59
4-16-74
9.27
No. 393, 1929
9.61
4-16-74
9.28
No. 467, 1947
9.64
11-2-76
9.29
No. 472, 1948
9.67
5-3-77
9.30
No. 307, 1915
9.71
6-20-78
9.31
12-6-85
9.72
3-7-78
9.32
1-17-55
9.73
8-15-78
9.33
11-7-55
9.74
9.34
11-5-56
9.75
4-20-82
9.35
2-4-57
9.76
3-7-78
9.36
6-17-57
9.77
10-17-78
9.37
4-17-61
9.78
10-7-80
9.38
11-4-63
9.79
1-20-81
9.39
5-18-64
9.80
3-20-79
CHAPTER 137 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
ORDINANCE NO.
ADOPTED
ORDINANCE NO.
ADOPTED
9.81
2-15-83
9.82
6-7-83
9.83
2-5-85
9.85
10-1-85
9.86
8-15-86
9.87
5-5-87
9.88
5-5-87
9.89
5-16-87
8.101
4-20-88
9.92
11-1-88
9.93
12-20-88
9.93
12-19-89
9.93
1988
9.94
1-16-90
9.95
1-16-90
9.96
2-6-90
9.98
3-6-90
9.99
7-17-90
9.102
6-18-91
97-19
6-3-97
97-21
7-1-97
97-23
11-18-97
98-31
10-20-98
99-40
9-7-99
99-41
9-7-99
05-85
5-17-05
05-92
12-20-05
19-179
8-7-18
19-184
10-16-18
19-186
12-4-18
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
138.01 Established Grades
138.02 Record Maintained
138.01 ESTABLISHED GRADES. The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been heretofore established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified and established as official grades.
138.02 RECORD MAINTAINED. The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO.
ADOPTED
9.90
11-5-73
9.91
1-4-83
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
139.01 Naming New Streets
139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street
139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names
139.01 NAMING NEW STREETS. New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
1. Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing street.
2. Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
3. Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02 CHANGING NAME OF STREET. The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.
139.03 RECORDING STREET NAMES. Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and County Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04 OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP. Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Creston, Iowa.”
139.05 REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP. If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map: (brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 140
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
140.01 Exercise of Police Power
140.05 Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility
140.02 Definition
140.06 Permitted Access Points
140.03 Right of Access Limited
140.07 Speed Limits
140.04 Access Controls Imposed
140.08 Parking Restricted
140.01 EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER. This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City under Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
140.02 DEFINITION. The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a controlled right or easement of access, light, air or view by reason of the fact that their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any other reason.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)
140.03 RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED. No person has any right of ingress or egress to, from or across any controlled access facility except at such points as may be permitted by the Iowa Department of Transportation and designated by ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
140.04 ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED. There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities within the City, described as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3)
1. Project No. FN-25-2. On the Primary Road System extension improvement, Project No. FN-25-2, Primary Road No. Iowa 25 within the City, described as follows:
Beginning at Station 186+00, a point 25.2 feet east of the centerline of Lincoln Street, thence westerly 2,653 feet to Station 212+53, the west corporation line.
regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway all in accordance with the plans for such improvement identified as Project No. FN-25-2, on file in the office of the Clerk.
CHAPTER 140 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Project No. U-83. On the Primary Road System extension improvement, Project No. U-83, Primary Road No. 34 within the City, described as follows:
From Station 361+21.8 to Station 392+49
regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway all in accordance with the plans for such improvement identified as Project No. U-83 on file in the office of the Clerk.
140.05 UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY. It is unlawful for any person to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3)
1. Cross Dividing Line. Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any curb, central dividing section, or other separation or dividing line on such controlled access facilities.
2. Turns. Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation or line.
3. Use of Lanes. Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane provided for that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the central dividing curb, separation section or line.
4. Enter Facility. Drive any vehicle into the controlled access facility from a local service road except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line which separates such service road from the controlled access facility property.
140.06 PERMITTED ACCESS POINTS. Points of access are hereby permitted as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
1. The compiled list furnished by the Iowa Highway Commission of drives and entrances provided for access under the improvement specified as Project No. U-83-(8), FU-83(8) and U-83 is hereby recorded as follows:
CHAPTER 140 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
STATION
SIDE OF STREET
CURB OPENING WIDTH
USE OF ENTRANCE
361+40
Right
18 feet
Residential
361+70
Right
35 feet
Commercial
361+82
Left
18 feet
Residential
362+80
Left
35 feet
Commercial
363+20
Right
35 feet
Commercial
364+31
Left
35 feet
Commercial
365+40
Right
18 feet
Residential
365+41
Left
18 feet
Residential
367+10
Left
18 feet
Residential
368+15
Left
18 feet
Residential
373+30
Right
18 feet
Residential
374+57
Right
18 feet
Residential
375+30
Left
35 feet
Commercial
376+45
Right
18 feet
Residential
376+98
Left
45 feet
Joint Commercial
377+48
Right
18 feet
Residential
378+50
Right
18 feet
Residential
380+12
Right
18 feet
Residential
380+63
Left
18 feet
Residential
380+70
Right
24 feet
Residential
381+40
Right
45 feet
Commercial
383+25
Left
24 feet
Residential
383+98
Right
35 feet
Commercial
384+68
Right
35 feet
Commercial
384+90
Left
35 feet
Commercial
385+87
Right
35 feet
Commercial
385+89
Left
24 feet
Commercial
386+83
Left
18 feet
Residential
387+87
Left
18 feet
Residential
388+02
Right
18 feet
Residential
388+11
Left
18 feet
Residential
389+10
Left
18 feet
Residential
389+37
Right
35 feet
Joint Commercial
389+95
Right
35 feet
Joint Commercial
390+08
Left
18 feet
Residential
391+74
Right
18 feet
Residential
392+60
Right
35 feet
Joint Commercial
393+70
Right
24 feet
Joint Residential
396+45
Right
45 feet
Commercial
398+70
Right
35 feet
Commercial
398+82
Left
35 feet
Commercial
400+52
Left
35 feet
Commercial
401+18
Left
35 feet
Commercial
402+44
Left
35 feet
Commercial
404+30
Right
24 feet
Street
CHAPTER 140 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
408+29
Left
24 feet
Alley
411+02
Right
18 feet
Farm
412+65
Left
45 feet
Commercial and Alley
414+65
Left
45 feet
Street
417+21
Left
35 feet
Commercial
419+95
Right
35 feet
Joint Commercial
422+99.7
Right
24 feet
Alley
422+99.7
Left
24 feet
Alley
423+36
Left
35 feet
Commercial
423+40
Right
35 feet
Commercial
423+93
Left
35 feet
Commercial
424+03
Right
35 feet
Commercial
425+18
Right
35 feet
Commercial
425+28
Left
35 feet
Commercial
425+83
Left
35 feet
Commercial
426+03
Right
35 feet
Joint Commercial
426+20
Left
20 feet
Alley
426+58
Left
35 feet
Commercial
427+23
Left
35 feet
Commercial
429+46.6
Left
35 feet
Commercial and Alley
429+50
Right
45 feet
Commercial and Alley
430+37.5
Right
35 feet
Commercial
430+38
Left
35 feet
Commercial
431+85
Right
35 feet
Commercial
432+81
Left
24 feet
Alley
432+81
Right
45 feet
Commercial and Alley
434+51
Left
45 feet
Commercial
436+21.1
Right
24 feet
Alley
436+21.1
Left
24 feet
Alley
438+40
Left
35 feet
Commercial
439+35
Right
35 feet
Commercial and Alley
439+41
Left
24 feet
Alley
440+00
Left
35 feet
Commercial
442+29
Right
24 feet
Commercial
442+60.9
Right
24 feet
Alley
442+55
Left
35 feet
Residential and Alley
443+10
Right
35 feet
Commercial
445+25
Left
35 feet
Commercial
445+49
Right
35 feet
Commercial
445+79
Left
35 feet
Commercial and Alley
446+30
Right
35 feet
Commercial
447+17
Right
35 feet
Joint Commercial
448+35
Right
24 feet
Commercial
449+15
Left
45 feet
Commercial and Alley
450+21
Left
35 feet
Commercial
450+83
Right
40 feet
Street
451+43
Right
18 feet
Residential
452+41
Right
18 feet
Residential
CHAPTER 140 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
452+57
Left
45 feet
Joint Commercial
453+18
Right
35 feet
Commercial
455+00
Left
35 feet
Commercial
463+90
Right
45 feet
Commercial
On Primary Road No. Iowa 25 (New York Avenue) from the intersection with Taylor Street northeasterly to Sumner Avenue.
STATION
SIDE OF STREET
CURB OPENING WIDTH
USE OF ENTRANCE
1391+83
Left
24 feet
Joint Residential
1393+93
Left
18 feet
Residential
1397+60
Right
18 feet
Park
1398+96
Right
22 feet
Commercial
1398+96
Left
16 feet
Residential
1399+48
Left
15 feet
Residential
1400+08
Left
16 feet
Residential
1401+06
Left
16 feet
Residential
1401+87
Right
35 feet
Commercial
1403+00
Left
20 feet
Residential
1403+23
Right
45 feet
Commercial
1404+10
Left
22 feet
Commercial
On Primary Road No. Iowa 25 (Sumner Avenue) from intersection with Taylor Street northerly to New York Avenue.
STATION
SIDE OF STREET
CURB OPENING WIDTH
USE OF ENTRANCE
1405+15
Left
35 feet
Commercial
1407+14
Right
35 feet
Commercial
1407+92
Right
35 feet
Commercial
140.07 SPEED LIMITS. The maximum speed limits on said projects are hereby established as follows:
1. The speed limit on New York Avenue from the south corporation line (Station 361+21.8) to a point 83 feet southwest of Smith Street (Station 369+00) is 45 miles per hour.
2. The speed limit from a point 83 feet southwest of Smith Street (Station 369+00) to the intersection of New York Avenue with Taylor Street (Station 392+49) is 35 miles per hour.
CHAPTER 140 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
3. The speed limit from the intersection of New York Avenue with Taylor Street (Station 392+49) east to a point 317.5 feet east of Mulberry Street (Station 454+00) is 35 miles per hour.
4. The speed limit from a point 317.5 feet east of Mulberry Street (Station 454+00) to the east corporation line (Station 472+12) is 55 miles per hour.
140.08 PARKING RESTRICTED. The parking of vehicles on or along controlled access facilities is restricted as follows:
1. Parking shall be prohibited on all minor street approaches for a distance of thirty-five (35) feet in advance of the stop sign.
2. On New York Avenue from the south corporation line to and including intersection of New York Avenue and Sumner Avenue.
3. On Taylor Street, also known as an extension of U.S. Highway No. 34, from New York Avenue easterly to the east corporation line.
4. On Sumner Avenue, from Taylor Street northerly to and including intersection of Sumner Avenue and New York Avenue.
5. On the parking within ten (10) feet of the curb line of Iowa Highway 25 in the area located between Prairie Street and Spencer Street.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
145.01 Enforcement Officers
145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe
145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building
145.07 Right to Demolish
145.04 Notice to Owner
145.08 Costs
145.01 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter in relation to all buildings or structures intended for human habitation or commercial use. The City Administrator or a designated Nuisance Officer as approved by City Council shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter in relation to any and all other buildings or structures. (Ord. 07-106 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
145.02 GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE. All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, or by rehabilitation, or by demolition and removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter. (Ord. 18-178 – Jul. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a])
145.03 UNSAFE BUILDING. “Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of the following criteria:
1. Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of (a) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay, including but not limited to exterior surfaces of any structure with holes, breaks, unpainted or peeling surfaces, loose or rotting materials, areas of exterior walls not maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated or sided to prevent deterioration and/or roofs or flashing with defects that admit rain; (b) faulty or unfinished construction; (c) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (d) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (e) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. (Ord. 06-95 - June 06 Supp.)
2. Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
3. Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease.
4. Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
5. Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04 NOTICE TO OWNER. The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice statin the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in charge of the building or premises, within forty-eight (48) hours or such reasonable time as the circumstances require, to commence either the required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within thirty (30) days from date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected and approved by the enforcement officer. (Ord. 18-178 – Jul. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [3h])
1. Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by Certified Mail to owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if the owner is found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the City limits such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
2. Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request for hearing within the time provided in the notice.
145.05 CONDUCT OF HEARING. If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the following:
1. Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the date, time and place of hearing.
2. Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
3. Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and may issue such order as it deems appropriate.
145.06 POSTING OF SIGNS. The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF CRESTON, IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, or rehabilitation, or demolition and removal are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the building.
(Ord. 18-178 – Jul. 18 Supp.)
145.07 RIGHT TO DEMOLISH. In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to repair, to rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. (Ord. 18-178 – Jul. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08 COSTS. Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury. Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special assessment against the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the manner provided for other taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
EDITOR’S NOTE
Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX of this Code of Ordinances.
Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We recommend you review the situation with your attorney before initiating procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.
CHAPTER 147
RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
147.01 Purpose and Intent
147.12 Unrecorded Land Contracts or Purchase
147.02 Definitions
Agreements
147.03 Terms Defined in Other Codes
147.13 Chapter Does Not Impair Authority to Act
147.04 Terms Not Defined
on Nuisances
147.05 Inspections by City Administrator
147.14 Chapter Does Not Abrogate Provisions of
147.06 Landlord and Operators to Register with City
Other Codes and Ordinances
147.07 Registration
147.15 Property Maintenance Standards Enumerated
147.08 Program for Rental Inspection
147.16 Liability of Landlord or Non-Occupying
147.09 Complaints
Property Owner
147.10 Right of Entry
147.17 Fees
147.11 Access by Owner or Operator
147.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum quality standards for all residential rental dwellings, rental dwelling units, rooming houses and rooming units; to provide for the enforcement of such standards; to establish a program of regular rental inspections; and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City. In order to meet the purpose of this chapter, the City intends:
1. To establish standards for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation and thermal conditions; for safety from fire or accident; for an adequate level of maintenance; and for the use, location and amount of space for human occupancy;
2. To define the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants of dwellings in securing City-wide compliance with minimum physical standards for rental property;
3. To contain and eliminate urban blight and deterioration of rental property and neighborhoods;
4. To prevent the unintentional development of conditions hazardous to the public health and safety;
5. To assure that dangerous conditions be prevented or abated;
6. To establish the authority, responsibility and administrative mechanism to inspect rental dwelling places through a systematic area-by-area procedure;
7. To establish the authority, responsibility and administrative mechanism to treat specific problems on a complaint basis; and
8. To establish a baseline for minimum design and installation standards for dwelling units that may have been constructed without benefit of codes.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
It is not the intent of this chapter to protect the individual, but rather to protect the public as a whole.
147.02 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
1. “Dwelling” means any building or structure, except temporary housing, which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, but does not include dormitories, hotels or motels. Whenever the word “dwelling” is used in this chapter, it shall be construed as though it were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
2. “Dwelling unit” means any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating of meals. Whenever the term “dwelling unit” is used in this chapter, it shall be construed as though it were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
3. “Non-dwelling structure” means any structure, except a dwelling or rooming house used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal or property of any kind used in conjunction with a rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit.
4. “Occupancy” means the act or acts of living, sleeping or cooking in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit.
5. “Occupant” means any person more than one year of age, including an owner or operator, living, sleeping or cooking in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit.
6. “Operator” means any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or any part thereof, in which any dwelling units or rooming units are let, either as owner or agent of the owner.
7. “Owner” means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with other:
A. Has legal title or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming hour or rooming unit;
B. Has charge, care or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, guardian of the estate or as the owner.
8. “Rental property” means any dwelling for which a stated return or payment is made for the temporary possession or use thereof.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
9. “Roomer” means an occupant of a rooming house who is charged rent and is not a member of the rooming house owner’s or operator’s family.
10. “Rooming house” means any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator to one or more roomers.
11. “Rooming unit” means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit in a rooming house used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating of meals.
147.03 TERMS DEFINED IN OTHER CODES. Where terms are not defined in this chapter and are defined in the Building, Electrical, Plumbing or Mechanical Codes, they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
147.04 TERMS NOT DEFINED. Where terms are not defined under the provisions of this chapter of under the provisions of the Building, Electrical, Plumbing or Mechanical Codes, they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as any context herein may imply.
147.05 INSPECTIONS BY CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator or his/her designee is authorized and directed to enter and make such inspections as are necessary to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming housed, rooming units and the premises thereof including but not limited to any non-dwelling structures used by tenants within the City limits in order to perform his or her duty of safeguarding the health, safety and welfare of the occupants and of the general public.
147.06 LANDLORD AND OPERATORS TO REGISTER WITH CITY.
1. All landlords and operators of rental property shall register their rental properties with the City. Each unit is required to be registered and amend the registration when the property is sold or has a status change. The registration shall be due February 28, 2012.
2. The City will provide an application form which must be completed and updated upon request. The following information shall be provided to the City:
A. The street address of the dwelling or rooming house;
B. The number of rental units contained in the dwelling or rooming house; and
C. The name, address and telephone number of the owner and any agent of the owner of the dwelling or rooming house.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
3. If a rental property is not registered before March 1, 2012, a late fee for each structure shall be added. Properties not registered by April 1, 2012, will result in a municipal infraction.
4. No person shall rent to another or offer to rent to another any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit unless the owner or operator of the same has registered the rental property with the City and posted the certificate evidencing said registration on the subject property.
5. The registration, administrative and other fees outlined in Section 147.17 of this code shall be set by ordinance.
147.07 REGISTRATION.
1. Any person who fails to register their property(ies) is guilty of a municipal infraction.
2. For newly constructed rental housing, the registration deadline is thirty (30) calendar days after the certificate of occupancy has been issued.
3. For rental housing that transfers ownership, the registration deadline is thirty (30) calendar days after the final transfer and/or the recording of such.
4. The registration deadline for a rooming house will commence fourteen (14) calendar days after the license (not the registration) expires.
147.08 PROGRAM FOR RENTAL INSPECTION.
1. Self-Inspections. At the time of registration the City shall provide to the applicant a checklist and guidelines to assist with a self-inspection of each rental unit. The checklist will identify all items that are to be inspected and provide a space for the landlord to indicate compliance with the applicable standard. The self-inspection will be completed and the certification form provided by the City shall be due within 60 days of registration.
2. Upon Receipt of the Self-Inspection. The City shall provide to the applicant a certificate evidencing the fact that the unit has been registered and the landlord/operator shall cause said certificate to be posted on the rental property in a location approved by the City inspection unit.
3. Spot Inspections. A spot inspection is an inspection conducted by City officials and which is conducted in one of two ways: either upon the observation by City officials of units which are obviously and substantially out of compliance, or by lot. These inspections will be scheduled with the owner and/or operator of the units.
4. Requested Inspections. Upon the request of the owner or operator of a rental unit, the City shall inspect said rental unit to determine compliance
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
with the Housing Code. Upon a successful completion of such inspection, the unit will be exempt from spot inspections determined by lot for a period of three (3) years.
5. Section 8 Inspections (also known as SIRHA inspections). Units which have been inspected for and passed Section 8 rental requirements shall be deemed to have been spot inspected and exempt from spot inspections determined by lot for a period of three (3) years. It shall be the duty of the owner and/or operator of such rental units to provide proof of a Section 8 inspection to the City.
6. Failed Inspections. A rating system developed by the City shall establish three (3) classifications: substantially in compliance; out of compliance; and substantially out of compliance. If after City inspection a rental unit is deemed to be substantially in compliance, a list of needed repairs will be provided to the owner and/or operator with stated time in which to make the repairs. It will be the duty of the owner and/or operator to notify the City once the identified repairs have been completed.
A. If after an inspection a rental unit is deemed to be out of compliance, a list of needed repairs will be provided to the owner and/or operator with a stated time in which to make the repairs. Upon completion of the repairs, the owner and/or operator shall schedule a re-inspection of the property to confirm compliance. The owner and/or operator shall pay a re-inspection fee of $35 per unit upon completion of said inspections.
B. If after City inspection a rental unit is deemed to be substantially out of compliance, a list of needed repairs will be provided to the owner and/or operator with a stated time in which to make the repairs. The owner and/or operator shall schedule a re-inspection of the property to confirm compliance. The owner and/or operator shall pay a re-inspection fee of $35 per unit upon completion of said inspections.
The City may also schedule inspection of all units owned by said owner/operator upon a finding that one of the owner/operator’s rental properties is substantially out of compliance.
147.09 COMPLAINTS. All persons making complaints concerning the compliance with the provisions of this chapter of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit shall do so in the following manner:
1. The complaints shall be in writing upon a form provided by the City of Creston and signed by the complainant.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
2. Such complaints shall state the address of the premises, the name of the owner, landlord or operator, and shall state the nature of the alleged violation with specificity.
3. In the case of tenants making complaints concerning the dwelling or dwelling unit in which they reside, such tenant shall attach a dated copy of the notice in which they requested the owner or operator to correct the alleged violation, unless complaint pertains to an emergency situation as determined by the administration.
4. It is a violation of the provisions of this chapter for an owner or operator to take reprisals against any tenant making a complaint under the provisions of this chapter. Any such reprisals shall constitute a municipal infraction.
147.10 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
1. The Creston Fire Department is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this ordinance and to perform the duties of safeguarding the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of all rental dwellings and the general public.
2. The Creston Fire Department personnel are authorized to enter and make inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises located within the City any condition or code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous.
3. The Creston Fire Department personnel may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon them by this chapter, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, said official shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied, such official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.
4. The Creston Fire Department personnel may make inspections of all rental premises pursuant to the City’s regular inspection program as frequently as may be necessary and may make an inspection at any reasonable time based upon the need for code enforcement determined by the age of the area, the nature of the building and premises, or the condition of the entire area.
5. If such entry is refused for regular request or complaint inspections, the Creston Fire Department personnel shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. When the Creston Fire Department personnel shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner, occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building or premises, shall fail or neglect to promptly permit entry therein by the authorized personnel for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter.
147.11 ACCESS BY OWNER OR OPERATOR. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give the owner or operator or his or her agent or employee access to any part of such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit for the purposes of making such inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter; provided the occupant shall be given twenty-four (24) hours’ written notice prior to any inspection, except in case of emergency when immediate access shall be granted.
147.12 UNRECORDED LAND CONTRACTS OR PURCHASE AGREEMENTS. For purposes of this chapter, any residential property which is the subject of an unrecorded land contract or purchase agreement shall be treated the same as rental property. The contract seller shall have the duties and responsibilities and shall be subject to the same penalties as the owner of rental property.
147.13 CHAPTER DOES NOT IMPAIR AUTHORITY TO ACT ON NUISANCES. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to impair or limit in any way the authority of the City to define and declare nuisances, or of the City Administrator, the Police Chief or other City officials to cause the removal or abatement of nuisances by summary proceedings or other appropriate proceedings.
147.14 CHAPTER DOES NOT ABROGATE PROVISIONS OF OTHER CODES AND ORDINANCES. The provisions of this chapter shall not abrogate the responsibility of any person to comply with any provision of the Plumbing, Electrical, Building, Fire Prevention and Zoning Codes or other ordinances of the City.
147.15 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS ENUMERATED. These minimum conditions and responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property shall govern.
1. Responsibility. Owners shall be responsible to maintain structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements while the occupants are to be responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition which they occupy and control.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
2. Vacant Structures and Land. Shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause blighting problems adversely affecting the public health or safety.
Exterior Property Areas
1. Grading and Drainage. Area to be maintained to prevent erosion and accumulation of stagnant water.
2. Rodent Harborage. Proper precautions to be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent infestation.
3. Exhaust Vents. Vents shall not be discharged directly upon abutting adjacent public or private property.
4. Accessory Structures. To be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
Exterior Structures
1. General. The exterior structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
2. Premises Identification. To have placed address numbers on the buildings that are plainly legible from the street. These numbers shall be contrasting with background and a minimum of four (4) inches in height.
3. Structural Members. Shall be maintained free from deterioration and capable of safely supporting the imposed loads.
4. Exterior Walls. Shall be free from holes, breaks and loose or rotting materials; and maintained, weatherproofed and proper surface-coated to prevent deterioration.
5. Roofs and Drainage. Shall not have defects that admit rain with drainage to prevent dampness, deterioration with drains, gutters and downspouts maintained and not discharged in a manner to create a nuisance.
6. Decorative Features. Shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
7. Overhang Extensions. Shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition with periodic application of weather coating materials.
8. Stairways, Decks, Porches and Balconies. Shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting imposed loads.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
9. Chimneys and Towers. Shall be maintained structurally safe and sound and in good repair with exposed surfaces protected from the elements and against decay or rust.
10. Handrails and Guards. Shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and maintained.
11. Windows, Skylights and Door Frames. Shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather-tight with glazing free from cracks and holes, easily openable, and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
12. Insect Screens. From April 1st to October 31st, outside openings required for ventilation shall be supplied with tightly fitting screens. Every storm door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
13. Doors. Shall be maintained in good condition with locks at unit’s entrances being tightly secured. Doors that are equipped with a deadbolt shall be operated from the inside only by the turning of a knob and shall have a lock-throw of not less than one (1) inch. A sliding bolt shall not be acceptable, and the lock shall be operable without the use of a key, tool, special knowledge or effort.
14. Basement Hatchways. Shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
15. Guards for Easement Windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with protection against the entry of rodents.
16. Building Security. Doors, windows or hatchways for units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within.
17. Windows. A unit’s operable windows located in whole or part within six (6) feet of ground level shall be equipped with sash-locking devices.
18. Basement Hatchways. If the hatchway provides access to a unit, it shall be equipped with devices that secure the unit(s) from unauthorized entry.
Interior Structure
1. General. Shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a clean, sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy in a clean and sanitary condition. The owner of multi-family unit(s) shall maintain the shared or public areas of the structure(s) and exterior in a clean and sanitary condition.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
2. Structural Members. Shall be maintained structurally sound and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
3. Stairs and Walking Surfaces. Shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair
4. Handrails and Guards. Shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and maintained.
Handrails and Guardrails
1. General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four (4) risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than thirty (30) inches above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than thirty (30) inches high or more than forty-two (42) inches high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surface. Guards shall not be less than thirty (30) inches high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface.
Rubbish and Garbage
1. Accumulation. There shall be no accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
2. Disposal of Rubbish. Every occupant shall use approved covered containers so as to dispose in a clean and sanitary manner.
3. Disposal of Garbage. Every occupant shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner in covered, leak-proof containers.
Extermination
1. Infestation. Structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation and exterminated if found.
2. Owner. Shall be responsible for extermination prior to renting or leasing.
3. Single Occupant. Shall be responsible for extermination on the premises of a one-family dwelling.
4. Multiple Occupancy. The owner shall be responsible for extermination in public or shared areas. The occupant shall be responsible for extermination if caused by failure to prevent infestation.
5. Occupant. Shall be responsible for continued rodent and pest-free conditions.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations
1. General. These provisions shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure.
2. Responsibility. Owner shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements and no person shall occupy any premises that do not comply with this code.
3. Alternative Devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation is permitted.
Light
1. Habitable Spaces. Every exterior-facing wall in a habitable space shall have at least one (1) window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court with a minimum glazed area of five percent (5%) of the floor area.
2. Common Halls and Stairways. Multi-family occupancies shall be lighted at all times with at least a sixty (60) watt incandescent bulb or equivalent energy saving bulb, for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area with a spacing not greater than thirty (30) feet.
3. Other Spaces. Shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to the maintenance of sanitary conditions and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures.
Ventilation
1. Habitable Spaces. Shall have at least one (1) openable window in every exterior-facing wall of a habitable room equal to fifty percent (50%) of the minimum required glazed area.
2. Bathrooms and Toilet Rooms. Shall comply with ventilation requirements for a habitable space, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system discharged to the outdoors or to a properly vented attic.
3. Clothes Dryer Exhaust. Shall be independent of all other systems by exhausting in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.
4. Privacy. Units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.
5. Minimum Room Widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen and bathroom, shall not be less than seven (7) feet in any plan dimension.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
6. Minimum Ceiling Heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet.
Bedroom Regulations
1. Area for Sleeping Purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one (1) person shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area and every person more shall be an additional thirty (30) square feet per occupant.
2. Water Closet Accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one (1) water closet and one (1) lavatory. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one (1) water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.
3. Prohibited Occupancy. Kitchens and non-habitable space shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
4. Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements.
Minimum Square Feet
1. Efficiency Units. A unit occupied by only one (1) occupant shall have a clear floor area of not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet and a unit occupied by two (2) occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet and three (3) occupants shall have a clear floor space of not less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet. The unit shall be provided with a working space of thirty (30) inches in front of the kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigerator. The unit shall have a separate bathroom containing a toilet, lavatory and a tub or shower. The maximum number of occupants shall be three (3).
Space
1-2 Occupants
3-5 Occupants
6 or more
Occupants
Living Room
No Requirements
120 sq ft
150 sq ft
Dining Room
No Requirements
80 sq ft
100 sq ft
Kitchen
50 sq ft
50 sq ft
60 sq ft
Bedrooms
Shall comply with Section
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements
1. General. This section shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
2. Responsibility. The owner shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements.
Required Facilities
1. Dwelling Units. Shall contain its own tub or shower, lavatory, toilet and kitchen sink, which shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the toilet or in close proximity. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.
2. Rooming Houses. At least one (1) toilet, lavatory and tub or shower shall be supplied for each four (4) rooming units.
3. Hotels. Where private toilets, lavatories and baths are not provided, then one (1) toilet, lavatory and tub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten (10) occupants.
Toilet Rooms
1. Privacy. Bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passage to a hall or other space or exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms in a multiple dwelling.
2. Location. Bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dorm units shall have access by transversing not more than one (1) flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway.
Plumbing Systems and Fixtures
1. General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, kept free from obstructions, leaks, defects and capable of performing its function.
2. Fixture Clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearance for usage and cleaning.
3. Plumbing System Hazards. If a hazard is found, the Code Official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard promptly.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
Water System
1. General. Every fixture shall be properly connected to an approved water system and shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water as per the Plumbing Code.
2. Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture.
3. Supply. Shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to fixtures in sufficient volume and pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely and free from defects and leaks.
4. Water Heating Facilities. Shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required fixture at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten degrees (110°) Fahrenheit. A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
Sanitary Drainage System
1. General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
2. Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
Storm Drainage
1. General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements
1. General. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
2. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
Heating Facilities
1. Facilities Required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section.
2. Residential Occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of sixty-five degrees (65°) Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms and bathrooms. Cooking appliances or portable heating units shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirement.
3. Heat Supply. Every owner is to furnish and maintain heat to occupants at a temperature of not less than sixty-five degrees (65°) Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms and bathrooms.
4. Room Temperature Measurement. Shall be measured three (3) feet above the floor near the center of the room and two (2) feet inward from the center of each exterior wall.
Mechanical Equipment
1. Mechanical Appliances. Shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition.
2. Removal of Combustion Products. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent (exception for labeled and unvented).
3. Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.
4. Safety Controls. Shall be maintained in effective operation.
5. Combustion. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided.
6. Energy Conservation Devices. Shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.
Electrical Facilities
1. Facilities Required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section.
2. Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the Electrical Code. Dwellings shall be served by a three-wire (3), 120/240 volt, single-phased electrical service having a rating of not less than sixty (60) amps.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
3. Electrical System Hazards. Where a hazard is found to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the Code Official shall require the defects to be corrected immediately to eliminate the hazard.
Electrical Equipment
1. Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
2. Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling unit shall contain at least one (1) separate and remote receptacle outlet. Every laundry area shall contain at least one (1) grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground-fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one (1) receptacle. Any new bathroom outlet shall have ground-fault circuit interrupter protection.
Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters
1. General. Shall be maintained to sustain all imposed loads, to operate properly and to be free from physical and fire hazards with current certificate of inspection displayed and available for public inspection.
2. Elevators. In buildings equipped with more than one (1) passenger elevator, at least one (1) elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied.
Duct Systems
1. General. Shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function.
Fire Safety Requirements
1. General. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the MINIMUM conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided. The State Fire Marshal may impose additional provisions.
2. Responsibility. The owner shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements.
Means of Egress
1. General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
2. Aisles and Corridors. The required width of aisles and corridors shall be thirty-six (36) inches within dwelling units and multi-family dwellings. Aisles and corridors shall be unobstructed.
3. Locked Doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without need for keys, special knowledge or effort.
4. Emergency Escape Openings. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grills, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the Building Code and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.
Fire-Resistance Ratings
1. Fire-Resistance-Rated Assemblies. The fire resistance rating of the walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.
2. Opening Protection. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smoke-stop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
Fire Protection Systems
1. General. Existing residential rental units not already provided with single-station smoke alarms shall be provided with approved single-station dual-sensor smoke alarms.
2. Smoke Alarms. Approved single- or multi-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in existing single- and multi-family dwelling units, duplexes, congregate residences and hotel/lodging house guest rooms regardless of occupant load in each sleeping room and immediately outside of sleeping areas and on each story including the basement.
3. Responsibility. It is the owner’s responsibility to ensure that smoke alarms are installed and working in each sleeping room, immediately outside of sleeping areas and on each story including the basement. The owner is responsible for replacing smoke alarms that become outdated (smoke alarm types below) or fail. It is also the owner’s responsibility to visibly mark on the outside of each smoke alarm the date installed (or best estimate if the install date is not known).
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
Tenants must sign that smoke alarms are functioning upon renting the unit. It is then the occupant’s responsibility to ensure that batteries are replaced when necessary.
There are three (3) types of smoke alarms with batteries:
A. Smoke Alarms that are powered by long-lasting batteries and are designed to replace the entire unit according to the manufacturer’s instructions, usually 8-10 years.
B. Standard type battery-powered smoke alarms – these batteries need to be replaced at least once per year and the whole unit should be replaced every 8-10 years.
C. Hard-wired battery back-up smoke alarms – the batteries need to be checked monthly and replaced at least once per year. The entire unit should be replaced every 8-10 years.
Failure to adhere to these responsibilities is a violation of City Code.
4. Fire Extinguishers. Multi-family dwellings shall have a 2A10BC-rated fire extinguisher located within seventy-five (75) feet of each dwelling unit’s main entrance. Extinguishers shall be checked and tagged by a qualified service person annually.
147.16 LIABILITY OF LANDLORD OR NON-OCCUPYING PROPERTY OWNER.
1. Any non-occupying property owner or landlord with actual knowledge of a nuisance on such person’s real property, or after being served with written notice of a nuisance condition on such real property, shall abate such nuisance within ten (10) calendar days after having actual notice or receiving written notice.
Written notice shall be personally served on the non-occupying property owner, landlord, or managing or leasing agent thereof, or shall be mailed to the person by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the certified mail notice is returned to the person issuing the notice, then this returned notice may be posted on the subject real property.
If any other section of this chapter specifically provides for a different method of notice and/or a different time-frame for notice, then the provisions of the other section may be followed instead of the provisions of this section. If the non-occupying owner or landlord, or agent thereof, fails to abate the nuisance condition as required, such non-occupying owner or landlord, or agent thereof, shall be guilty of violation Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances. It shall be an affirmative defense for a non-occupying owner or landlord to show that said person is either:
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY
AND INSPECTION PROGRAM
A. Evicting or permanently removing the tenant from all premises owned or managed by such person; or
B. Acting diligently in terminating the nuisance.
If specific sections of this chapter provide for liability to landlords or owners with less notice, then the specific sections will apply.
2. For the purpose of this section, the term “landlord” includes property manager, resident manager, rental agent or any person responsible for showing the property to prospects, renting to tenants, collecting rent or lease payments, evicting tenants or maintaining the property. If the non-occupying owner or landlord is an entity other than a human being, then the term “landlord” includes the officers, partners, executives, owners or other humans responsible for managing the entity.
147.17 FEES.
1. There is no annual fee for registration, self-inspection or initial inspection. Re-inspections for units not in compliance on the previous inspection shall be $35. This applies to each subsequent re-inspection.
2. For registrations received after March 1, 2012, a late fee of $50 will be added and a municipal infraction will be filed on April 1, 2012. For properties not registered by the owner/property manager, and found to be rental property will be assessed a late fee of $50 and a municipal infraction will be filed.
3. For newly constructed or ownership transfer, a late fee of $50 will be added one (1) day after the registration deadline.
4. A municipal infraction will be filed on properties thirty-one (31) days after the late fee date.
(Chapter 147 – Ord. 11-130 – Jul. 11 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
150.01 Definitions
150.03 Building Numbering Map
150.02 Owner Requirements
150.04 Plan of Numbering
150.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
2. “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision thereof.
150.02 OWNER REQUIREMENTS. Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
1. Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to the principal building from the Public Works Director.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
2. Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous place to the street in figures not less than three and one-half (3½) inches in height and of a contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
3. Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein provided, or fails to do so for a period of five (5) days after being notified in writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03 BUILDING NUMBERING MAP. The Public Works Director shall be responsible for preparing and maintaining a building numbering map.
150.04 PLAN OF NUMBERING. Buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the Philadelphia Plan, using Adams Street as a base line or dividing line between the north and south portions and Pine Street as the base line or dividing line between the east and west portions of the City.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 151
TREES
151.01 Purpose
151.05 Disease Control
151.02 Definition
151.06 Inspection and Removal
151.03 Planting Restrictions
151.07 Nuisance Abatement
151.04 Duty to Trim Trees
151.08 Appeals to City Council
151.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote tree planting in a reasonable and responsible way and to improve the aesthetic qualities of the City by regulating tree management and landscaping activities. Its purpose is to protect the public; protect public and private property; ensure pedestrian and vehicular rights-of-way; and to promote aesthetic quality and help create and maintain a pleasant community environment.
151.02 DEFINITION. For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue, or highway in the City not covered by the sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line; or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.03 PLANTING RESTRICTIONS. No tree shall be planted in any parking except in accordance with the following:
1. Alignment. All trees planted in any parking shall be planted in the parking midway between the outer line of the sidewalk (or where a sidewalk would normally be placed) and the curb. In the event that a curb line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line nine (9) feet from the property line, except as noted elsewhere in this chapter. In no case shall a tree be planted closer than four (4) feet from the curb line or existing or potential sidewalk line and, if possible centered in the middle of the parking, except as noted elsewhere.
2. Spacing. Trees shall not be planted on any parking which is less than nine (9) feet in width, or contains less than eighty-one (81) square feet of exposed soil per tree. Trees shall not be planted less than thirty (30) feet from intersections (property lines extended) and ten (10) feet from driveways. If at all possible, all trees should be planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk (or where one would normally be placed) and the curb.
3. Prohibited Trees. No person shall plant in any parking any fruit bearing trees (except as noted), shrubs, bushes, or any type of the tree commonly known as:
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
A. Cottonwood
B. Poplar
C. Box elder
D. Chinese elm
E. Evergreen
F. Willow
G. Black walnut
H. Maples (except as indicated below)
4. Accepted Trees. The following is a list of trees which are acceptable to be planted in the parking. This list is divided into two (2) categories, A and B. The minimum distance between any trees (either category) is twenty-five (25) feet.
A. Category A Trees:
(1) Amur maple (tree form only)
(2) Japanese tree lilac
(3) Ornamental pear
(4) Purple leaf plum (non-fruit varieties)
(5) White fringe tree
(6) Corkscrew willow
(7) Any flowering crabapple tree is acceptable provided that it is a variety in which the fruit it bears does not exceed three-quarters (3/4) inch in diameter
(8) Padoga dogwood
(9) Red bud
B. Category B Trees. Category B trees have different sitting requirements than Category A trees. The sitting requirements for Category B trees are:
(1) No trees shall be planted closer than eight (8) feet to the curb line and no closer than four (4) feet from the nearest sidewalk edge or where a sidewalk edge would normally be placed.
(2) Category B trees shall not be planted where they will potentially interfere with overhead wires.
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(3) Category B trees shall not be planted where the width of the parking is less than twelve (12) feet.
(4) Acceptable Category B trees are:
(a) Any variety of green or white ash trees
(b) River birch
(c) Greenspire linden
(5) As new species evolve, the City reserves the right to add species to either the Prohibited or Accepted trees list.
5. The abutting property owner is liable for any damage caused by a tree(s) not in compliance with this chapter. Prior to any digging or planting, it is the responsibility of the abutting property owner, occupant, or agent in charge to contact Iowa One Call at 1-800-292-8989 to have Locator Service come to the digging or planting site to determine where any underground systems are located.
6. No tree shall be planted within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant.
151.04 DUTY TO TRIM TREES.
1. The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on or overhanging the street trimmed so that all branches will be at least sixteen (16) feet above the surface of the street and eight (8) feet above the sidewalks. If the abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five (5) days. If no action is taken within that time, the City may perform the required action and assess the costs incurred with such action against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
2. Trimming trees:
A. The City may trim any tree located on the parking if the tree is creating a public hazard.
B. The City may trim any tree, bush, or shrub to the extent necessary to remove the hazard to protect lives and property.
C. The City will employ persons skilled in such trimming so that the life and general aesthetic qualities of the tree, bush, or shrub are preserved.
151.05 DISEASE CONTROL. Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub which may harbor serious insect or disease, pests, or disease injurious to other trees,
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
as determined by the City Administrator or designee is hereby declared a nuisance and subject to abatement.
151.06 INSPECTION AND REMOVAL. The City Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in the City reported or suspected to be infected with or damaged by any disease or insect or disease pests, and also trees damaged by storms and trees that could be considered hazardous to the public, and such trees and shrubs shall be subject to removal as follows:
1. Removal from City Property. If it is determined by the City Administrator or designee that any such conditions exist on any public property, including the parking between the curb and the lot line of private property, and that danger to the public or to other trees within the City is imminent, the Council shall immediately cause such condition to be corrected by treatment or removal so as to eliminate the hazard or destroy or prevent as fully as possible the spread of disease or the insect or disease pests. The Council may also order the removal of any trees on the streets of the City which interfere with the making of improvements or with travel thereof.
2. Removal from Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty by the City Administrator or designee that any such condition exists on private property and that the danger to other trees within the City is imminent, the Council shall immediately notify (by certified mail) the property owner, occupant, or agent in charge of the property to correct such condition by treatment or removal of said tree(s) or shrub(s) within fourteen (14) days of said notification. If that property owner, occupant, or agent in charge of said property fails to comply within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of notice, the Council may cause the nuisance to be removed and the costs of removal be assessed against the property.
3. Except as provided above, no tree, bush or shrub shall be removed without the written consent of the property owner, occupant, or agent in charge of the property upon which property the tree, bush, or shrub is located.
4. The City shall not be responsible for a property owner’s, occupant’s, or agent’s in charge of the property, discretionary removal of any tree not damaged by storm or disease or otherwise not posing a public hazard or nuisance.
151.07 NUISANCE ABATEMENT. All trees, shrubs, and bushes on the parking which are planted in violation of, or not maintained in compliance with, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. The City Administrator or designee may cause written notice to be served on the property owner requiring such nuisance to be corrected within a specified period, or the nuisance be abated and the costs thereof be assessed against the property owner in the manner of ordinary taxes.
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
151.08 APPEALS TO THE CITY COUNCIL. Whenever, because of unusual circumstances, there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the City Council may grant a specific exemption for individual situations; provided that they shall first find that special and unusual individual circumstances makes the strict application of this chapter impractical and that the exemption granted with appropriate safeguards is in conformity with the intent and purposes of this chapter.
(Ch. 151 – Ord. 02-62 – Dec. 02 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 156
PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL CODE
156.01 Adoption of Code
156.04 Plans and Specifications
156.02 Permit for Plumbing or Mechanical Work
156.05 Emergency Work
156.03 Issuance of Permit
156.06 Administration and Enforcement
156.01 ADOPTION OF CODE. The 2012 editions of the Uniform Plumbing Code, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, and the 2012 International Mechanical Code, as published by the International Code Council, are hereby incorporated by reference. The latest editions are hereby adopted in full except for such portions as hereinafter may be deleted, modified or amended. All installations, repairs and alterations of plumbing and mechanical systems shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of such Codes. Official copies of the Uniform Plumbing Code and the International Mechanical Code, latest editions as adopted, are on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection. (Ord. 13-145 – Jan. 13 Supp.)
156.02 PERMIT FOR PLUMBING OR MECHANICAL WORK. No plumbing or mechanical work shall be done without a permit issued by the Building Inspector. A permit shall be issued if the plumbing work, as proposed in the application for a permit, meets all the requirements of this chapter. If plans and specifications of the proposed work are requested, they also must meet the requirements of this chapter.
156.03 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. A permit shall be issued only to a licensed plumbing/mechanical contractor. However, any permit required by this chapter may be issued to the owner of a single-family dwelling, used exclusively for living purposes, to do any work regulated by this chapter in that dwelling, including the usual accessory buildings located on the same lot as the dwelling, provided that the dwelling will be occupied by the owner and also that the owner personally shall purchase all material and perform all labor in connection with the work. All work done in accordance with this exception must meet all the requirements of this chapter and shall be inspected as other work.
156.04 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS. Plans and specifications showing the proposed work in the necessary detail shall be submitted if required by the Building Department. If a permit is denied, the applicant may submit revised plans and specifications without payment of any additional fee. If, in the course of the work, it is found necessary to make any change from the plans and specifications on which a permit was issued, amended plans and specifications shall be submitted.
CHAPTER 156 PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
156.05 EMERGENCY WORK. In emergency situations work can be initiated and completed by licensed plumbing/mechanical contractors without first obtaining a permit. However, a permit must be obtained within a reasonable time after the passage of the critical period. With this exception, all emergency work must be done in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and shall be inspected by the Building Department for full compliance.
156.06 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. It is the duty of the Building Inspector to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests. The Mayor may appoint or authorize assistants or agents of the Building Inspector as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 157
ELECTRICAL CODE
157.01 Adoption of Code
157.06 Plans and Specifications
157.02 Administration and Enforcement
157.07 Emergency Work
157.03 Permit for Electrical Work
157.08 Inspections
157.04 Issuance of Permit
157.09 Right of Entry
157.05 Application for a Permit
157.10 Shutting Off Supply
157.11 Connections to Electrical Power Supply
157.01 ADOPTION OF CODE. The National Electrical Code of 2011, or the latest edition, as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted in full except for such portions that are deleted or modified or amended by this chapter. All electrical work shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this Code as modified by this chapter. A copy of the National Electrical Code as adopted shall be on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection. (Ord. 13-143 – Jan. 13 Supp.)
157.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. It is the duty of the Building Department to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Building Inspector shall keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections and re-inspections made and other official work performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
157.03 PERMIT FOR ELECTRICAL WORK. No electrical work shall be done unless a permit authorizing the work has been issued by the Building Department. A permit shall be issued if the electrical work, as proposed in the application for a permit, meets all the requirements of this chapter. If plans and specifications of the proposed work are requested by the Building Department, they also must meet the requirements of this chapter.
157.04 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. A permit shall be issued only to licensed electrical contractors. However, any permit required by this chapter may be issued to the owner of a single-family dwelling, used exclusively for living purposes, to do any work regulated by this chapter in that dwelling, including the usual accessory buildings located on the same lot as the dwelling, provided that the dwelling will be occupied by the owner, that the owner appears before the Building Department and shows competency to do the specific work for which the permit is desired, and also that the owner personally shall purchase all material and perform all labor in connection with the work. All work done in accordance with this exception must meet all the requirements of this chapter and shall be inspected like other work.
CHAPTER 157 ELECTRICAL CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
157.05 APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT. Applications for permits shall be made to the Building Department on forms provided by the Building Department prior to beginning the particular work, except for emergency work. The application shall include the name and business address of the person who is to do the work, a description of the property where the work is to be done, the name of the owner of the property, the name of the occupant, and a general description of the material to be used, and shall specify the particular part or parts of the work that must be inspected as required by this chapter. The application shall be accompanied by fees in accordance with the schedule of fees as stated on the permit. Permits shall be valid for 180 days from date of issue. Permits shall become dull and void if work is abandoned for 180 days.
157.06 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS. Plans and specifications showing the proposed work in the necessary detail shall be submitted if requested by the Building Department. If a permit is denied, the applicant may submit revised plans and specifications without payment of any additional fee. If, in the course of the work, it is found necessary to make any change from the plans and specifications on which a permit was issued, amended plans and specifications shall be submitted.
157.07 EMERGENCY WORK. In emergency situations, work can be initiated and completed by licensed electricians without first obtaining a permit. However, a permit must be obtained within a reasonable time after the passage of the critical period. With this exception, all emergency work must be done in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and shall be inspected by the Building Department for full compliance.
157.08 INSPECTIONS. Upon the completion of electrical work that has been done under a permit, the person doing the work shall notify the Building Department by phone or in person. The Building Department shall inspect the work within twenty-four (24) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after receipt of notice, or as soon thereafter as practicable.
1. Certificate of Approval. If the Building Department finds the work to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the Building Inspector or other authorized person shall issue to the person that has done the work a certificate of approval, and shall deliver a duplicate copy of the certificate of approval to the owner of the premises where the work was done. This certificate shall authorize the use of the work and its connection to the supply of electricity. The Building Department shall deliver written notice in person of this authorization to the agency supplying the electricity.
2. Temporary Installations. A certificate of approval may be issued authorizing the connection and use of a temporary installation. Such certificates shall be issued to expire at a stated time and may be revoked by the Building Department for any violation of this chapter.
CHAPTER 157 ELECTRICAL CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
3. Periodic Inspections. If any electrical equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of a building, structure or grounds, the person installing the equipment shall notify the Building Department by phone or in person. Such equipment shall not be concealed until it has been inspected and approved by the Building Department or until twenty-four (24) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, shall have elapsed after the receipt of such notification by the Building Department. On installations where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the person installing the equipment shall give the Building Department due notice by phone or in person and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work. At regular intervals the Building Department shall visit all premises where work may be done and the inspector shall inspect all electrical work done since the date of his or her last inspection and shall issue a certificate of approval for work found to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter after the licensee has paid any fees required.
157.09 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Building Department shall have the right, during reasonable hours and upon consent of the occupant, to enter any building or premises in the discharge of official duties to make any inspection, re-inspection, or test of electrical equipment that is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Where the building or premises is unoccupied, the consent of the owner shall be obtained. If the Building Department has reasonable cause to believe that electrical installations or equipment within the building or premises constitute an extreme hazard to persons or property, the inspector shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such installations or equipment and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and to make such inspection, whether such property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained.
157.10 SHUTTING OFF SUPPLY. If the Building Department finds that any electrical equipment or installation is defective or that it has been installed in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the Building Department shall notify the person responsible for the electrical equipment or installation by certified mail of such findings and orders. If the necessary changes or repairs are not completed within fifteen (15) days (or such longer period as specified in the notice), the Building Department shall have the authority to disconnect or order the discontinuance of electrical service to the equipment or installation in question. No disconnection shall be made during the pending of an appeal to the Council. In cases where maintenance of electrical service to electrical equipment or installations constitutes an extreme hazard to persons or property, the Building Department shall have authority to cause immediate discontinuance of such service. If fires have
CHAPTER 157 ELECTRICAL CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
damaged the wiring of any building or structure, reconnection to electrical supply shall not be made until authorized in writing by the Building Department.
157.11 CONNECTIONS TO ELECTRICAL POWER SUPPLY. It is unlawful for any person to make connection from a supply of electricity or to supply electricity to any electrical equipment for the installation of which a permit is required unless such connection has been authorized by the Building Department. It is unlawful to make connections to equipment that has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the Building Department.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 158
BUILDING CODE
158.01 Adoption of Code
158.03 Sections Deleted or Modified
158.02 Copies on File
158.01 ADOPTION OF CODE. The 2012 Edition of the International Building Code, (IBC) as published by the International Code Council, and the 2012 International Residential Code, (IRC) as published by the International Code Council are hereby adopted in full except for such portions deleted, modified or amended. The latest editions are hereby adopted in full except for such portions as hereinafter may be deleted, modified or amended.
158.02 COPIES ON FILE. Official copies of the aforementioned Codes are on file in the office of the Clerk.
158.03 SECTIONS DELETED OR MODIFIED. The following sections of the 2012 IRC and the 2012 IBC are hereby deleted or amended:
1. Amend IBC Section 105.2, Work Exempt from Permit IBC Section 105.2, Work Exempt from Permit is hereby amended by adding #14.
14. Siding, shingling or reroofing while replacing or repairing roof coverings or siding on existing structures providing that no structural alterations are being done to the existing structure. The waiver of permits shall not waive the requirements of the IBC pertaining to the installation of siding or shingles.
2. Amend IRC Section R105.2, Work Exempt from Permit IRC Section R105.2, Work Exempt from permit by adding #11.
11. Siding and shingling while replacing or repairing roof coverings or siding on existing structures providing that no structural alterations are being done to the existing structure. The waiver of permits shall not waive the requirements of the IRC pertaining to the installation of siding or shingles.
3. Amend IRC Section R108 Fees. Subsection 108.1, Payment of Fees, of the IRC is hereby amended by adding Subsection 108.1A and is hereby established by adding the following subsection:
Subsection 108.1A Payment of Fees. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
CHAPTER 158 BUILDING CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. Amend IBC Section 109 Fees. Subsection 109.1, Payment of Fees, of the IBC is hereby amended by adding Subsection 109.1A and is hereby established by adding the following subsection:
Subsection 109.1A Payment of Fees. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
5. Amend IRC Section 302.2 Townhouses. Subsection R302.2, Townhouses, of the IRC, is hereby amended by deleting said subsection and inserting in lieu thereof the following (exception remains unchanged)
Subsection P302.2 Townhouses. Each sprinklered townhouse shall be considered a separate building and shall be separated by fire resistant rated wall assemblies meeting the requirements of section R302.1 for exterior walls.
6. Amend IRC Section 302.2 Townhouses. Subsection R302.2, Townhouses, of the IRC, is hereby amended by adding Subsection R 302.2A and is hereby established by adding the following subsection and exception:
Subsection R302.2A Townhouses. Each non-sprinklered townhouse shall be considered a separate building and shall be separated by fire resistant rated wall assemblies meeting the requirements of Section R302.1 for exterior walls.
Exception: A common 2-hour fire resistant rated wall assembly tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 0r UL 263 is permitted for townhouses if such walls do not contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of the common wall. The wall shall be rated for fire exposure from both sides and shall extend to and be tight against exterior walls and the underside of the roof sheathing. Electrical installations shall be in accordance with the Creston Electrical Code. Penetrations of electrical boxes shall be in accordance with Section R302.4.
7. Amend IRC Subsection R302.3 Two Family Dwelling Units. Subsection R302.3, Two Family Dwellings of the IRC is hereby amended by deleting said subsection and inserting in lieu of therefore the following and deleting exception 2:
R302.3 Two-Family Dwellings. For the purposes of fire resistive separation, two family dwelling units shall be considered as townhouses and shall be constructed in accordance with R-302.2A
Exception 2 deleted.
8. Amend IRC Section R403.1.4.1, Frost Protection, Exception 1 Subsection R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection of the IRC is hereby amended by deleting said subsection and inserting in lieu of therefore the following:
CHAPTER 158 BUILDING CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
R 403.1.4.1 Frost protection, Exception 1. Protection of free standing accessory structures with an area of 780 square feet or less, of light frame construction, shall not be required.
9. Amend IRC Section R403.1.4.1, Frost Protection, Exception 2 Subsection R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection of the IRC is hereby amended by deleting said subsection and inserting in lieu of therefore the following:
R 403.1.4.1 Frost protection, Exception 2. Protection of free standing accessory structures with an area of 780 square feet or less, of other than light frame construction, shall not be required.
10. Amend IRC Section R-313.1, Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Subsection 313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler system, of the IRC is hereby deleted said subsection and inserting the following in lieu of (exception remains unchanged):
Subsection R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses containing more that 8 (eight) units.
11. Amend IRC Subsection Section R-313.2 One and Two Family Dwelling Automatic Fire Systems by deleting said subsection.
Subsection R-313.2 One and Two Family Dwelling Automatic Fire Systems Deleted
12. Amend IRC Section P-2904, Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems, Subsection P 2904.1 is hereby deleted said subsection and inserting the following in lieu of (exceptions remain the unchanged):
Subsection P 2904.1 Required Sprinkler Locations. Sprinklers, when installed, shall protect all areas of a dwelling unit.
(Ch. 158 – Ord. 13-147 –Jan. 13 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 165
ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
165.01 Purpose and Intent
165.08 Administration and Enforcement
165.02 Scope
165.09 Violations and Penalties
165.03 Interpretation
165.10 Amendments to the Zoning Code
165.04 Private Agreements
165.11 Procedure to Amend Zoning Code
165.05 Lots of Record
165.12 Conditional Use Permits and Procedures
165.06 Disclaimer of Liability
165.13 Building and Use Permits
165.07 Definitions
165.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. The Zoning Code is enacted for the following purposes:
1. To provide for the orderly, economic, and safe development of land and urban services and facilities, and to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City;
2. To promote the character and preserve and enhance the stability of properties and areas within the City;
3. To divide the City into zones or districts as to the use, location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of land and structures for residence, business and industrial purposes.
4. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and safety;
5. To prevent the overcrowding of land, undue concentration of population;
6. To promote the proper use of land and structures;
7. To fix reasonable standards to which building, structures and land shall conform for the benefits of all;
8. To prohibit the use of buildings, structures and lands that are incompatible with the intended use or development of lands within the specified zones;
9. To promote the safe, rapid and efficient movement of people and goods;
10. To facilitate the provisions of public service;
11. To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health and welfare by providing for the off-street parking of vehicles and vehicle loading areas;
12. To protect against fire, panic, explosion, noxious fumes, offensive noise, vibration, dust, odor, heat, glare, and other pollution of the air and
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
other hazards in the interest of the public health, comfort and general welfare; and
13. To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies provided for herein.
165.02 SCOPE. From and after the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance, the use of all land and every building or portion of a building erected, altered with respect to height and area, added to, relocated, and every use within a building or use accessory thereto, in the City shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Code. Any existing building or structure and any existing use of properties not in conformity with the regulations herein prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming properties or uses.
165.03 INTERPRETATION. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Zoning Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the Zoning Code impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than the Zoning Code, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
165.04 PRIVATE AGREEMENTS. The Zoning Code is not intended to abrogate any easement covenant, or any other private agreement provided that where the regulations of the Zoning Code are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements), the requirements of the Zoning Code shall govern.
165.05 LOTS OF RECORD. Any lot which was legally recorded with the Union County Recorder and Auditor at the time of adoption of the Zoning Ordinance, and which does not meet the requirements of the Zoning Code as to area, width or open space, may, nevertheless, be utilized for single family detached dwelling purposes provided the measurements of such area, width or open space are established by the Zoning Code.
165.06 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. The F-1 Flood Plain District herein established is intended to provide a reasonable approach to flood control based on present information. As additional information becomes available, the extent of various boundaries shall be so altered to maintain this reasonableness. The Zoning Code does not imply that areas beyond the district limits will be free from flooding; nor shall the Zoning Code, or districts established herein, create a liability on the part of, or cause action against the City or any office or employee thereof, for any flood damage that may result from reliance upon the Zoning Code or flood district so established.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
165.07 DEFINITIONS. For use in this Zoning Code, the following words and terms are defined. In addition, the word “building” shall include “structures” of every kind, regardless of similarity to buildings; the word “lot” shall include the words “plot,” “piece” and “parcel;” the words “used for” shall include the phrases “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,” “maintained for” and “occupied for;” and all measured distances shall be taken to the nearest integral foot. If a fraction is one-half (½) foot or less, the integral foot next below shall be taken.
1. “Agriculture” means the area or science of cultivating the soil and activities incidental thereto; the growing of soil crops in the customary manner on open tracts of land; the accessory raising of livestock and poultry; farming. The term includes incidental retail selling by the producer of products raised on the premises, provided that space necessary for parking of vehicles of customers shall be furnished outside the public right-of-way.
2. “Alley” means a public or private right-of-way less than 30 feet in width which affords secondary means of access to abutting property.
3. “Alteration as applied to a building or structure” means a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another.
4. “Apartment” means a room or suite of rooms designed for, intended for, or used as a residence for one family or individual and equipped with cooking facilities.
5. “Apartment building” means three or more apartments grouped in one building.
6. “Automobile repair, major” means general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, or trailers; collision service including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop and vehicle steam cleaning.
7. “Automobile repair, minor” means incidental body or fender work, or other minor repairs, painting and upholstering, replacement of parts and motor service to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half (1½) ton capacity, but not including any operation named under “Automobile repair, major” or any other similar use.
8. “Automobile or trailer sales area” means an open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done.
9. “Automobile service station” or “filling station” means a place where gasoline, kerosene or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale and delivered directly into motor
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
vehicles including grease and oiling but excluding “automobile repair, major” and “automobile or trailer sale area.”
10. “Basement” means a story having part but not more than one-half (½) its height below the average level of the adjoining finished grade. A basement is counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations, if subdivided and used for business or dwelling purposes.
11. “Bed and breakfast home” means a private residence which provided lodging or meals for guests in which the host or hostess resides and in which no more than two guest families are lodged at the same time, and which, while it may advertise and accept reservations, does not hold itself out to the public to be a restaurant, hotel or motel; does not require reservations and serves food only to overnight guests as established by Chapter 170A and 170B of the Code of Iowa.
12. “Bed and breakfast inn” means a hotel which has nine or fewer guest rooms as established in Chapter 170A and 170B of the Code of Iowa.
13. “Block” means a tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines, waterways, or boundary lines of corporate limits of the City.
14. “Board” means the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
15. “Boarding house” means a building other than a hotel or motel, where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not exceeding ten (10) persons.
16. “Buildable area” means the space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open space and setback requirements of the Zoning Code have been met.
17. “Building” means any structure for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel, or property of any kind; and when separated by party walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
18. “Building, accessory” means a subordinate building or structure on the same lot, or part of the main building, exclusively occupied by or devoted to a use incidental to the main use.
19. “Building, height of” means the vertical distance from the average contact ground level at the front wall of the building to the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for sable, hip or gambrel roofs.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
20. “Building line” means an imaginary line separating buildable lot area and required yards.
21. “Building line setback” means the distance between the building line and the street line in a district, lot, tract or parcel of land.
22. “Building, detached” means a building surrounded by open space, said open space being on the same zoning lot as the building.
23. “Cellar” means a story having more than one-half (½) of its height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
24. “Certificate of Occupancy” means a certificate, issued to the intended occupant of a structure, prior to occupancy, which indicates that the structure complies with all Federal, State and Local codes for such structure.
25. “Clinic” means a place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm and injured persons and those who are in need of medical or surgical attention, but who are not provided with board or room or kept overnight on the premises.
26. “Club” means a nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues, and are organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.
27. “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Creston, Iowa, established pursuant to Chapter 23 of this Code of Ordinances.
28. “Condominium” means two or more individually owned living units which share a common area such as halls or yards or walls.
29. “Convalescent (Rest) Home” means a home designed and licensed to provide care for aged or infirm persons requiring or receiving personal care or custodial care complying with the standards established by the Iowa State Board of Health.
30. “Corner lot” — See “Lot, corner”.
31. “Court” means an unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such building.
32. “Court, inner” means a court enclosed on not less than three sides by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable.
33. “Court, outer” means a court enclosed on not more than three sides by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable, with one side or end open to a street, driveway, alley or yard.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
34. “Curb level” means the level of the established curb in front of a building measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one (1) street, the curb level shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center of the front of each street.
35. “Duplex” means two self-contained living units in one structure.
36. “Dwelling” means a building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family, and multiple-family units, but not including hotels, motels, boarding or lodging houses.
37. “Dwelling unit” means one (1) or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and kitchen facilities, permanently installed, shall always be included for each dwelling unit.
38. “Dwelling unit, factory-built” means a dwelling unit designed for long-term residential occupancy which is mass-produced in a factory and designed and constructed for transportation to a site for installation and use when connected to required utilities, either as an independent, individual building or as modules or sections for combination with other elements to form a building on the site. Different types of factory-built dwellings are further defined as follows:
A. “Modular dwelling” means a new factory-built dwelling unit comprised of panelized units, components, sections, modules or other assemblies of closed construction which are transported to the site for minor and incidental assembly and installation, and which is inspected and certified by the State or State-approved third party agency as complying with all requirements of the Iowa State Building Code for modular factory-built structures.
B. “Manufactured dwelling” means a new factory-built dwelling unit which is inspected and certified by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or HUD-approved third party agency as complying with all Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards in effect on June 15, 1976, or the date of manufacture, whichever is the later date. Such dwelling units are generally, but are not required to be, constructed on a chassis, which may or may not be removed, for transportation to a site for minor assembly.
C. “Mobile home” means a factory-built dwelling unit which has been installed or occupied on a previous site or which does not comply with Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards or the Iowa State Building Code of modular housing, as applicable.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
39. “Dwelling, attached (group, row or townhouse)” means a dwelling joined to other dwellings by a party wall or walls.
40. “Dwelling, detached” means a dwelling entirely surrounded by open space, said space being on the same zoning lot as the dwelling.
41. “Dwelling, multiple family” means a dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units, designed with more than one (1) dwelling unit connecting to a common corridor or entranceway, originally constructed for said purpose; and not including converted dwellings or attached row dwellings (party-wall type) as defined herein.
42. “Dwelling, single-family” means a detached dwelling containing accommodations for and occupied by one (1) family only.
43. “Dwelling, two-family” means a dwelling designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other.
44. “Earth sheltered building” means an earth sheltered building is constructed so that 50% or more of the exterior surface area, including the roof, of the completed building is covered with earth. Garages and other accessory buildings should be excluded from calculations of earth covering. Earth covering is measured from the lowest level of livable space in nonresidential buildings. An earth sheltered building is a complete structure that does not serve just as a foundation or substructure for above grade construction. A partially completed building shall not be considered earth sheltered.
45. “Easement” means a grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities, including but not limited to sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines.
46. “Essential services” means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water, cable TV, transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipe conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith; reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including building.
47. “Family” means any number of individuals living together on the premises as a single non-profit housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
48. “Farm, crop” means an area more than one (1) acre which is used for the growing of the usual farm crops such as vegetables, fruit trees, and grain, and for the packing or storage of the products produced on the premises, but not including the raising of farm animals or laboratory animals such as mice, rats, rabbits, snakes, etc.
49. “Floor area” means the floor area of a building, and is the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls.
50. “Floor area (livable)” means livable floor area shall be the same as “floor area” defined above, excluding all areas occupied by cellars, garages, porches, attics, stairways and storage, utility and heating rooms.
51. “Floor area ratio (F.A.R.)” means the floor area ratio of the building or buildings on any zoning lot is the floor area of the building or buildings on that zoning lot divided by the area of such zoning lot, or, in the case of planned developments, by the net site area. The floor area ratio requirements, as set forth under each zoning district, shall determine the maximum floor area allowable for the building or buildings (total floor area of both principal and accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of the zoning lot.
52. “Frontage” means all the property fronting on one (1) side of a street between the nearest intersecting streets, or between a street and right-of-way, waterway, or other similar barrier.
53. “Garage, private” means an accessory building designed or used for the storage of automobiles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory.
54. “Garage, public” means any premises used for the storage or care of motor-driven vehicles except private garages, or premises where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or are kept for remuneration, for hire, or for sale.
55. “Garage, truck” means a building which is used or intended to be used for the storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors, and commercial vehicles exceeding one and one half (1½) tons capacity.
56. “High rise building” means any structure, designed for a specific use that exceeds the fourth floor of elevation.
57. “High water mark” means a mark delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape. The normal high water mark is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
58. “Home occupation” means any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by members residing therein, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof.
59. “Hotel” means a building occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals in which there are more than five (5) sleeping rooms and wherein no provisions are made for cooking in any individual room or apartment.
60. “Junk yard” means land or building where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, stored, exchanged, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to scrap metal, rags, paper, hides, rubber products, glass products, lumber products and products resulting from the wrecking of automobiles or other machinery.
61. “Kennel” means any structures or premises on which three (3) or more domestic animals over four (4) months of age are kept.
62. “Loading space” means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of success.
63. “Lodging house” means a building where lodging is provided for compensation, to three (3) or more persons in contradistinction to hotels open to transients.
64. “Lot” means land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings together with such open spaces as are required under the Zoning Code and having its principal frontage upon a street or officially approved place. (Plot)
65. “Lot area” means the lot area is the land area within the lot lines.
66. “Lot coverage” means the total allowable amount of lot area, expressed as a percentage, which may be covered by a principal use and its accessory structures.
67. “Lot depth” means the mean horizontal distance between the mean front road and the mean rear lot line. The greater frontage of a corner lot is its depth, and its lesser frontage is its width.
68. “Lot of record” means a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the deed to which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder at the time the Zoning Ordinance was passed.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
69. “Lot, corner” means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. The point of intersection of the street lines is the “corner.”
70. “Lot, double frontage” means a lot having frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
71. “Lot frontage” — See “lot line, front”.
72. “Lot, interior” means a lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
73. “Lot line, front” means a boundary of a lot butting a street. On a corner lot, the shortest street lot line is the front lot line.
74. “Lot line, rear” means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
75. “Lot line, side” means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an interior side lot line.
76. “Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at the established front building line.
77. “Metes and bounds” means a method of property description by means of their direction and distance from an easily identifiable point.
78. “Mobile home” see “dwelling unit, factory-built.”
79. “Manufactured Housing” — See “dwelling unit, factory-built.”
80. “Mobile home park” means any park, mobile park, mobile court, mobile camp, court, campsite, lot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained, or intended for the purpose of supplying a long term location or accommodations for any mobile home and upon which any mobile home, coach, or mobile home coaches are parked, and includes all buildings used or intended for use as a part of the equipment thereof, whether or not a change is made for the use of the mobile home park and its facilities. Mobile home parks do not include automobile or mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the purpose of inspection, display and sale.
81. “Mobile home lot” means a parcel of land rented or sold for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
82. “Mobile home stand” means that part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
83. “Nonconforming building” means a building or portion thereof, lawfully existing at the time of adoption of the Zoning Ordinance, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is now located.
84. “Nonconforming use” means a use lawfully in existence on the effective date of the Zoning Code and not conforming to the regulations for the district in which it is situated, except that such a use is not nonconforming if it would be authorized under a conditional use permit where located.
85. “Nonconforming lot” means a lot which does not comply with the minimum lot area or frontage requirements of the district in which it is located.
86. “Nonconforming structure” means a structure which does not comply with the bulk, yard, setback or height regulations of the district in which it is located.
87. “Nonconforming use of land” means any use of a lot which does not conform to the applicable use regulations of the district in which it is located.
88. “Nonconforming use of structure” means a use of a structure which does not conform to the applicable use regulations of the district in which it is located.
89. “Obstruction” means any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock gravel, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood hazard area which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.
90. “Parking space” means a land area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet, exclusive of driveways and aisles, of such shape and dimensions and so prepared as to be usable or the parking of a motor vehicle, and so located as to be readily accessible to a public street or alley. Truck loading and unloading space are not included in such area.
91. “Planned Unit Development” means a tract of land developed as a unit rather than as individual development wherein two or more buildings may be located in relationship to each other rather than to lot lines or zoning district boundaries.
92. “Premises” means a lot or plat with the required front, side and rear yards for a dwelling or other uses as allowed under the Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
93. “Private open space” means any land owned by private persons or homes associations wherein the land is dedicated for a use such as public open space but for use by the private persons or association.
94. “Public open space” means any publicly owned open area, including but not limited to the following: parks, playgrounds, school sites, parkways, and streets.
95. “Public utility” means any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, or board fully authorized to furnish and furnishing under municipal regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam, communication services, telegraph services, transportation, cable TV, or water.
96. “Public waters” means a body of water capable of substantial beneficial public use. This shall be construed to mean, for the purpose of these regulations, any body of water which has the potential to support any type of recreational pursuit or water supply purpose. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland for a designated private use authorized by the Department of Natural Resources shall be exempt.
97. “Railroad right-of-way” means a strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not including depots, loading platforms, station, train sheds, warehouses, car shop, car yards, locomotive shops, or water towers.
98. “Recreational vehicles” means a self-propelled vehicle or wheeled vehicle capable of being towed which can be licensed for travel on any public street or highway, or a unit which can be mounted on a pickup or other vehicle, which is arranged for residential occupancy, customarily of a temporary or transient nature, and having less than 320 square feet of floor area.
99. “Recreational vehicle camp” constitutes any area used on a daily, nightly, or weekly basis for the accommodation of three or more occupied tents, expandable camp trailers, travel trailers and converted buses or trucks; whether privately or publicly owned; and whether use of such accommodation is granted free of charge or for compensation.
100. “Regulatory flood protection elevation” means the elevation to which uses regulated by the Zoning Code are required to be elevated or floodproofed. It corresponds to a point not less than one foot above the water surface profile associated with the regional flood plus any increases in flood heights attributable to encroachments on the floodway.
101. “Rest home” or “nursing home” means a private home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
disorders. Such home does not contain equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or injury.
102. “Road” means a public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, through-way, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated.
103. “Rooming house” — see “lodging house.”
104. “Setback line” means the allowable building line as defined by the yard regulations of the Zoning Code.
105. “Sign” means a name, identification, description, display, illustration or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land in view of the general public and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business.
106. “Sign, advertising” means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, activity or entertainment not necessarily conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such a sign is located.
107. “Sign, area of” — see “sign, surface area of.”
108. “Sign, business” means a sign which directs attention to a business or profession of a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such a sign is located.
109. “Sign, display” means an advertising device.
110. “Sign, flashing” means any illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times where such sign is in use.
111. “Sign, illuminated” means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign.
112. “Sign, marquee” means any sign affixed to any hood, marquee or canopy over the entrance to a building.
113. “Sign, nameplate” means any sign which states the name or address or both of the business or occupant of the lot where the sign is placed.
114. “Sign, rotating” means a sign which revolves or rotates on its axis by mechanical means.
115. “Sign, surface area of” means the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign surface, not including any structural elements outside the limits of such sign and not
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
forming an integral part of the display. Only one side of a double-face or V-type sign structure shall be used in computing total surface area.
116. “Standard, performance” means a criterion established in the interest of protecting the public health and safety for the control of noise, odor, smoke, noxious gases and other objectionable or dangerous elements generated by an inherent in or incidental to land use.
117. “Story” means that portion of the building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
118. “Story, half” means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is finished off for use. A half-story contained independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story.
119. “Street” means a public or private right-of-way forty (40) feet or more in width, approved or accepted by public authority or user, which provides a primary means of public access to abutting property. The term “street” includes avenue, drive, circle, road, parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare or any other similar term.
120. “Street line” means the right-of-way line of a street.
121. “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground. When a structure is divided into separate parts by an unpierced wall each part shall be deemed a separate structure.
122. “Structure alterations” means any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial changes in the roof and exterior walls.
123. “Subdivision” means a described tract of land which is to be or has been divided into two (2) or more lots or parcels, any of which resultant parcels is less than five (5) acres in area and three hundred (300) feet in width, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term includes resubdivision, and, where it is appropriate to the context, relates either to the process or subdivision or to the land subdivided.
124. “Trailer” means a vehicle with or without motor power used or adaptable for temporary living, sleeping, business, or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, or skirting, which does not meet building code requirements and has been or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
from place to place. The term “trailer” shall include “camp car,” “travel trailer,” “camping trailer,” and “house car.” A permanent foundation shall not change its character unless the entire structure is erected in accordance with Building Code.
125. “Townhouse” means a multiple family dwelling which maintains private ingress and egress, attached to its own foundation, contains no independent dwellings above or below it and is attached to other similar dwellings by a common wall.
126. “Unit, dwelling” — See “dwelling unit.”
127. “Unit, Lodging, Rooming, Dormitory” means a room rented as sleeping and living quarters but without cooking facilities and with or without individual bathroom. In a suite of rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one lodging room or rooming unit for the purpose of the Zoning Code.
128. “Use” means the purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
129. “Use, accessory” means a use subordinate to the main use on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the main use.
130. “Use, conditional” means a use which, because of unique characteristics, cannot be classified as a permitted use in any particular district. After due consideration, in each case, of the impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the public desirability or the particular use of the particular location, a “conditional use permit” may or may not be granted. If granted, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach conditions and guarantees upon the zoning permit deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest.
131. “Use, principal permitted” means a use which is permitted outright in a district for which a zoning certificate may be issued by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code.
132. “Variance” means a modification or variation of the provisions of the Zoning Code, as applied to a specific piece of property, except that modification in the allowable uses within a district shall not be considered a variance.
133. “Vet clinic” means a place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm and injured animals and those who are in need of medical or surgical attention.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
134. “Yard” means an open space on the same zoning lot with a building or structure, which yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in Chapter 168.
135. “Yard, front” means a yard extending across the front of the lot between the side yard lines and lying between the front street line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
136. “Yard, rear” means an open space occupied except for accessory buildings on the same lot with a building between the rear lines of the building and the rear line of the lot, for the full width of the lot.
137. “Yard, side” means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building between the building and the side of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear yard.
138. “Zoning Administrator” means the designated Zoning Administrator of the City or an authorized representative as appointed by the City Council by resolution.
139. “Zoning certificate” means a document issued by the Zoning Administrator authorizing buildings, structures, or uses consistent with the terms of the chapter and for the purpose of carrying out and the enforcement of its provisions.
140. “Zoning district” means an area or areas within the limits of the Community for which the regulations and requirements governing use are uniform.
141. “Zoning lot” means a plot of ground, made up of one (1) or more parcels of land, which is or may be occupied by a use, building, or buildings, including the open spaces required by the Zoning Code.
142. “Zoning map” means the map or maps incorporated into the Zoning Code as part hereof, designating the zoning districts.
165.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
1. The Zoning Administrator. The Public Works Director is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of the Zoning Code. Said official may delegate the enforcement of the Zoning Code to any administrative official of the City and supporting staff if deemed necessary, who shall be directly under the control of the Public Works Director and shall be known as the Zoning Administrator or Zoning Enforcement Officer. The Zoning Administrator shall perform the following duties.
A. Examine all applications pertaining to use of land, building, or structure, and approve same when the application conforms with the provisions of the Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
B. Keep a record of all nonconforming uses.
C. Inspect buildings, structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of the Zoning Code, upon request or upon apparent violation. In regard to performance standards the Zoning Administrator may require the service of a testing laboratory to determine compliance. The cost of employing said laboratory shall be paid for by the owner if a violation of the Zoning Code is established, otherwise by the City.
D. Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a provision of the Zoning Code, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
E. Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; order removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions, alterations; order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or take any action authorized by the Zoning Code to insure compliance with or to prevent violations of its provisions.
F. Maintain permanent and current records of the Zoning Code, including all maps, amendments, conditional uses and variations.
G. Maintain a current file of all permits, all certificates, and all copies of notices of violations, discontinuances, or removal for such time as necessary to insure a continuous compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Code, and, on request, provide information to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in any specific property.
H. Provide technical assistance to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
2. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Adjustment for the City, consisting of five (5) members. Appointments to the Board shall be for a term of three (3) years. Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
(Ord. 04-77 – Oct. 04 Supp.)
B. The members shall elect one of their number as Chairperson and shall appoint a Secretary, who may be a member of the Board.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of the Zoning Code. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairperson or in the absence of the Chairperson the acting Chairperson, may
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public.
D. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
E. Hearing; Appeals; Notice Appeals to the Board of Adjustment concerning interpretation or administration of the Zoning Code may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the governing body of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days or such lesser period as may be provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing or appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
F. A copy of all applications for a Variance or a Conditional Use under the provisions of the Flood Plain District shall be forwarded to the Department of Natural Resources ten (10) days prior to said hearing.
G. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken certified to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed with said official, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of such official, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a Court of record on application, on notice to the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
H. The Board shall have the power and duty of hearing and deciding appeals or requests in the following cases. The Council may review actions by the Board of Adjustment before their effective date. However, the Council may only remand a decision concerning action
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
by the Board for the further study. The cases which may be presented to the Board of Adjustment are as follows:
(1) Appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer in the enforcement of the Zoning Code.
(2) Requests for a variance from the literal provisions of the Zoning Code in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration.
I. In granting any variance the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the Zoning Code. Violations of such conditions and safe-guards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the Zoning Code and shall be punishable under Section 165.09 of the Zoning Code.
J. In exercising the aforementioned powers, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of the Zoning Code, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determination appealed from and may such order, requirements, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have powers of the administrative official from whom any appeal is taken.
K. The concurring vote of a majority of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the Zoning Code, or to effect any variation of the Zoning Code. (Ord. 97-20 - Oct. 97 Supp.)
L. A copy of all decisions granting Variances or Conditional Use Permits in the Floodway and/or Flood Fringe portions of the Flood Plain District shall be forwarded to the Department of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action.
3. Appeal for Variance. Application for any adjustment permissible under the hardship provision in subsection H above, shall be made to the Zoning Administrator in the form of a written application for a permit to use the land or building or both as set forth in said application. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structure or buildings in the same district and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. The application shall present a statement and adequate evidence showing:
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
A. That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the land, building, or use referred to in the application, which circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to land, building, or uses in the same zone classification.
B. That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and employment of substantial property rights of the petitioner.
C. That the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance.
D. The variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of land, building or structure.
E. That the granting of such application will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, materially affect adversely the health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the applicant, and will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in said neighborhood.
F. That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant.
G. That granting the application will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures, or building in the same district. No variance in a Flood Plain District should provide a lesser degree of flood protection than the Flood Protection elevation for that area.
4. Notification and Public Hearing for Variance Requests.
A. Application for any adjustment permissible under the provisions of this Section shall be made to the Zoning Administrator, in the form of a written application for a building permit or for a permit to use the property or premises as set forth in the application. An application for a variance shall be accompanied by payment of a fee as established by the City Council in addition to the regular building permit fee.
B. Upon receipt of any applications, such officer shall set a time and place for public hearing before the Zoning Board of Adjustment for such application. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing, and give not less than four (4) days or more than twenty (20) days’ public notice in a paper of general circulation in the City, and shall decide the same within ten (10) days.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
C. Any person may appear or be represented by an agent or attorney.
D. The applicant shall be required to produce proof of notice to affected property owners immediately adjacent to the applicant’s property. Such proof may be by return receipt mail or by written approval by said affected property owners.
E. Within a reasonable time after the hearing, the Board shall make its order deciding the matter and serve a copy of such order upon the applicant or the petitioner by mail.
5. Duties of Zoning Administrator, Board of Adjustment, City Council and Courts on Matters of Appeal.
A. It is the intent of the Zoning Code that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning Administrator and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator and that recourse from the decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the City Council, then the Courts as established by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa. (See Section 165.08(2)(H)(2) of this Code of Ordinances)
B. The duties of the City Council in regard to the Zoning Code shall include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise in such case where the decision of the Board of Adjustment is challenged. The City Council shall also have the duties of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments to the repeal of the Zoning Code, as provided by law and establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Section 165.13.
165.09 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions hereof or who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions hereof or who shall make any false statement in any document required to be submitted under the provisions hereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days or both, and in addition shall pay all court costs. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
165.10 AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING CODE. The Council may on its own motion, or on request of the Commission, or a petition or appeal of the affected property owners:
1. Transfer land, or a portion thereof, from the district in which it is situated into another district, by amendment to the Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Change any of the regulations of the Zoning Code as to the use of land in any district, or as to the restrictions upon buildings or structures herein, by amendment to the Zoning Code.
165.11 PROCEDURE TO AMEND ZONING CODE.
1. An application for amendment shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator in duplicate, accompanied by a fee as determined by the City Council. The Zoning Administrator shall forward one (1) copy to the Commission.
2. The Commission shall take action on such application within thirty (30) days and transmit its recommendations to the City Council. The Commission may recommend that the application be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification of the zoning amendment requested in the application, or it may recommend that the application be denied. These recommendations shall be certified to the Council.
3. The Commission shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing. Notice shall be given not more than thirty (30) days or less than fifteen (15) days in advance of the hearings by publishing a notice thereof at least once in a newspaper of general circulation and by notifying by mail, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting, the property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property. The current County Assessor’s tax record shall be deemed sufficient for the location or certification of ownership of said properties.
4. All amendments concerning Floodway and Flood Fringe portions of the Flood Plain District must be submitted and approved by the Department of Natural Resources prior to adoption.
5. The City Council, upon receiving reports of the Commission, and without further public hearing, may vote on the adoption of any proposed amendment or it may refer it back to the Commission for further consideration. If no recommendation is transmitted by the Commission within thirty (30) days after the hearing, the City Council may take action without awaiting such notifications. In considering such recommendations, due allowances shall be made for existing conditions, for the conservation of property values, for the direction of building development to the best advantage of the entire City and for the uses to which the property affected is being devoted at the time; and no change shall be recommended unless it is required for the public good. The Council may over-rule the recommendations of the Commission by three-fourths (3/4) vote of the full membership of the Council.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
165.12 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS AND PROCEDURES. Conditional Use Permits may be issued for any and only the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by provisions of the Zoning Code.
1. Application. An application for the Conditional Use Permit shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator indicating the section of the Zoning Code under which the Conditional Use Permit is sought and stating the ground on which it is requested. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and elevations and site plans as prescribed by the Commission and presented by the Zoning Administrator to the Commission. A copy of all applications for a Conditional Use Permit under the provisions of the Floodway and/or Flood Fringe portions of the Flood Plain District shall be forwarded to the Department of Natural Resources ten (10) days prior to a public hearing.
2. Notification and Public Hearing. Upon receipt in proper form of the application and other requested material, the Commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing in a location to be prescribed by the Commission at least fifteen (15) days in advance of each hearing, a notice of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the City and like notification at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to the owner or owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property. Notices of such hearings shall be posted at the City Hall at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. The County Assessor’s current tax records shall be deemed sufficient for the location or certification of ownership of said adjacent properties.
3. Findings. No conditional use shall be recommended by the Commission unless the Commission shall find:
A. That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted, or substantially diminish and impair property values within the immediate vicinity.
B. That the establishment of a conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant property values within the immediate vicinity.
C. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
D. The adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide sufficient off-street parking and loading space to serve the proposed use.
E. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration, so that
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
none of these will constitute a nuisance and to control lighted signs and other lights in such a manner that no disturbance to neighboring properties will result.
4. Fees. To defray administrative costs for processing requests for Conditional Use Permits, a fee shall be paid by the applicant. Such fee shall be established by the City Council.
5. Conditions and Safeguards. The Planning Commission shall prescribe appropriate Conditions and Safeguards in conformity with the Zoning Code. The Commission shall prescribe a time limit within which the action for which the conditional use is required shall commence, or be completed or both. Failure to commence, or complete, or both, such action within the time limit set shall void the Conditional Use Permit.
6. Violations. Violations of such Conditions and Safeguards, when made part of the terms under which the Conditional Use Permit is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the Zoning Code and punishable under Section 165.09 of the Zoning Code.
165.13 BUILDING AND USE PERMITS. Except as hereinafter provided, no person, firm or corporation shall construct, erect, alter, wreck or move any building or structure or parts thereof within the jurisdiction of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Board of Adjustment without first securing a building or use permit from the City. Application for permit shall apply as set forth in the City Building Code. Application for a building permit shall be made to the City on blank forms to be furnished by the City. Each application for a permit to construct or alter a building shall be accompanied by a plan drawn to scale showing the dimensions of the lot to be built upon and the size and location of the building and accessory buildings to be erected. Application shall contain such other information as may be deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of this or any other ordinance. The City shall issue or may direct the Director of Public Works to issue the building permit only after determining that the building plans together with the application comply with the terms of the Zoning Code. (Ord. 97-20 - Oct. 97 Supp.)
1. Certification of Occupancy.
A. No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected, reconstructed or structurally altered shall be occupied or
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
used, in whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever, until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating that the building and use complies with all of the provisions of the Zoning Code applicable to the building or premises or the use in the district in which it is to be located.
B. No change in use shall be made in any building or part thereof, now or hereafter erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, with or without a Certificate of Occupancy having been issued by the Zoning Administrator, and no such permit shall be issued to make such change unless it is in compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Code.
C. No vacant flood plain land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected, altered or moved shall be occupied until the applicant submits to the appropriate local official a certification by a registered professional engineer, land surveyor or other qualified person designated by the local governing body that the finished fill and building floor elevations or other flood protection measures are in compliance with appropriate flood plain zoning provisions and other flood plain regulations.
D. Certification of Occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the lawful erection, reconstruction or structural alteration is completed.
E. A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the Office of the Zoning Administrator, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the structure, building or land affected.
F. A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued by the administrative official for a period not exceeding six (6) months, during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may require such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
G. Failure to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy shall be considered a violation of the Zoning Code and subject to penalty under Section 165.09 of the Zoning Code.
2. Schedules of Fees, Charges and Expenses. The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure, for building permits, certificates of occupancy, appeals, and other matters pertaining to the Zoning Code. The schedule of fees shall be posted
CHAPTER 165 ZONING CODE — GENERAL PROVISIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
in the office of the Zoning Administrator, and may be altered or amended only by the City Council. No permit, certificate, conditional use permit, or variance shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken on proceedings before the Board of Adjustment unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full.
3. Complaints Regarding Violations. Whenever a violation of the Zoning Code occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, who shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by the Zoning Code.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 166
ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
166.01 Establishment of Districts
166.06 R-2 Family or Multiple Family Residential District
166.02 Zoning Map
166.07 R-3 Mobile Home Residential District
166.03 District Boundary Lines
166.08 C-1 Commercial District
166.04 Annexations
166.09 C-2 Light Commercial Office District
166.05 R-1 Single-Family Residential District
166.10 I-1 Light Industrial District
166.11 I-2 Heavy Industrial District
166.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS. For the purpose of the Zoning Code, the City is divided into the following Districts:
Residential Districts
R-1 Single-Family Residential
R-2 Two-Family or Multiple Family
R-3 Mobile Home Residential
Commercial District
C-1 Commercial
C-2 Light Commercial Office (Ord. 03-69 – Nov. 03 Supp.)
Industrial Districts
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industrial
Flood Plain District
Flood Plain District (Overlay District)
166.02 ZONING MAP.
1. The boundaries of the district established by the Zoning Code are delineated on the Zoning Map; said Map and all notations, references and data shown thereon are hereby adopted and made part of the Zoning Code and will be on permanent file and for public inspection in the Office of the Zoning Administrator.
2. If in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on said Map within thirty (30) days after official publication of the amendment.
3. No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
in the Zoning Code. Any unauthorized change of any kind by any person shall be considered a violation of the Zoning Code and punishable as provided under Section 165.09 of this Zoning Code.
4. The Official Zoning Map on record in the City Clerk’s Office shall be the final authority as the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the City.
5. The flood plain designation on zoning maps shall not be removed from flood plain areas unless and until it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the areas are filled to an elevation at or above the flood protection elevation and are contiguous to other lands lying outside the flood plain district. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Department of Natural Resources if they determine that, through other measures, lands are protected adequately for the intended uses.
(See Editor’s Note at end of this chapter for ordinances amending Zoning Map.)
166.03 DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINES. Whenever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as shown on the Zoning Map incorporated herein, the following rules shall apply:
1. Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets, highways, alleys, railroads, or similar rights-of-way, then shall be construed as following the centerlines thereof.
2. Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following lot lines or section lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
3. Where district boundary lines are indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated above in this section, it shall be so construed.
4. Distances not specifically indicted on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
5. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by this section, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the distance boundaries.
6. Where a platted lot held in one (1) ownership and of record at the effective date of the Zoning Code is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to be within the least restrictive district.
7. Flood Plain District Boundaries: The exact boundaries of the Floodway and Flood Fringe portions of the Flood Plain District shall be determined on a case by case basis at the time a person applies for building
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
permit or conditional use permit. At such time, the applicant shall submit a drawing indicating the existing and graded elevations of the site in question.
166.04 ANNEXATIONS. All territory hereafter annexed to the City which is not shown on the Official Zoning Map as part of the Zoning Code, shall, upon annexation, be classified in accordance with its established or contemplated use prior to annexation, and shall be subject to all regulations, notations, references and conditions applicable to such zone until such time that a determination may be made as to the official district classification and an amendment to the Zoning Code made to that effect.
166.05 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The R-1 District is intended to provide for low density residential development. This district is designed to protect residential areas now developed with single-family detached dwellings and adjoining vacant areas likely to be developed for such purposes. The regulations are designed to stabilize such areas and to promote a suitable environment for family life.
1. Permitted principal uses.
A. Single family detached dwellings
B. Parks, playgrounds and community buildings owned or operated by public agencies.
C. Public libraries.
D. Golf courses, except miniature courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes.
E. Churches or other places of worship, provided that no building shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any line of an abutting lot in any of the classes of residential districts.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses.
A. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to one of the principal uses unless otherwise excluded.
B. Private garages, parking spaces and carports for passenger cars.
C. Home occupations, as defined in Chapter 165.
D. Swimming pools (private).
E. Keeping of not more than two (2) boarders or roomers by a residential family.
F. The parking of one unoccupied recreational vehicle not exceeding thirty-two (32) feet in length.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
G. Tool houses, sheds and similar buildings for storage of domestic supplies and noncommercial recreational equipment.
3. Conditional Uses.
A. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
(1) Conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met.
(2) Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
B. Two-family attached dwellings.
C. Public or semi-private recreational buildings and neighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools, and religious institutions.
D. Convalescent and nursing homes.
E. Location of any new buildings, other than residence and garages, on existing acreages.
F. Mobile Home Park developments subject to the special conditions and requirements as set forth in Section 166.07, Mobile Home Residential District.
G. Cemetery or Memorial Gardens.
H. Bed and breakfast homes or bed and breakfast inns, providing that said use conforms to the provisions of Chapter 170A and 170B of the Code of Iowa and that a public hearing is held on each request before said facility is permitted in the use district. This conditional use must also provide one off-street parking space per guest room and one off-street guest space for the host or owner.
4. Height, Yard, Area and Lot Width Regulations.
A. Height. No building shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height.
B. Front Yard Regulations. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet on residential streets and forty (40) feet on collector streets or higher classifications. For the purposes of determining front yard requirements on corner lots and double frontage lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage. Porches without roofs, or with roofs no more
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
than thirty percent (30%) solid, open and unenclosed porches or decks may extend ten (10) feet into the front yard. Whenever an addition to an existing structure will not extend any further into a front yard than the existing structure, then the addition may be allowed as long as all other side yard and rear yard setbacks are met.
C. Side Yard Regulations. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than seven (7) feet. Wherever a lot of record existing at the time of the passage of the Zoning Ordinance has a width of fifty (50) feet or less, the side yard on each side of a building may be reduced to a width of not less than ten (10) percent of the width of the lot, but in no instance shall it be less than four (4) feet.
D. Rear Yard Regulations. The rear yard of each lot shall have a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet or twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot, from the residence, whichever amount is greater. The sum total of all accessory buildings shall not exceed or utilize thirty percent (30%) of the entire rear yard as defined by this Zoning Code. In addition, no accessory building or any portion thereof shall be constructed within two (2) feet of the vertical line of the rear boundary of a lot.
(Ord. 97-20 - Oct. 97 Supp.)
E. Lot Area Regulations. Every lot or tract of land shall have an area of not less than seventy-two hundred (7,200) square feet.
F. Lot Width Regulations. Every lot or tract of land shall have a minimum width of sixty (60) feet.
5. General Regulations. Additional regulations applicable in the R-1 District are set forth in Chapter 168.
166.06 R-2 FAMILY OR MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The R-2 District is to provide for high density residential developments designed specifically for duplexes or multiple dwellings such as apartments, townhouses, row houses, condominiums, etc.
1. Permitted Principal Uses.
A. All uses permitted in the R-1 Single Family Residential District.
B. Duplex dwelling units.
C. Multi-family dwellings, including cooperative apartment houses and condominium dwellings.
D. Boarding and lodging houses.
E. Institutions of a religious, educational, eleemosynary or philanthropic nature, excluding any penal or mental institutions.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
F. Hospitals, convalescent and nursing homes.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses. All permitted accessory uses allowed in a R-1 Single Family Residential District.
3. Conditional Uses.
A. Funeral homes.
B. Fraternities, sororities, private clubs, and lodges providing the chief activity is not a service customarily carried on as a business.
C. Bed and breakfast homes or bed and breakfast inns, providing that said use conforms to the provisions of Chapter 170A and 170B of the Code of Iowa and that a public hearing is held on each request before said facility is permitted in the use district. This accessory use must also provide one off-street parking space per guest room and one off-street guest space for the host or owner.
D. Conditional Uses. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
(1) Conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met.
(2) Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
(Ord. 04-78 – Oct. 04 Supp.)
4. Height, Yard, Area and Lot Width Regulations.
A. Height Regulations. No building shall exceed four (4) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height except any variance to the provisions of this subsection shall require a setback from all yard lines required in this subsection an additional distance of one (1) foot for every one (1) foot that the building exceeds the allowable height.
B. Front Yard Regulations. The front yard regulations are the same as those in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
C. Side Yard Regulations. The side yard regulations are the same as those in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, except for buildings exceeding thirty (30) feet in height, there shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of fifteen (15) feet plus one (1) foot of side yard for each one (1) foot of building over thirty (30) feet. Townhouses shall be exempt from the side yard regulations and shall be allowed to have zero (0) side yards in all interior lot lines as long as all exterior dimensions conform to the provisions of the R-2 district.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
D. Rear Yard Regulations. The rear yard regulations are the same as those in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District. A lot on which there is erected a two-family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than thirty-six hundred (3,600) square feet per family, and an average width of not less than sixty (60) feet. Townhouses will be exempt from the provisions of the Zoning Code as it pertains to all interior lots of a townhouse site, providing that the area in which the townhouse is located conforms to the provisions of the Zoning Code. A lot on which there is erected a multiple dwelling shall contain an area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet per family, with a minimum of seventy-two hundred (7,200) square feet per lot, except that this regulation shall not apply to lodging houses, fraternities, or sororities where no cooking is done in individual rooms, or apartments, or townhouses, as defined by the Zoning Code.
5. Minimum Floor Area for Multiple Family Dwellings. The minimum floor area of any efficiency dwelling unit shall be not less than 300 net square feet; that of a one-bedroom dwelling unit shall be not less than 400 net square feet, and that of a two-bedroom dwelling unit shall be not less than 550 net square feet. Units containing three or more bedrooms shall have an additional 150 net square feet of floor area for each bedroom in excess of two bedrooms. For purposes of measurement, the net floor area of a dwelling unit shall mean that area within a building used as a single dwelling unit, and shall be measured from the inside walls to the center of partitions bounding the dwelling unit being measured, but shall not include public stairways, public entries, public foyers, public balconies, or unenclosed public porches, separate utility rooms, furnace areas or rooms, storage areas not within the apartment, or garages.
6. Design and Construction Requirements.
A. Design and Review. A building permit for a multiple dwelling must be approved by the Commission and the Council after review of the plans set forth in the Zoning Code in the manner set forth in Section 165.12, CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS. The Commission and Council may designate conditions or guarantees in connection therewith as will secure substantially the provisions of the District.
B. Building Design and Construction. A building permit for a multiple dwelling building containing more than four (4) dwelling units shall not be issued unless the applicant’s building plans, including the site plan, are submitted to the Commission and Council for approval. Any such building shall have its electrical, mechanical and structural systems approved. Provisions of this subsection shall in no way prohibit the
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
preparation of the site plan by a professional site planner. Such plans shall include the following:
(1) Complete details of the proposed site development including location of building, driveways, parking spaces, dimensions of the lot, lot area and yard dimensions.
(2) Complete landscaping plans including species and size of trees and shrubs proposed.
(3) Complete plans for proposed sidewalks to service parking, recreation and service areas within the proposed development.
(4) Complete plans for storm water drainage systems sufficient to drain and dispose of all surface water accumulations within the area.
(5) Complete structural, electrical and mechanical plans for the proposed buildings.
(6) Complete plans and specifications for exterior wall finishes proposed for all principal and accessory buildings.
C. Sound. Party and corridor partitions and floor systems shall be of a type rated by a laboratory regularly engaged in such testing as capable of accomplishing an average sound transmission loss (using a 9 frequency test) of not less than 50 decibels. Door systems between corridors and dwelling units shall be of solid core construction and include gaskets and closure plates. Room relationships, hallway designs, door and window placements and plumbing and ventilating installations shall be such that they assist in the control of sound transmission from unit to unit.
D. Projecting Air Conditioning and Heating Units. Air conditioning or heating units projecting through exterior walls or windows shall be so located and designed that they neither unnecessarily generate or transmit sound nor disrupt the architectural amenities of the building. Units projecting more than fourteen inches beyond the exterior finish of a building wall shall be permitted only with the written consent of the building inspector, which shall be given when building structural systems prevent compliance.
E. Trash and Garbage Storage. Except with townhouses and multiple residence sites of four or less units no exterior trash or garbage disposal or storage shall be permitted. In the case of townhouses and multiple residences with four or less units, any storage shall be completely enclosed by walls and roof.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
F. Elevators. Any multiple residence building of three stories or more shall be equipped with at least one public elevator.
G. Recreational and Open Space. Multiple Family Residential Projects shall contain an adequate amount of land for park, recreation or local open space use, exclusive of drainage areas which shall not be less than twenty (20) percent of the gross area of the property and shall consist principally of land within the building setback lines.
166.07 R-3 MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The Mobile Home Residential District is intended to promote health, safety, order, convenience and general welfare by enforcing minimum standards for homes and mobile home parks, and their design, construction, alteration and arrangement on said lots. The installation of all mobile home parks shall be governed by the City Building Code, City Electrical Code, and City Plumbing and Mechanical Code and other local rules and regulations concerning construction and installation of mobile homes and mobile home parks. Where the local chapter conflicts with provisions of the State Code, the local provisions pertaining to building, plumbing and electrical and other construction shall take precedence.
1. Mobile Home District Regulations. The Mobile Home Residential District is intended to provide for the proper placement of a mobile home meeting certain requirements on an individual lot within certain residential areas of the City where such use will be compatible with existing and future development. Within the R-3 District, as indicated on the zoning map, no building, land or premises shall be used, no buildings erected or altered which are arranged, maintained or designated to be used except for the following uses:
A. Principal Uses:
(1) Any use permitted in an R-1 Residential District, under regulations prescribed for that district.
(2) Any mobile home manufactured after June 15, 1976, shall be in compliance with Federal manufactured housing standards as evidenced by appropriate seals affixed to the unit and applicable State and local requirements.
B. Accessory Uses. All accessory uses permitted in an R-1 Residential District.
C. Conditional Uses. All uses requiring the granting of a special permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and permitted in R-1 Residential districts.
D. The lot area shall be as contained herein this chapter. Setbacks from private streets shall be as contained herein this chapter.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
However, any mobile home lots which front a public street, the setback from the public street shall be as required in an R-1 Residential District.
E. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Chapter.
F. Off-Street Parking. All parking shall conform to the requirements of the R-1 Residential District.
G. Special Limitations. Any amendment of a zoning classification to R-3 Mobile Home Residential District shall be in accordance with the following:
(1) Any mobile home park is to be a minimum gross area of two (2) acres.
(2) All newly platted mobile home subdivisions shall comply with the requirements and procedures of the Subdivision Regulations of the City as stated in Chapter 170 of this Code of Ordinances.
(3) Occupancy shall not be permitted until all required improvements including utility services are installed and operating.
2. Definitions. For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
A. “Accessory Building” means any structure which is appurtenant to a mobile home such as utility shed, carport, garage, community building, elevated deck, roofed patio, or roofed porch.
B. “Community Building” means a structure which may house a toilet, bathing, laundry or other facilities for a mobile home park.
C. “Engineering Plans” means plans certified by an engineer registered in accordance with the requirements of Iowa Code Chapter 542B, professional engineers and land surveyors.
D. “Flood Plain” means any area of a community or locality which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated as falling, wholly, or partly within flood hazard boundaries and zones or any other areas determined by responsible State or Federal agencies to be subject to periodic flooding.
E. “Independent Mobile Home Space” means a mobile home space which has both individual water and sewer connections.
F. “Mobile Home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and so designed,
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
constructed, or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons, but shall also include any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa.
G. “Mobile Home Space” is a plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of one mobile home.
H. “New Installations” means mobile home parks or additions thereto which are proposed for construction.
I. “Nonpublic Water Supply” means a system for the provision of water for human consumption which has less than fifteen service connections and serves less than twenty-five people or has less than fifteen service connections and serves more than twenty-five people for less than sixty days a year.
J. “Public Roadway” means a road or street owned and maintained by a Federal, State, or local government agency.
K. “Public Water Supply” means a system for the provision of piped water for human consumption, which has at least fifteen service connections or regularly serves an average of at least twenty-five individuals daily at least sixty days out of the year. Such a system would include the collection (including wells), treatment, storage, or distribution facilities.
L. “Refuse” means any solid waste including garbage, rubbish, trash, debris, or nonfunctioning equipment such as junked vehicles.
M. “Residential Mobile Home Park” means a mobile home park designed, established and maintained for year-round residency by mobile homes.
N. “Sewage Disposal System” means all equipment and devices necessary for proper collection, storage, treatment, and disposal of sewage from a mobile home park.
(1) Public systems collect and treat 1,500 or more gallons per day or serve eight or more mobile home spaces and,
(2) Nonpublic systems collect and treat less than 1,500 gallons/day or serve less than eight mobile home spaces.
3. Supervision/Management.
A. Each mobile home park should have personnel who are responsible for managing the park. These individuals should be identified by the park owner in writing and authorized to arrange for
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
emergency repairs and services and for taking such other actions as may be necessary to comply with State and local requirements.
B. A permanent register of all tenants of the mobile home park must be maintain din accordance with Iowa Code, Chapter 435.
(1) This register is to be made available on the premises on request and open to the inspection by a duly authorized representative of any law enforcement agency.
(2) This register should contain a record of the number of mobile home units harbored, the owners’ names, and year and make of units.
(3) Semi-Annual (January-July) report shall be made to the County Treasurer of all mobile homes in the park. Reports of arrivals and departures with tax clearance forms will be reported to the County Treasurer at time of arrival and/or departure of the mobile home. Park owner liability ends with this report.
C. The owner is responsible for supervision of the park and for the implementation of the provisions of the Iowa Code Chapter 562B, Landlord and Tenant Act, for the removal of any person from the park who willfully or maliciously creates an unsanitary condition or does not adhere strictly to prescribed rules. The mobile home park should provide sanitation, health and safety rules and instructions as needed to protect the residents of the park.
D. Mobile home park management should require in writing that residents notify the park management of any planned excavation or installation of below-ground facilities, including gas, electric, water or sewer lines, mobile home tie-downs, or barrier posts.
(1) The management shall contact the utilities to locate for the resident any buried gas or electric lines; and water and sewer lines, as necessary.
4. Park Site.
A. Residential Mobile Home Park sites should be well drained and not located in a flood plain.
B. All sites should be free from obvious hazards.
C. Sites should not be located in or adjacent to swamps, marshes, or other breeding places of insects, rats, and mice.
D. Storm drainage should be provided in such a manner so as not to endanger any water supply or surface water course.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
5. Roadways. Roadways should be maintained in a safe, unobstructed condition at all times.
A. Twenty-nine (29) feet wide if parking is permitted only on one side and so posted.
B. Thirty-six (36) feet wide with parking on both sides.
6. Spacing.
A. The number of mobile homes permitted in the park should not exceed the number of spaces which can be serviced by the sanitary facilities in the park.
B. Each mobile home space should be clearly numbered. Each mobile home should:
(1) Abut to a roadway and,
(2) Have clear, unobstructed access to a public roadway.
C. Existing mobile home spaces, which are located in parks that have been in continuous operation since prior to August 1, 1970, may be at least eight feet larger than the mobile home in both the lateral and longitudinal directions. New mobile home spaces added to these parks should meet the mobile home spacing criteria of Spacing, Item D.
D. Mobile home parks constructed and new spaces added to existing parks after January 1, 1996, should conform to the following mobile home spacing criteria:
A mobile home should not be located closer than:
(1) 15 feet from the side of another mobile home;
(2) 10 feet from the end of another mobile home;
(3) 10 feet from an accessory shed or building (except that an accessory shed or building may abut the owner’s mobile home and should be located or constructed in such a manner as to not impede egress from any doorway of the mobile home;
(4) 20 feet from the public curbline or as required by City ordinance;
(5) 5 feet from boundary of the mobile home park.
7. Water Supply.
A. A continuous supply of safe potable water under at least forty pounds pressure, P.S.I. (pounds per square inch), should be provided for each mobile home park.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(1) Where a municipal water supply having adequate capacity is available abutting the property, such water supply should be used.
(2) In mobile home parks where a municipal supply is not available, a private system shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with Chapter 455B.172 for nonpublic systems and with Iowa Department of Natural Resources, Iowa Code, Chapter 455B.173 for public systems.
(3) Detailed engineering plans should be on file for each park, especially for new construction.
(4) Design and operation of public water and nonpublic supply systems are to be consistent with the water supply requirements of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, Chapters 455B.173 and 455B.172 Iowa Administrative Code.
B. All sources of potential contamination should be situated at a reasonable safe distance from drinking water wells. Minimum distances between all wells and named sources of pollutions should be as outlined in Table I.
TABLE I
RECOMMENDED LATERAL DISTANCES
FROM ANY DRINKING WATER WELLS*
MINIMUM
LATERAL
SOURCES OF CONTAMINATION DISTANCE
Solid waste disposal site 200 feet
Lagoons or waste treatment facilities 1000 feet
Cesspools (receiving raw sewage prohibited for
new construction) 150 feet
Preparation or storage area for spray materials,
commercial fertilizers or chemicals 150 feet
Drainage or improperly abandoned wells 100 feet
Soil absorption field, pit privy or similar disposal unit 100 feet
Confined feeding operations 100 feet
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
MINIMUM
LATERAL
SOURCES OF CONTAMINATION DISTANCE
Septic tank, concrete vault privy, sewer of tightly
joined tile or equivalent material, sewer connected
foundation drain, or sewer under pressure 50 feet
Ditches, streams, or lakes 25 feet
Sewer of cast iron with leaded or mechanical joints,
independent clear water drains, or cisterns 10 feet
Well pumphouse floor drain draining to ground
surface 5 feet
*NOTE: The distances shown in Table I are minimum distances required by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources. For public water supplies, Iowa Department of Natural Resources requirements shall be complied with.
C. Pipes and fittings used in constructing water system distribution mains, laterals and water risers should be:
(1) Composed of materials meeting the requirements of the State Plumbing Code 661-16.400(103A) Iowa Administrative Code.
(2) Marked to indicate the approval by the National Sanitation Foundation Testing Laboratory (NSF).
(3) Installed and bedded in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and specifications.
D. In new installations, the water distribution lines should be separated horizontally from sanitary sewers by at least ten feet of undisturbed or compacted earth, except as specified below.
(1) When water and sewer lines cross, the water line should be at least twelve inches above the top of the sewer line throughout a distance of ten feet horizontally, and no joints are to be made in the water line within this distance of ten feet.
(2) Water and sewer lines may be laid in the same trench providing:
(a) The bottom of the water line is laid at all points at least twelve inches above the top of the sewer line at its highest point;
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(b) The water line is laid on a solid shelf excavated at one side of the common trench or on a solidly tamped backfill;
(c) The joints in the water line are kept at a minimum;
(d) The sewer is constructed of cast iron with leaded or mechanical joints or approved plastic, and shown to be watertight by test. In cases where cast iron or plastic is not suitable sewer material, other durable and corrosion-resistant material may be used provided it meets State Plumbing Code requirements.
(e) The size of water distribution mains may be as specified in Table II in new installations and as specified in Table VII for those constructed prior to June 1, 1980.
TABLE II
RECOMMENDED SIZE OF WATER PIPE
RESIDENTIAL
MINIMUM PIPE MOBILE HOME
SIZE (INCHES) SPACES SERVED
1 2 - 5
1¼ 6 - 11
1½ 12 - 14
2 15 - 50
2½ 51 - 100
3 101 - 150
4 151 - 300
(f) Fire protection requirements for water supply shall be as required by the State or local authority having specific jurisdiction for the protection.
(g) Each mobile home space water riser and connection should:
(i) Terminate at least four inches above established grade.
(ii) Be provided with a control valve.
(iii) Be capped or otherwise protect when not in use.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(iv) Be provided with a watertight connection for attachment to the mobile home water line.
(v) Be protected against freezing if the park is operated throughout the year.
(vi) It is recommended that a curb stop valve be installed preceding each individual space water riser outlet in residential mobile home parks.
(h) The water supply system should be so installed as to eliminate all potential sources of contamination.
(i) Prior to installation, water pipes should not be stored where they will come in contact with sewage or other contamination.
(ii) During installation, disturbed soil should be compacted, and the grade should be sloped away from water risers.
(iii) Means should be provided to prevent backflow of contaminated water from appliances, fixtures, drains, and sewers.
(iv) No water system should be connected to a nonpotable or questionable water supply.
(v) Backflow preventers should be placed on all freezeless hydrants or faucets supplying potable water to mobile home spaces. Control valves of the “stop and waste” type should be prohibited for installation.
(vi) All water systems should be disinfected after installation and prior to use.
(i) Water Sample Analysis.
(i) The water supplied to mobile home sites should be demonstrated to be of satisfactory quality by means of sampling and laboratory analysis prior to initial use or after any repairs are made to the system.
(ii) Public water systems serving a mobile home park must be sampled by the owner of the water system with the frequency and for the contaminants required by the Iowa Department
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
of Natural Resources, Chapter 455B.173, Iowa Code. More frequent sampling is recommended if known sources of contamination exist or if the analytical record shows a history of contamination.
(iii) It is recommended that the owner of a nonpublic water system serving a mobile home park sample the water system at least once per month and have the sample analyzed for coliform bacteria. Sampling and analysis for other contaminants should be at least as frequent as required for public water systems.
(iv) All residents should be notified in writing when the water supply has been found to be unsafe due to bacteriological, chemical, or other contamination. When the water supply has been determined to contain more than 45 mg/l of nitrate, the owner should notify the residents in writing that the water should not be used for infant feeding.
(j) Disinfection and treatment equipment, if employed, shall be approved by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
8. Sewage System.
A. Adequate facilities should be provided and maintained for the collection and treatment of sewage from all mobile homes, community buildings, and other facilities. Cesspools are prohibited for all mobile home park sewage systems constructed, reconstructed, or altered.
(1) Disposal of sewage and other water-carried wastes should be into a public sewer system where a public sewer system is available and abutting the property.
(2) Where a public sewer is not available, a sewage disposal system designed, constructed and maintained according to the Iowa Department of Natural Resources requirements for public sewage systems or according to the requirements of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, Iowa Code, Chapter 455B.171-455B.192 for nonpublic systems must be provided.
(3) The connection between the mobile home drain and park sewer should be made with a leak-proof connector of
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
durable, corrosion-resistant material attached at the inlet and outlet end with a water and gas-tight joint.
(4) Each sewer outlet should be tightly capped when not in use.
(5) No discharge of sewage or any other type of waste water from any mobile home or building should be permitted onto the ground surface.
(6) Means should be provided to prevent sewage odors from escaping out of any sewer connection or outlet.
(7) Cleanouts should be provided in accordance with Iowa Department of Natural Resources Design Standards for public sewage systems, and the State Plumbing Code, Chapter 661.16.400(103A), Iowa Administrative Code and Iowa Department of Natural Resources rules on nonpublic sewage systems, Chapter 455B.171-455B.192, Iowa Code. Alternatively, manholes may be used in accordance with Iowa Department of Natural Resources Design Standards for public sewage systems.
B. In new installations, each space sewer lateral should be connected to the park sewer main in the following manner:
(1) Through the use of an approved “Y” fitting.
(2) It should connect below the frost line.
(3) It should extend vertically to not less than three nor more than six inches above established grade.
(4) Individual risers should not be less than three inches in diameter.
C. In new installations the pipes and fittings used in constructing sewer mains, laterals, sewer risers, longsweep quarter bends, and the connecting length of lateral to each space should be:
(1) Composed of materials meeting the requirements of the State Plumbing Code Iowa Administrative Code, Chapter 661.16.400(103A).
(2) Installed and bedded in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications.
D. The minimum size and slope of sewer installations constructed should be determined in accordance with Table III.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
TABLE III
RECOMMENDED SIZE AND SLOPE OF SEWER
Sewer Diameter Mobile Homes Connected Slope Per 100 Feet
(Inches) (Number) (Inches)
Residential Recreational
4 2 - 15 2 - 30 15
6 16 - 60 31 - 120 8
8 61 - 100 121 - 200 5
9. Gas and Fuel Systems. The gas and fuel systems should be installed and operated so as not to create obvious hazards, such as unsecured gas bottles and unprotected gas meters. See item D under Supervision/Management for recommended action necessary to avoid potential hazards associated with buried gas or fuel lines.
10. Electrical System.
A. The electrical system should be installed and operated so as not to create obvious hazards such as poor connections, exposed or unprotected wiring. See item D under Supervision/ Management for action necessary to avoid potential hazards associated with buried electrical lines.
B. Obvious hazards, such as poor connections, exposed or unprotected wiring, should be eliminated.
C. Lighting should be provided for all streets, walkways, buildings, and other facilities subject to nighttime use.
(1) Illumination is to be provided in accordance with local requirements, or
(2) Where no local requirements exist, an average illumination level of 0.1 foot-candle should be maintained on all streets, and
(3) Potentially hazardous locations such as street intersections and steps or ramps should be individually illuminated with a minimum level of 0.3 foot-candle.
11. Community Buildings. Community buildings are not required, but if one is provided, it shall conform to local codes.
12. Public Swimming Pools.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
A. Any swimming pools, wading pools or bath houses used in connection with pools should be constructed and operated in a safe and sanitary manner.
B. The design and operation of swimming pools is to be according to the Iowa Department of Public Health’s criteria.
C. In new installations, engineering plans and specifications must be submitted to the Department of Public Health.
13. Refuse Disposal.
A. The proper storage, collection and disposal of refuse should be the responsibility of the park owner or operator. Refuse disposal and the control of the growth of grass, bushes, and noxious plant should be accomplished in a manner to avoid creation of health hazards such as a rodent harborage, insect breeding areas or public health nuisance conditions.
B. The park owner should be responsible to assure that sufficient containers are available to provide storage space for all garbage produced between collections. All garbage and refuse should be stored in fly-tight, water-tight, and rodent-proof containers having tight-fitting lids. Each container should be maintained in good condition at all times. A plastic bag should not be acceptable as a container and should only be used as a liner in a durable and otherwise satisfactory container.
(1) Garbage should be collected from the containers at least once a week.
(2) It should be transported to a disposal site approved by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources in a covered vehicle.
C. The park premises should be kept free of any refuse, plant overgrowth, or noxious weeds at all times.
D. Abandoned or junked vehicles should not be stored or accumulated within a park in accordance with local ordinance.
14. Chemical and Fuel Safety.
A. Application of pesticides should comply with current rules and guidelines of the Iowa department of Agriculture and the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
(1) Pesticides should be stored in a safe location not accessible to children.
(2) Pesticides, fuel, or other hazardous chemicals should not be stored in a well house or a well frost pit.
B. Recreational fire should be supervised and only be permitted in designated safe areas.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
C. Storage of flammable material and fuel or fuel containers should not be allowed beneath the mobile homes. Flammable material such as hay or straw should not be used for skirting or insulation of mobile homes.
D. Any garbage dumpsters utilized should be of the “child-safe” type and shall be so designated by the manufacturer.
15. Miscellaneous Recommendations.
A. The park’s rules should prohibit residents from permitting their pet animals to run at large and to create any health or safety hazard within a mobile home park.
B. In new installations, when skirting is provided around a mobile home, an access panel should be provided for inspection and maintenance of service connections. In existing installations, the park owner should insure accessibility through any skirting.
166.08 C-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. The C-1 Commercial District is intended to provide a district for a wide range of services and goods which are basically retail in nature. The C-1 Commercial District is designed to accommodate retail and office activities and assembly in conjunction with retail sales.
1. Permitted Accessory Uses.
A. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the uses permitted.
B. Off-street parking and loading as regulated by Section 168.07 of this Zoning Code.
C. Signs as regulated by Section 168.06(3) of this Zoning Code.
D. Multiple dwelling and apartment when located on the second floor or above; or if on first floor, it must be approved by the Board of Adjustment.
E. Additions, alterations or accessory buildings to be used with single-family dwellings existing at the time of passage of the ordinance codified herein.
2. Conditional Uses.
A. Public and private parking lots.
B. Bed and breakfast homes or bed and breakfast inns, providing that said use conforms to the provisions of Chapter 170A and 170B of the Code of Iowa and that a public hearing is held on each request before said facility is permitted in the use district. This conditional use must also provide one off-street parking space per guest room and one off-street guest space for the host or owner.
C. Any use permitted in R-1 or R-2 not allowed in subsection E of subsection 1 of this section.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
D. Conditional Uses. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
(1) Conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met.
(2) Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
(Ord. 04-78 – Oct. 04 Supp.)
3. Height, Yard and Area Regulations.
A. Height Regulations. No building shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed eighty (80) feet in height.
B. Yard Regulations and Lot Coverage Regulations. There shall be no specific yard requirements except as necessary to provide off-street parking and loading if required, or if a commercial district abuts the residential district. The yard requirements of the residential district shall govern. The yard requirements for a dwelling shall be the same as its respective district.
4. General Regulations. Additional regulations in the C-1 District are set forth in Chapter 168.
166.09 C-2 LIGHT COMMERCIAL OFFICE DISTRICT. The C-2 Light Commercial Office District is intended to provide office locations generally serving neighborhood or community needs. This District should be located adjacent to a C-1 Commercial District or an arterial or collector street and is designed to be compatible in scale and land use intensity with residential settings. The District allows for the integration of limited supporting commercial uses into office developments. The District is most appropriately located along collector and arterial streets in areas of transition between residential and higher intensity uses, and in areas of existing and new office development. The District is not intended to allow commercial or retail sales.
1. Permitted Uses. The following use types are permitted:
A. Office uses. (Business hours must be between 7:30 a.m. and 7:30 p.m.)
B. General offices.
C. Financial services.
D. Medical offices.
E. Professional services offices. (Businesses that require licensure by the State of Iowa such as legal, engineering, surveying, financial consulting, real estate)
F. Additions, alterations or accessory buildings to be used with single-family dwellings existing at the time of passage of Ordinance No. 03-69, codified herein.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
G. Commercial uses such as (Business hours must be between 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m.) business support services (such as information technology, computer programming and software, office machine repair service, janitorial services).
H. Civic uses such as:
(1) Administrative services.
(2) Convalescent services.
(3) Cultural services.
(4) Day care.
(5) Local utility services.
(6) Park and recreation services.
(7) Religious assembly.
2. Conditional Uses. The following use types are allowed, subject to approval of a conditional use permit:
A. Residential Uses. Any use permitted in R-1 or R-2 not allowed in Subsection F of Subsection 1 above.
B. Bed and breakfast homes or bed and breakfast inns, providing that said use conforms to the provisions of Chapter 170A and 170B of the Code of Iowa and that a public hearing is held on each request before said facility is permitted in the use district. This conditional use must also provide one off-street parking space per guest room and one off-street parking space for the host or owner.
C. Civic Uses:
(1) Community recreation.
(2) Group care facility.
(3) Postal facilities.
(4) Recreational clubs.
(5) Safety services.
D. Conditional Uses. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
(1) Conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met.
(2) Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
(Ord. 04-78 – Oct. 04 Supp.)
3. Site Development Regulations. Each site in the office district shall be subject to the following site development regulations:
Regulator:
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Lot Area 10,000 square feet minimum
Lot Width 90 feet minimum
Front Yard Same as those in the R-1 Single
Family District
Street Side Yard Same as those in the R-1 Single
Family District
Side Yard (abutting commercial) 15 feet minimum
Rear Yard (abutting residential) 30 feet minimum
Rear Yard (abutting commercial) 15 feet minimum
Height 30 feet maximum
Building Coverage Impervious Coverage 0.50 maximum
4. Additional Regulations.
A. Abutting Residential Zones. When abutting residential zones, the office zoned area shall be required to provide visual buffers in the side yard or rear yard setbacks. The buffers shall consist of earthen berms no less than 3 foot above the elevation at the property line of the abutting residential property, or landscaping with trees and shrubs or a combination thereof.
B. Commercial Uses. Certain commercial sales are allowed only if the sales relates directly to a professional service being provided at the location.
C. Signs. Signs shall conform to the general provisions for all districts. Where a sign is illuminated, the light source shall not be directed at residential areas and the source shall be indirect lighting from the ground surface. Signs shall only be lighted during business hours. Signs mounted on the building shall not project higher than the building and shall not project more than one foot (1') perpendicular from the building face. Ground set signs shall not be higher than eight feet (8') above ground surface and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from front yard lot line. The total sign surface shall be one-half of that allowed for C-1 Commercial Districts. Only one sign shall be allowed per parcel or lot regardless of number of businesses contained in the structure or on the parcel. For corner lots, the sign shall be placed so as to be visible from the street with the higher traffic volume.
D. Parking and Loading. The office district zone shall follow the current Parking and Loading Regulations in Section 168.07 of this Code of Ordinances.
E. Curb Cuts. No curb cut or driveway shall exceed forty-five feet (45') in width.
F. Fences or Walls. Fences or walls in the office district shall comply with Section 168.01(1), Fences or Walls in Residential Zones.
(Section 166.09 - Ord. 03-69 – Nov. 03 Supp.)
166.10 I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT The I-1 Light Industrial District is intended to establish areas in which light manufacturing may situate for administering,
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
wholesaling, manufacturing and related uses which can maintain high standards of appearance, including open spaces and landscape and limit external effects such as noise, odors, smoke and vibration. The District will provide locations which offer adequate utilities and insure a functional relationship among various types of land uses.
1. Accessory Uses. Additions, alterations or accessory buildings to be used with single-family dwellings existing at the time of passage of the ordinance codified herein.
2. Conditional Uses.
A. Any manufacturing, production, processing, cleaning, storage, servicing, repair and testing of materials, goods or products similar to those described above which comply with the performance standards of this district.
B. Retail and service establishments essential to a Planned Industrial District and providing goods and services which are primarily for the use of persons employed in this District.
C. Bed and breakfast homes or bed and breakfast inns, providing that said use conforms to the provisions of Chapter 170A and 170B of the Code of Iowa and that a public hearing is held on each request before said facility is permitted in the use district. This conditional use must also provide one off-street parking space per guest room and one off-street guest space for the host or owner.
D. Any use permitted in R-1 or R-2, not allowed in Section 166.09(1).
E. Conditional Uses. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
(1) Conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met.
(2) Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
(Ord. 04-78 – Oct. 04 Supp.)
3. Height, Yard and Area Regulations.
A. Height Regulations. No structure shall exceed eighty (80) feet in height, except that cooling towers and domes which do not contain usable space, water towers and smokestacks may be of any height which does not conflict with airport requirements.
B. Front Yard Regulations. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet, except yard requirements for dwellings shall be the same as their respective districts. Where that part of a district is adjacent to or across the street from a residential district there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than fifty (50) feet.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
C. Side Yard Regulations. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building, each yard having a width of not less than fifteen (15) feet; except where that part of a district abuts a residential district, the side yard shall have a width of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
D. Rear Yard Regulations. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet; except where that part of a district abuts a residential district, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifty (50) feet.
E. Lot Area Regulations. Every individual lot, site, or tract shall have an area adequate for employee and customer parking and loading.
F. General Regulations. Additional regulations applicable to the I-1 District are set our in Chapter 168.
166.11 I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. The I-2 Heavy Industrial District is intended for general industrial uses which, due to their size and nature, would not be appropriate in the I-1 Light Industrial District.
1. Permitted Uses. Within an I-2 Heavy Industrial District, unless otherwise provided by the Zoning Code, no building or land shall be used except for general industrial uses.
2. Accessory Buildings and Uses.
A. Off-street parking and loading as regulated in Section 168.07.
B. Signs as regulated in Section 168.06.
C. Additions, alterations or accessory buildings to be used with single-family dwellings existing at the time of passage of the ordinance codified herein.
3. Conditional Uses. Within an I-2 Heavy Industrial District, buildings or land may be used for one or more of the following uses if granted a Conditional Use Permit as provided in Section 165.11.
A. Any manufacturing, production, processing, cleaning, storage, servicing, repair, and testing of materials, goods, or products that are hazardous, radioactive, emit odors or fumes, or dust.
B. Extraction, processing, or storage of sand and gravel, stone or other raw materials.
C. Retail and service establishments essential to the operation of a Heavy Industrial District.
D. Bed and breakfast homes or bed and breakfast inns, providing that said use conforms to the provisions of Chapter 170A and 170B of the Code of Iowa and that a public hearing is held on each request before said facility is permitted in the use district. This conditional use must also provide one off-street parking space per guest room and one off-street guest space for the host or owner.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING CODE — ZONING DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
E. Conditional Uses. Governmental and public utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
(1) Conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met.
(2) Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
(Ord. 04-78 – Oct. 04 Supp.)
4. Height, Yard and Area Regulations.
A. Height Regulations. No structure shall exceed eighty (80) feet in height.
B. Front Yard Regulations. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet, except yard requirements for dwellings shall be the same as their respective districts.
C. Side Yard Regulations. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building each having a minimum width of not less than fifteen (15) feet, except no building shall be located within fifty (50) feet of a residential district.
D. Rear Yard Regulations. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet, except where that part of a district abuts a residential district, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifty (50) feet.
E. Lot Area Regulations. Every individual lot, site, or tract shall have adequate area for customer and employee parking and loading.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map described in Section 166.02 and have not been included as a part of this Code of Ordinances but have been specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NUMBER
DATE ADOPTED
10.3
June 7, 1988
10.4
June 7, 1988
10.6
May 2, 1989
10.11
July 17, 1990
10.12
December 4, 1990
10.51
May 2, 1992
05-84
May 17, 2005
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 167
ZONING CODE — FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
167.01 Statutory Authority, Findings of Fact and Purpose
167.07 Administration
167.02 General Provisions
167.08 Nonconforming Uses
167.03 Establishment of Zoning (Overlay) Districts
167.09 Penalties for Violation
167.04 Floodway (Overlay) District (FW)
167.10 Amendments
167.05 Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District FF
167.11 Definitions
167.06 General Floodplain (Overlay) District FP
167.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.
1. The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
2. Findings of Fact.
A. The flood hazard areas of the City of Creston are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community.
B. These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by: (i) The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flooding and (ii) the cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
C. This ordinance relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of Natural Resources.
1. Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City of Creston and its residents and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in Section 167.01(2)(A) of this Ordinance with provisions designed to:
A. Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
B. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities.
C. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction or substantial improvement.
D. Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.
E. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance Program.
167.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1. Lands to Which Ordinance Apply. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Creston shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of the Floodway, Floodway Fringe, and General Floodplain (Overlay) Districts, as established in Section 167.03.
2. Establishment of Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) for Union County and Incorporated Areas, City of Creston, Panels 19175C0109C, 0117C, 0128C, 0129C, 0136C, 0137C, dated June 7, 2017, which were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Union County, is (are) hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with the Flood Insurance Study are also declared to be a part of this ordinance.
3. Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. The boundaries of the zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this Ordinance.
4. Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance.
5. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this Ordinance shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
6. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
7. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The standards required by this Ordinance are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain (Overlay) District areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Creston or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made there under.
8. Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
167.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS. The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this ordinance are hereby divided into the following districts; (i) Floodway District (FW), (ii) Floodway Fringe District (FF), and (iv) General Floodplain District (FP). The boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. Within these districts, all uses not allowed as Permitted Uses or permissible as Conditional Uses are prohibited unless a variance to the terms of this ordinance is granted after due consideration by the Board of Adjustment.
167.04 FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FW).
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the storage of material or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse.
A. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
B. Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
C. Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
D. Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
E. Such other open-space uses similar in nature to the above uses.
2. Conditional Uses. The following uses which involve structures (temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided for in Section 167.07(3). Such uses must also meet the applicable provisions of the Floodway District Performance Standards.
A. Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses.
B. Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement enterprises.
C. Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs and billboards.
D. Extraction of sands, gravel and other materials.
E. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers and wharves.
F. Utility transmission lines and underground pipelines.
G. Other uses similar in nature to uses described in Section 167.04(1) or (2) which are consistent with the provisions of Section 167.04(3) and the general spirit and purpose of this ordinance.
3. Performance Standards. All Floodway District uses allowed as a Permitted or Conditional Use shall meet the following standards.
A. No use shall be permitted in the Floodway District that would result in any increase in the 100-year flood level. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
B. All uses within the Floodway District shall:
(1) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(2) Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
(3) Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
C. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.
D. Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
E. Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and shall not be for human habitation.
F. Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway District within the time available after flood warning.
G. Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
H. Any fill allowed in floodway must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
I. Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
167.05 FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT FF.
1. Permitted Uses. All uses within the Floodway Fringe District shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District.
2. Performance Standards. All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance standards. Where 100-year flood data has not been provided on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make such determination.
A. All structures shall:
(1) Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(3) Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
B. Residential buildings – All new or substantially improved residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than 1.0 ft. above the 100-year flood level and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed subject to favorable consideration by the Board of Adjustment, where existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated with flooding.
All new residential structures shall be provided with a means of access will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.
C. Non-residential buildings - All new or substantially improved non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the structure, below the 100-year flood level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
D. All new and substantially improved structures:
(1) Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and low damage potential storage.
(2) New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
(3) New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
E. Factory-built homes:
(1) All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level.
(2) All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
F. Utility and Sanitary Systems:
(1) On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding.
(2) All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection equal to or greater than one (1) foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
(3) New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one (1) foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(4) Utilities such as gas and electrical systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
G. Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters or (ii) be readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
H. Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a minimum of 3 ft. of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources shall approve structural flood control works.
I. Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources must approve such alterations or relocations.
J. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this Ordinance. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood elevation data for those areas located within the Floodplain (Overlay) District.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
K. Accessory Structures to Residential Uses
(1) Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are incidental to a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation where the following criteria are satisfied.
(a) The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential. Its size shall not exceed 600 sq. ft. in size. Those portions of the structure located less than 1 foot above the BFE must be constructed of flood-resistant materials.
(b) The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
(c) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(d) The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(e) The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation.
(f) The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the provisions of Section 167.05(2)(D)(1) of this Ordinance.
(2) Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of the structure and its contents.
L. Recreational Vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Section 167.05(2)(E) of this Ordinance regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied.
(a) The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than 180 consecutive days, and,
(b) The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(2) Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of Section 167.05(2)(E) of this Ordinance regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.
M. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
167.06 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT FP.
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the General Floodplain District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions, the storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse.
A. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
B. Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
C. Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
D. Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
2. Conditional Uses. Any uses which involves placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be allowed only upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided for in Section 167.07(3). All such uses shall be reviewed by the Department of Natural Resources to determine (i) whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe and (ii) the 100-year flood level. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make the determination.
3. Performance Standards
A. All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway (Overlay) District Section 167.04.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
B. All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Fringe District (Overlay) District Section 167.05.
167.07 ADMINISTRATION.
1. Appointment, Duties and Responsibilities of Zoning Administrator
A. The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to implement and administer the provisions of this Ordinance and will herein be referred to as the Administrator.
B. Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not necessarily be limited to the following:
(1) Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that the provisions of this Ordinance will be satisfied.
(2) Review floodplain development applications to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state and local governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural Resources for floodplain construction.
(3) Record and maintain a record of (i) the elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures or (ii) the elevation to which new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
(4) Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(5) Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this Ordinance.
(6) Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator.
(7) Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or modifications to the community’s boundaries.
(8) Review subdivision proposals to insure such proposals are consistent with the purpose of this ordinance and advise the City Council of potential conflict.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Floodplain Development Permit
A. Permit Required – A Floodplain Development Permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations), including the placement of factory-built homes.
B. Application for Permit – Application shall be made on forms furnished by the Administrator and shall include the following:
(1) Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is to be made.
(2) Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done (i.e., lot, block, track, street address or similar description) that will readily identify and locate the work to be done.
(3) Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
(4) Elevation of the 100-year flood.
(5) Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a building is to be floodproofed.
(6) For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
(7) Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this Ordinance
C. Action on Permit Application – The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain development meets the applicable standards of this Ordinance and shall approve or disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the specific reasons therefore. The Administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.
D. Construction and Use to be as Provided in Application and Plans – Floodplain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.
3. Conditional Uses, Appeals and Variances
A. Appointment and Duties of Board of Adjustment – A Board of Adjustment is hereby established which shall hear and decide (i) applications for Conditional Uses upon which the Board is authorized to pass under this ordinance, (ii) appeals, and (iii) requests for variances to the provisions of this ordinance, and shall take any other action which is required of the Board.
B. Conditional Uses – Requests for Conditional Uses shall be submitted to the Administrator, who shall forward such to the Board of Adjustment for consideration. Such requests shall include information ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the Board of Adjustment.
C. Appeals – Where it is alleged there is any error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance, the aggrieved party may appeal such action. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment and with the official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason for the appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
D. Variance – The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in specific cases such variances from the terms of this Ordinance that will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
(1) Variances shall only be granted upon: (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
(2) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood would result.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
(3) Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(4) In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this Ordinance, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that: (i) the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and property.
(5) All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
E. Hearings and Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
(1) Hearings. Upon the filing with the Board of Adjustment of an Appeal, an application for a Conditional Use or a request for a Variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence. The board may require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance and/or evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the Department of Natural Resources.
(2) Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an Appeal, Conditional Use or Variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an Appeal, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision. In granting a Conditional Use or Variance, the board shall consider such factors as contained in this section and all other relevant sections of this ordinance and may prescribe such conditions as contained in Section 167.07(3)(E)(2)(a).
(a) Factors Upon Which the Decision of the Board of Adjustment Shall Be Based. In passing upon applications for
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Variances, the Board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other section of this Ordinance and:
(1) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
(2) The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or downstream to the injury of others.
(3) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
(4) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(5) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the City.
(6) The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
(7) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
(8) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
(9) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area.
(10) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.
(12) The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.
(13) Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(b) Conditions Attached to Variances – Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
(1) Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
(2) Limitation of periods of use and operation.
(3) Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
(4) Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving the purpose of this Ordinance.
(5) Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with the regulatory flood. The Board of Adjustment shall require that the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
F. Appeals to the Court – Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board.
167.08 NONCONFORMING USES.
1. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this Ordinance, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
A. If such use is discontinued for six (6) consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
B. Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
C. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Except as provided is Section 167.08(1)(A) any use which has been permitted as a Conditional Use or Variance shall be considered a conforming use.
167.09 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. Violations of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of Conditional Uses or Variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 (five hundred) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained prevent the City of Creston from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy violation.
167.10 AMENDMENTS. The regulations and standards set forth in this Ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement, change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
167.11 DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application.
BASE FLOOD – The flood having one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (See 100-year flood).
BASEMENT – Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest floor.”
DEVELOPMENT – Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. “Development” does not include “minor projects” or “routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” as defined in this section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filling, grading.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION – Any structure for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. May also be referred to as “existing structure”.
EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – A factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FACTORY-BUILT HOME – Any structure, designed for residential use, which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a building site. For the purpose of this Ordinance factory-built homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also include “recreational vehicles” which are placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK – A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
FLOOD – A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD ELEVATION – The elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the 100-year flood elevation is the elevation of flood waters related to the occurrence of the 100-year flood.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) – The official map prepared as part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOODPLAIN – Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT – An overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of floodplains, including
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPROOFING – Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
FLOODWAY – The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot.
FLOODWAY FRINGE – Those portions of the floodplain, other than the floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without causing substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE – Any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of the National Register;
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or,
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either (i) an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LOWEST FLOOR – The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a basement except when all the following criteria are met:
1. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of Section 167.05(2)(D)(1) of this Ordinance and
2. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or storage, and
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
3. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level, and
4. The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined in this section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria 1, 2, 3, and 4 above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above.
MINOR PROJECTS – Small development activities (except for filling, grading and excavating) valued at less than $500.
NEW CONSTRUCTION – (new buildings, factory-built home parks) – Those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
NEW FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – A factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
ONE HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD – A flood, the magnitude of which has a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100) years.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE – A vehicle which is:
1. Built on a single chassis;
2. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILTIES – Repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs include:
1. Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing roofing tiles and replacing siding;
2. Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;
3. Basement sealing;
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
5. Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA – The land within a community subject to the “100-year flood”. This land is identified as Zone A on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map.
START OF CONSTRUCTION – Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE – Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, and other similar uses.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE – Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT – Any improvement to a structure which satisfies either of the following criteria:
1. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either (i) before the “start of construction” of the improvement, or (ii) if the structure has been “substantially damaged” and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. The term also does not include any alteration of an “historic structure”, provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as an “historic structure”.
CHAPTER 167 REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by 25 percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
VARIANCE – A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management regulations.
VIOLATION – The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
(Ch. 167 – Ord. 17-174 – Apr. 17 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 168
ZONING CODE — GENERAL REGULATIONS
168.01 Vision Clearance
168.08 Requirements for Vehicular Circulation
168.02 Street Closures
168.09 Regulations on Screening, Landscaping,
168.03 Areas Under Water
Lighting, Storage and Outdoor Displays
168.04 Essential Services
168.10 Manufactured Dwellings
168.05 Structures to Have Access
168.11 Nonconforming Uses of Land or Structures
168.06 Sign Regulations
168.12 Wind Turbines
168.07 Parking and Loading Regulations
168.01 VISION CLEARANCE.
1. Fences or Walls in Residential Zones. No fence, wall or planting more than thirty percent (30%) solid and more than three (3) feet high above the level of the public street may be located within forty (40) feet of a street intersection. Said forty (40) foot measurement shall be made from the curb line of and parallel to each of the intersecting streets. Fences, walls or hedges less than thirty percent (30%) solid and four (4) feet high or less may be located on any remaining part of the lot. Fences or walls six (6) feet high or less may be erected on those parts of a lot that are as far back or further back from a street than the main building. These fences may be solid. Higher fences or walls may be allowed only by approval by the Board of Adjustment.
2. Fences in Commercial and Industrial Zones. No fence, wall or planting more than ten (10) feet high may be located in commercial or industrial zones. There shall be no setback for fences in these zones. Higher fences may be allowed only by approval by the Board of Adjustment.
168.02 STREET CLOSURES. Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official action of the City, the zoning district adjoining each side of the street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.
168.03 AREAS UNDER WATER. All areas within the corporate limits of the City which are under water and not shown as included within any zone shall be subject to all of the regulations of the zone which immediately adjoins the water area. If the water area adjoins two or more zones, the boundaries of each zone shall be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line until they meet the other district at a half-way point.
168.04 ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the City in any district, it being the intention hereof to exempt such erection, construction, alteration, and maintenance from the application of the Zoning Code.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
168.05 STRUCTURES TO HAVE ACCESS. Every building erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking.
168.06 SIGN REGULATIONS. All signs erected or maintained, except official, public traffic, and street signs, shall conform with the provisions of this section and other ordinances or regulations of the City.
1. General Provisions for all Districts. The following regulations shall apply to all signs permitted in all Districts:
A. Signs shall not be permitted within the public right-of-way or easements.
B. Flashing or rotating signs resembling emergency vehicles shall not be permitted in any district, and any signs not affixed to building or ground in any manner shall also not be permitted in any district.
C. No signs shall be permitted to obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway, or opening intending to provide light, air or access to any building or structure.
D. Upon notification by the Council or Zoning Administrator that a sign is rotted, unsafe or unsightly, the owner of said sign or owner of property thereunder shall remove or repair the same.
E. The owner, lessee or manager of any ground sign and the owner of the land on which the same is located shall keep grass or weeds and other growth cut and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot on which the sign is located.
F. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 19-181 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
2. Signs in Residential Districts. No sign shall be erected in any Residential District except:
A. A nameplate sign identifying the owner or occupant of a building or dwelling unit, provided such sign does not exceed two (2) square feet in surface area. Such sign shall not be illuminated.
B. A sign pertaining to the lease or sale of the building or property, provided such sign does not exceed four (4) square feet in surface area. Such signs shall not be illuminated.
C. A temporary sign identifying an engineer, architect, contractor, or product engaged in or used in the construction of a building, is removed prior to the occupancy of the building. Such sign shall not be illuminated except for signs required by State or Federal law.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
D. One identification sign not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in surface area displaying location information for churches, schools, hospitals, nursing homes, clubs, offices, libraries or similar use. Such signs may be illuminated.
E. Directional unilluminated signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in surface area displaying directional information for churches, schools, hospitals, nursing homes, clubs, libraries or similar uses excluding office or commercial establishments, provided that each such use shall be limited to one such sign per thoroughfare approach.
F. Public street identification signs, traffic signs, and directional signs in any parking area where such signs are necessary for the orderly movement of traffic.
G. Business signs located in Residential zones as Nonconforming or Home Occupations shall not be located in the front yard. Signs shall be attached to the house or located wholly within three (3) feet of the structure, shall not be illuminated and shall not be larger than two (2) square feet.
3. Signs in Commercial Districts. Signs may be erected in Commercial Districts subject to the following provisions:
A. The total surface area of all business signs on a lot shall not exceed two (2) square feet per lineal foot of lot frontage or ten (10) percent of the building frontage area, or seventy-five (75) square feet, in area whichever is greater. Signs may be illuminated.
B. Advertising sign structures shall be limited to one for a lot of 100 foot frontage or less, to only one for each additional 100 feet of additional frontage, or one per individual business. Rear signs on businesses shall be governed by the same restrictions as those pertaining to frontage.
C. Advertising structures may contain one sign per business per facing and shall not exceed 55 feet in total length. Free standing signs shall contain one sign per business but shall conform to the requirements of square footage as defined in the Zoning Code.
D. No advertising sign may be erected within one hundred (100) feet of an adjoining Residential District.
E. For corner lots, the “frontage” used to determine allowable sign area shall be the least dimension along a street, but an equivalent sign area shall be allowed facing the intersecting street.
F. No sign shall project higher than six (6) feet above the height of the building, or thirty-two (32) feet above the average grade at the building line, whichever is greater.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
G. Signs painted on a building shall be governed by the square footage limitations specified above. Such signs shall be maintained in good condition and shall be repainted, removed, or painted out when, in the opinion of the Council and/or Zoning Administrator, they are not so maintained.
H. Where a sign is illuminated, the source of light shall not be visible from any public right-of-way, and such light shall be directed away from any Residential District.
I. No sign shall project more than one (1) foot perpendicular from the building face.
4. Signs in the I-1 Light Industrial District. Signs may be erected in the I-1 Light Industrial District subject to the following provisions:
A. Advertising sign structures shall be limited to one (1) for a lot of one hundred (100) foot frontage or less and to only one (1) for each additional lot frontage. Such structures shall not exceed fifty-five (55) feet in length. No advertising sign may be erected within one hundred (100) feet of a Residential District.
B. Sign lighting shall not be directed toward a public right-of-way or any Residential District.
C. The total surface area of all business signs on a lot shall not exceed three (3) square feet per lineal foot of lot frontage or twenty (20) percent of the building frontage area or three hundred (300) square feet in area, whichever is greater. Such signs may be illuminated.
168.07 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
1. Scope of Regulations. All parking hereafter constructed or maintained shall conform to the provisions of this section and any other ordinances or regulations of the City. For any and all uses or structures not specifically provided for hereunder, such parking space shall be determined by the Commission.
2. Minimum Size Regulations. The required parking and loading spaces shall be provided on the premises of each use. Each parking space shall contain a minimum area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet, not including access drives, and a width of not less than ten (10) feet, and a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet.
3. Reduction and Use of Parking and Loading Space. Whenever, after the date of the Zoning Ordinance, there is a change in the lawful use of the premises or in any unit of measurement specified in this section and whenever such change creates a need for an increase or decrease of more than fifteen (15) percent of the number of required off-street parking spaces, the number of off-street parking facilities shall
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
be provided, on the basis of adjusted needs, within six (6) months or as determined by the Board of Adjustment. Should an unusual hardship result due to the requirements of this subsection, an appeal may be made to said Board, in the manner provided by law. Such required parking or loading space shall not be used for storage of goods or vehicles that are inoperable or for sale or rent.
4. Computing Requirements. In computing the number of such parking spaces required, the following rules shall govern:
A. Floor space shall mean the gross floor area of the specified use.
B. Where fractional space results, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the nearest whole number.
C. The parking space requirements for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature, as determined by the Commission.
5. Yards. On-site parking at loading facilities shall not be subject to the front yard, side yard and rear yard regulations for the use district in which the parking is located, except that:
A. In all Commercial Districts, no parking or loading space shall be located within ten (10) feet of any property line that abuts a road or highway right-of-way or any Residential District.
B. In an I-1 Light Industrial District, no parking or loading space shall be located within ten (10) feet of any property line that abuts a highway right-of-way line or any Residential District except for a railroad loading area.
6. Buffer Fences and Planting Screens. On-site parking and loading areas near or abutting Residential Districts shall be screened by a buffer fence of adequate design of a planting buffer screen; plans of such screen or fence shall be submitted for approval as a part of the required site or plot plan, and such fence or landscaping shall be installed as a part of initial construction.
7. Access.
A. Parking and loading spaces shall have proper access from a public right-of-way.
B. The number and width of access drives shall be located as to minimize traffic congestion and abnormal traffic hazards.
C. Vehicular access to business or industrial uses across property in any Residential District shall be prohibited.
8. Location of Parking Facilities and Combined Facilities.
A. Required on-site parking space shall be provided on the same lot as the principal building or use, except that combined or joint parking facilities
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
may be provided for one (1) or more buildings or uses in Commercial Districts and Industrial Districts, provided that the total number of space shall equal the sum of the requirements for each building or use.
B. Special purpose off-street automobile parking facilities, to the extent required in this section, may be provided on the same lot or premises with the parking generator on any lot or premises, a substantial portion of which is within eight hundred (800) feet of such parking generator.
9. Construction and Maintenance. No driveway or curb cut in a residential district shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in width. Driveways or curb cuts in areas zones as commercial or industrial shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet in width. For driveways associated with one or two family dwellings, the following requirements shall apply:
A. Within City right-of-way a driveway leading to no garage or to a single stall garage, the maximum width shall be 12 feet.
B. Within City right-of-way a driveway leading to a double stall garage, the maximum width shall be 24 feet.
C. Within City right-of-way a driveway leading to a three stall garage, the maximum width shall be 36 feet.
D. Approaches shall not project across projected property lines at the curb. Approaches may be six feet wider at the curb line than the maximum driveway width and then taper to the maximum width within ten feet of the curb.
E. Driveways and parking spaces on private property must be concrete, blacktop, asphalt, bricks or crushed rock, constructed and maintained in quality, quantity and size to prevent the creation of ruts or deterioration or damage to the driveway from vehicle use. If concrete, blacktop, asphalt or brick surfacing is not used, a minimum of 3 inches thickness of a minimum of ¾ inch crushed stone shall be placed. Any driveway or parking space shall extend onto private property a minimum of 24 feet perpendicular to the street or to the entrance to a garage. Said driveway or parking space shall be completed within 120 days of the curb opening.
F. Only one driveway shall be permitted for each 100 feet of street frontage.
(Ord. 05-89 – Feb. 06 Supp.)
10. Lighting. Lighting shall be reflected away from the public right-of-way and nearby or adjacent Residential Districts.
11. Required Site Plan. Any application for a building permit shall include a site plan or plot plan drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing on-site parking and loading space to be provided in compliance with the Zoning Code.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
12. Required Number of On-Site Parking Spaces. Off-street parking areas of sufficient size to provide parking for patrons, customers, suppliers, visitors and employees shall be provided on the premises of each use. For all uses conducted within a C-1 zone, the following are recommended minimums only and shall not be construed as requirements. The minimum number of required on-site parking spaces for various uses shall be as follows:
A. One and Two Family Dwelling. Two (2) parking spaces per family. No garages shall be converted into living space unless other acceptable on-site parking spaces are provided.
B. Multiple. Two (2) parking spaces for each apartment, except housing for the elderly projects, which shall provide one (1) parking space for each dwelling unit.
C. Lodging, Rooming and Boarding Houses, Tourist Homes, Cabins or Motels. One (1) parking space for each guest or sleeping room or suite; plus three (3) spaces for the owner or manager if resident on the premises.
D. Hotels. One (1) parking space for each room or suite; plus, two (2) spaces for each five (5) employees.
E. Mobile Home Parks. Two (2) off-street parking spaces for each mobile home berth.
F. Travel Trailer Courts or Camps. One and one-half (1½) parking spaces for each trailer space.
G. Private Clubs or Lodges. Parking space equal in number to not less than twenty (20) percent of the active membership thereof; plus one (1) space for each employee of the club or lodge.
H. Hospitals, Sanitariums, Convalescent Homes. One (1) parking space for each four (4) beds (excluding bassinets); plus one (1) for each staff or visiting doctor; plus one (1) for each three (3) employees including nurses. Loading and unloading space for all emergency vehicles is not included in the spaces herein.
I. Mortuaries or Funeral Parlors. One (1) parking space for all “official” vehicles plus one (1) parking space for each family in residence on the premises; plus one (1) space for each thirty-five (35) square feet of seating area.
J. Community Centers, Libraries, Museums, Post Offices, Civic Clubs and Similar Uses. One (1) space for each two (2) employees; plus one (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area.
K. Dance Hall. One (1) space for each thirty-five (35) square feet of dance floor area; plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
L. Bowling Alleys. Five (5) parking spaces for each bowling lane, plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees.
M. Miniature Golf Course, Archery or Golf Driving Range. Ten (10) parking spaces or one (1) parking space for each practice area, whichever is greater.
N. Convention Hall, Auditoriums, Theaters, Stadiums, Sports Arenas or Similar Uses. One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats based upon design capacity plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees.
O. Churches. One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats based on the design capacity of the main seating area.
P. Medical and Dental Clinics and Similar Professional Offices. Four (4) parking spaces, plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000) square feet.
Q. Golf Courses, Golf Clubhouse, Country Club, Swimming Club, Tennis Club, Public Swimming Pool. Twenty (20) spaces, plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area in the principal structure.
R. Auto Sales, Trailer Sales, Marine And Boat Sales, Implement Sales, Garden Supply Store, Building Material Sales, Auto Repair. Six (6) parking spaces plus one (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000) square feet.
S. Retail Sales And Service Establishments. One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of retail floor area.
T. Restaurants, Night Clubs, Tearooms, Lunch Counters. One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor space, or one (1) parking space per table and stool and one (1) space per average number of employees, whichever is greater.
U. Schools.
(1) Elementary. One and one-half (1½) parking spaces for each classroom.
(2) Junior High. One (1) parking space for each classroom plus one (1) space for each five (5) students based on design capacity.
(3) Senior High. One (1) parking space for each classroom plus one (1) space for each five (5) students based on design capacity.
V. Office, Professional or Public Building. One (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
W. Automobile Service Station. Four (4) parking spaces plus two (2) parking paces for each service stall. Such parking spaces shall be in addition to the gas pump service area.
X. Drive-in Restaurants. Twenty (20) parking spaces or one (1) parking space per each three (3) seats, whichever is greater.
Y. Shopping Center. Where several business uses are grouped together according to a general development plan, five (5) parking spaces shall be provided on site for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area; separate on-site space shall be provided for loading and unloading.
Z. Industrial or Manufacturing Establishments and Storage, Wholesale or Warehouse Establishments. One (1) off-street parking space for each two (2) employees on the major shift or one (1) space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area within the building, whichever is greater; plus one (1) space for each company motor vehicle when customarily kept on the premises.
13. Parking Lots in Residential Districts. The Commission may permit, temporarily or permanently, when in its opinion the best interest of the community will be served, the use of land in a Residential District for a parking lot where the land abuts or is across the street from a District other than a Residential District provided that:
A. The lot is used for only the parking of passenger vehicles of employees, customers or guests of the person or firm controlling and operating the lot, who shall be responsible for its maintenance.
B. There shall be no charge for parking on the lot.
C. The lot shall not be used for sales, repair work or other servicing of any kind.
D. Ingress and egress for the lot shall be located in such a way as to do no harm to a Residential District.
E. There shall be no advertising signs or material located on the lot.
F. All parking shall be kept back of the setback building line by barrier unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Board of Adjustment.
G. The parking lot and that portion of the driveway back of the building line is to be adequately screened from adjoining property in a Residential District by a hedge or other fence as approved by Board of Adjustment not less than six (6) feet in height and not more than ten (10) feet in height located back of the setback building line.
H. All lighting shall be arranged so that there will be no glare therefrom annoying to the occupants of adjoining property in a Residential District.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
I. The parking lot shall be asphalt, rock or concrete and be adequately drained.
J. Such other conditions as may be deemed necessary by the Board of Adjustment to protect the character of the Residential District.
14. Parking Lots and Driveways Abutting Residential Districts. Whenever a parking lot or a driveway to a parking lot is hereinafter established in other than a Residential District so as to abut the side or rear lines of a lot in a Residential District, a solid masonry wall or other fence as approved by Board of Adjustment not less than six (6) feet and not more than ten (10) feet in height shall be constructed and maintained at least five (5) feet from side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the front building setback line. Appropriate shrubbery of equal height may be used in place of masonry wall. In addition, in all use districts, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, on any parking lot or driveway shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residence buildings or districts or streets.
15. Off-Street Loading Design and Maintenance.
A. Location. All required loading or unloading into or out of trucks in excess of three-quarter (3/4) ton capacity, or railroad cars, shall be conducted at facilities specifically designated for that purpose. These facilities shall be located upon the zoning lot of principal uses requiring them. All berths beyond one (1) shall be separate from areas used for off-street parking.
B. Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be so designed as to avoid undue interference with other vehicular or rail access or use of public streets, alleys, or other public transport systems.
C. Surfacing. All off-street loading berths and maneuvering areas, shall be surfaced with a hard, all weather, dust free durable surfacing material and shall be well drained and landscaped and shall be maintained in a sightly and well kept condition.
D. Landscaping and Screening. All berths shall be screened from view from the property street frontage and from the zoning district boundary when the adjacent property or across the street or side street frontage is zoned or used for residential purposes. Said screening shall be accomplished by a solid wall not less than six (6) feet in height and shall be so designed as to be architecturally harmonious with the principal structure. Screen plantings may be substituted for the prescribed wall, however, such plantings must not be less than two and one-half (2½) inches in diameter and of such type as to permit a minimum of ninety (90) percent capacity.
E. Design. All of the required number of truck berths shall be a minimum of sixty (60) feet in length, twelve (12) feet in width and fifteen (15) feet in height. All loading areas shall consist of a maneuvering area in
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
addition to the berth and shall not use any portion of the site containing parking stalls. Maneuvering areas shall be of such size as to permit the backing of truck tractors and coupled trailers into a berth, without blocking the use of other berths or drives or maneuvering areas.
F. Required Loading Areas. Space for loading and unloading of goods, supplies and services shall be provided in addition to required off-street parking spaces and shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of each use as indicated in this subsection.
(1) Motels, Hotels, Lodging and Rooming Houses, Private Lodges and Clubs. One (1) space for each structure over 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(2) Retail and Wholesale Commercial Uses, except where otherwise specified. One (1) space for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area; plus one (1) space for each additional 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) Auditorium, Stadium, Gymnasium, Community Centers, Religious Institutions and Schools (public and private). One (1) space for each structure over 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(4) Office Buildings and Professional Offices (other than doctor and dentist) and Banks. One (1) space for buildings between 30,000 and 100,000 square feet of gross floor area; plus one (1) space for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(5) Restaurants and other Food Dispensing Establishments except Drive-in Restaurants. One (1) space for each structure with over 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(6) Furniture, Automobile and Boat Sales and Appliance Sales. One (1) space; plus one (1) space for each 25,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(7) Hospitals, Nursing Homes, Rest Homes, etc.. One (1) space; plus one (1) space for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(8) Bowling Alleys. One (1) space for each 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(9) Manufacturing and Research, Experimental or Testing Stations. One (1) space for each 50,000 square feet of gross floor area.
168.08 REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICULAR CIRCULATION. All commercial building or structures and their accessory uses shall be accessible to and from nearby public streets and sidewalks by driveways and walkways surfaced with a hard, all weather, durable, dust free material and properly drained. Vehicular traffic generated by a
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
commercial use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner that will avoid congestion on the public streets, traffic hazards, excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly truck traffic. The adequacy of any proposed traffic circulation system to accomplish these objectives shall be determined by the Commission who may require such additional measures for traffic control as may be deemed necessary, including but not limited to the following: directional signalization, channelization, standby turn lanes, illumination, and storage area and distribution facilities within the commercial site to prevent backup of vehicles on public streets. No area used by motor vehicles other than driveways serving as ingress and egress to the commercial site shall be located within the public street right-of-way.
1. Driveway Widths: (Measurements between roadway edges)
Type
Maximum Feet
Minimum Feet
One-way
25
12
Two-way
30
24
2. Minimum Driveway Angle to Street: Thirty (30) degrees when street is one-way or divided, otherwise sixty (60) degrees.
3. Minimum Distance between Driveways: Twenty (20) feet, between roadway edges measured along street curb line.
4. Minimum Distance of Driveway from Street Intersections (Measured along street curb line between nearest driveway edge and intersecting street curb line):
If the driveway enters a street classified as a:
And the intersecting street is classified as a:
and the Driveway enters land approach or leaving intersection
Approach
Leaving
Minor Street
Minor Street, Collector Street or Minor Arterial
25 feet
25 feet
Major Arterial
25 feet
25 feet
Collector Street
Minor Street
25 feet
25 feet
Collector Street or Minor Arterial
25 feet
25 feet
Major Arterial
35 feet
25 feet
Major Arterial
Minor Street
25 feet
25 feet
Collector Street or Minor Arterial
25 feet
25 feet
Major Arterial
40 feet
25 feet
NOTE: Minimum distance to be the same as that specified for approaching lane if left turn is permitted into or out of driveway.
168.09 REGULATIONS ON SCREENING, LANDSCAPING, LIGHTING, STORAGE AND OUTDOOR DISPLAYS.
1. Screening. All principal and accessory uses, except business signs, which are situated within fifty (50) feet of a Residential District, shall be screened from
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
such district by a wall or fence of not less than ninety (90) percent capacity and not less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) feet in height above the level of the residential district in property at the district boundary. Walls or fences of lesser heights or planting screens may be permitted by the City Council if there is a finding that the nature or extent of the use being screened is such that a lesser degree of screening will as adequately promote and protect the use and enjoyment of the properties within the adjacent residential district, or there is a finding that a screening of the type required by the Zoning Code would interfere with the provisions of adequate amounts of light and air to same said properties. Loading docks in the Commercial or Industrial District shall be screened so as not to be visible from any public street right-of-way within a Residential District. All required screening devices shall be so designed so that they are architecturally harmonious with the principal structures on the site and they shall be properly maintained so as not to become unsightly, hazardous, or less opaque than when originally constructed.
2. Landscaping. All exposed ground areas surrounding or within a principal or accessory use including street boulevards, which are not devoted to drives, sidewalks, patios, or other such uses shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees, or other ornamental landscaped materials. All landscaped areas shall be kept neat, clean, and uncluttered. No landscaped area shall be used for the parking of vehicles or the storage or display of materials, supplies, or merchandise.
3. Lighting. All sources of artificial light situated in a Commercial or Industrial District site shall be so fixed, directed, designed or sized that the sum total of their illumination will not increase the level of illumination on any nearby residential district by more than 0.1 foot candle in or within twenty-five (25) feet of a dwelling nor more than 0.5 foot candle on any other part of the property. “Glare,” whether direct or reflected, as differentiated from general illumination, shall not be visible from beyond the limit of the immediate site from which it originates. Lighting on sport complexes where said lighting is used periodically shall be exempt from this section.
4. Storage; Displays. All materials, supplies, merchandise or other similar matter not on display for direct sale, rental or lease to the ultimate consumer or user shall be stored within a completely enclosed building within the Commercial or Industrial District, or within the confines of a one hundred (100) percent opaque wall or fence not less than five (5) feet high. Merchandise which is offered for sale as described above may be displayed beyond the confines of a building in the Commercial or Industrial District, but the area occupied by such outdoor display shall not constitute a greater number of square feet than ten (10) percent of the ground floor area of the building housing the principal use, unless such merchandise is of a type customarily displayed outdoors such as garden supplies. No storage of any type shall be permitted within the one-half of the required front or side street set-back nearest the street.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
168.10 MANUFACTURED DWELLINGS. Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow a manufactured dwelling or mobile home to be located in other than an approved manufactured dwelling park, except if the dwelling is in compliance with the following provisions:
1. Such dwelling shall comply with the minimum floor-area and width requirements of the one- and two-family dwelling district.
2. Such dwelling shall be certified by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, hereinafter referred to as HUD, or HUD-approved third-party agency, as being in compliance with all requirements of the most recent edition of the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards. The HUD certification label shall be placed on each section or module of the dwelling in accordance with HUD regulations.
3. The foundation system for a manufactured home shall be compatible with the structural design of the manufactured home structure. When such manufactured homes are located outside a mobile home park, the foundation system shall meet the following requirements:
A. The perimeter foundation system shall be visually compatible with the foundation systems in the surrounding residential structures; and
B. The perimeter foundation system shall be constructed of wood, masonry materials or siding material consistent with the construction of a manufactured home; and
C. The foundation system shall meet all other structural requirements established in City ordinance.
4. The vehicular frame shall be removed, or if not removable, permanently modified or destroyed to the extent of making the dwelling nontransportable, and the dwelling permanently attached to the foundation.
5. Such dwelling shall be converted to and taxed as real estate. Evidence shall be provided in the form of an affidavit that any and all indebtedness applicable to the dwelling is secured as a real estate mortgage as opposed to a chattel loan. If no indebtedness exists the owner shall so certify and provide evidence of clear title. The vehicle title, registration card, registration plates, unless said plates are retained to be attached to another manufactured dwelling, and any required information shall be filed with the assessor when applying for a building permit, and evidence provided that the application for conversion is satisfactory in the form of a certified statement signed by the assessor. No certificate of occupancy, either permanent or temporary, shall be granted until the assessor has certified that the conversion has been satisfactorily completed and the property entered upon the tax rolls. A bond or other surety may be required to ensure that the conversion is satisfactorily completed. The dwelling shall be new and undamaged and shall not have been
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
previously installed or occupied for any purpose as evidenced by the chain of title and certification by the dealer.
6. All additions and modifications shall be constructed n accordance with the City’s Building Code.
7. Sewer, water and utility services, and all other site improvements shall conform to all City Codes and specifications.
8. No manufactured dwelling not within a mobile home district shall be replaced with another without conforming to the above specifications.
9. The minimum horizontal dimension of a single-family detached dwelling shall be 20 feet for at least 65 percent of the longer horizontal dimension of the dwelling, said dimensions to be exclusive of attached garages, porches or other accessory structures, unless such dwelling is located in an approved mobile home park.
It is unlawful for any person to park or occupy any factory-built dwelling unit or recreational vehicle on the streets, alleys, highways, any public place or on private land except as otherwise provided by State law and City regulations. Recreational vehicles, while not being used for residential occupancy may be stored temporarily by the owner at his or her place of residence if such vehicle is operable and in good repair.
168.11 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND OR STRUCTURES.
1. Interpretation. This Zoning Code and the districts herein, or any later amendments may create situations where structures, buildings, or uses of the land previously permitted may become prohibited, regulated or otherwise restricted. It is the intent of the Zoning Code to permit the continuance of these nonconforming structures or uses until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by the Zoning Code to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the districts involved.
A. An existing building or premises devoted to a use not permitted by the Zoning Code in the district in which such building or premises is located shall not be enlarged upon, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered, not be used as grounds for adding other buildings or structures prohibited elsewhere in the same district, except when required to do so by law or ordinance, unless such use is changed to one permitted in the district in which such building or structure or land is located.
B. A nonconforming use of a building may be replaced with another nonconforming use provided no structural alterations are made.
C. No change from one nonconforming use to another shall be made without first applying to and receiving from the Commission a permit to
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
make such change except as defined in Subsection 168.11(2), Nonconforming Lots of Record.
D. A nonconforming use may be changed to conforming use at any time.
E. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, such shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use.
F. The extension or addition of a lawful use to any portion of a nonconforming building or structure or land shall not be deemed as the extension of the nonconforming use.
G. Where nonconforming status applies to a building or structure, the removal or destruction of same shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
H. If a building or structure is moved for any reason or any distance whatever, it shall therefor conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is removed.
I. All uses which lawfully exist on the effective date of the Zoning Code and are classified as a Conditional Use by the Zoning Code for the district in which they are located, shall be considered lawful Conditional Uses.
J. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one district to another district of a different classification, the provisions of this Section shall also apply to any nonconforming uses developing as a result of such action.
2. Nonconforming Lots of Record.
A. A single family dwelling and customary accessory buildings, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of the Zoning Code, may be erected in any district in which single family dwellings are permitted on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption of or amendment to the Zoning Code. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
B. Variance of area, width, and yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustment.
3. Construction Approved Prior to Zoning Ordinance. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Zoning Code shall require change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building or structure provided that:
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
A. A building permit has been issued within sixty (60) days prior to the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance.
B. The construction of the building or structure shall have commended within thirty (30) days after the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance.
C. The construction is continuous until the building or structure is completed.
D. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position; except where demolition or removal of an existing building or structure has commended preparatory to construction, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building or structure involved.
4. Repairs and Maintenance.
A. Nothing in the Zoning Code shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding of a nonconforming building, structure or part thereof existing at the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance, rendered necessary by wear and tear, deterioration or depreciation provided the cost of such work shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of such building or structure at the time such work is done, or prevent compliance with the provisions of the City Building Code or City Housing Codes relative to the maintenance of buildings or structures; provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of the Zoning Code shall not be increased. That the above apply to all dwellings except for the cubic content requirement and that all structure additions shall comply with yard and area regulations for their respective district.
B. Nothing in the Zoning Code shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing, rebuilding and continued use of any nonconforming building or structure damaged by flood, fire, collapse, explosion, or Acts of God, subsequent to the date of the Zoning Ordinance, wherein the expense of such work does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost of the building or structure at the time such damage occurred. However, the Board of Adjustment may issue a Conditional Use Permit for reconstruction if the use is located outside the floodway and, upon reconstruction, is adequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected in conformity with the Flood Plain District.
5. Discontinuance.
A. When a nonconforming use of structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18 months during any three year period, the structure, or structure and
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
premises in combination, shall not therefore be used except in conformance with the regulations of the District in which it is located.
B. A nonconforming use shall be considered discontinued:
(1) When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent, or
(2) When the characteristic equipment and the furnishing of the nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by similar equipment within ninety (90) days, unless other facts indicate the intention to resume the nonconforming use, or
(3) When it has been replaced by a conforming use, or
(4) When uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses, or
(5) When nonconforming uses located in the floodway portion of the Flood Plain District shall be eliminated or brought into conformity with the standards contained in the Zoning Code within a reasonable period of time as determined by the Board of Adjustment, after hearing for each such nonconforming use. The Board shall make its determination upon the basis of the normal useful life of any improvement upon the premises. In addition, the monetary value of any competitive advantage derived by the operation of such nonconforming use, by reason of the limitation on establishment of competing businesses as a result of the Zoning Code, shall be considered as a reduction of losses resulting from the requirement of termination of the use under the Zoning Code.
6. Cessation of Junk and Salvage Yards. Junk or salvage yards not within an enclosed masonry building and not within an Industrial District shall not be operated or maintained for more than twelve (12) months after a zoning change to a use district within which such yard is not permitted except where the Board of Adjustment determines that it is impractical to roof over a large area containing junk or salvage material. The Board may permit the construction around such area of a fence, screen planting or other device of such height as to completely screen the operation, and may then permit the continued use of such property for such purposes for a specified period.
7. Nonconforming Signs. Signs which are nonconforming uses shall be allowed to remain until removed voluntarily or for any other reason. Signs which are intended to replace nonconforming signs or any new signs shall conform to the provisions of the Zoning Code.
168.12 WIND TURBINES.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
1. Intent. This section establishes general guidelines for the sitting and use of wind turbine generators and related devices and structures. This section is intended to:
A. Protect residential areas from any potentially adverse visual or noise impacts of wind turbine generators or related devices or structures.
B. Provide for a land use that will provide an energy source with low associated environmental impacts.
C. Provide for the removal of abandoned or noncompliant wind turbine generator towers, anemometer towers, or related devices and structures.
D. Allow restricted use of wind turbine generator towers and anemometers of limited height.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Definitions Related to Wind Turbine Generators.
A. Anemometer. An instrument for measuring and recording the speed of the wind.
B. Anemometer Tower. A structure, including all accessory facilities, temporarily erected for no more than two (2) years, on which an anemometer is mounted for the purposes of documenting whether a site has wind resources sufficient for the operation of a wind turbine generator.
C. Wind Turbine Generator. A tower, pylon, or other structure, including all accessory facilities, upon which any, all, or some combination of the following is mounted:
(1) A wind vane, blade, or series of wind vanes or blades, or other devices mounted on a rotor for the purpose of converting wind kinetic energy into electrical energy.
(2) A shaft, gear, belt, or coupling device used to connect the rotor to a generator, alternator, or other electrical or mechanical energy-producing device.
(3) A generator, alternator, or other device used to convert mechanical energy transferred by the rotation of the rotor into electrical energy.
D. Wind Turbine Generator Height. The distance between the ground and the highest point of the wind turbine generator equipment, including the blades.
E. Shadow Flicker. The visible flicker effect when rotating turbine blades cast shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing the repeating pattern of light and shadows.
3. Applicability.
A. Wind turbine generator tower and anemometer tower setbacks for towers shall be a distance equal to 110% of the total height of the tower and blades from overhead utility lines, public road right-of-way, and property boundaries.
B. All wind turbine generators and anemometer towers shall only be permitted after a conditional use permit approval in accordance with Section 165.12.
C. The Creston Airport Board must approve the maximum height and location of all generator towers (plus blades) or anemometer towers to insure the safety of airplane traffic.
D. The City Building Department shall approve any electric generator system before and after installation.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
4. General Requirements.
A. Minimum Site Area. The minimum site area for a wind turbine generator or an anemometer tower shall be as necessary to meet required setbacks and any other standards of this section.
B. Maximum Height. The maximum wind turbine generator height (blades included), or the height of an anemometer tower erected prior to the wind turbine generator, shall be 300 feet.
C. Minimum Rotor Wind Vane or Blade Clearance. The lowest point of the arc created by rotating wind vanes or blades on a wind turbine generator shall be no less than 25 feet or ¼ of the tower height, whichever is greater.
D. Maximum Noise Levels. Any proposed wind turbine generator shall produce sound levels that are no more than 50 decibels as measured on the dB(A) scale at the property lines of the site in question. A variance is allowed when due to occasional high winds. A noise report shall be submitted with any application for an anemometer tower or wind or wind turbine generator tower. A noise report shall be prepared by a qualified professional or equipment vendor and shall include the following, at a minimum:
(1) A description and map of the project’s noise producing features, including the range of noise levels expected, and the basis of the expectation.
(2) A description of the projects proposed noise control features and specific measures proposed to mitigate noise impacts for sensitive land uses.
E. Maximum Vibrations. Any proposed wind turbine generator shall not produce vibrations humanly perceptible beyond the property on which it is located.
F. Transmission Lines. Any on-site electrical transmission lines connecting the wind turbine generator to the public utility electricity distribution system shall be located underground.
G. Ice Shedding. Wind turbine generator owners shall ensure that ice from the rotor blades does not impact any off-site properties.
H. Interference with Reception. Any wind turbine generators shall be constructed and operated so that they do not interfere with television, microwave, navigational, or radio reception to neighboring areas.
I. State and Federal Requirements. Any proposed wind turbine generator or anemometer tower shall meet or exceed any standards and regulations of the FAA, the Iowa Utilities Board, National Electric Code, and any other agency of the State or Federal government, with the authority to
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
regulate wind turbine generators or other tall structures in effect at the time the conditional use permit is approved.
J. Aesthetics and Lighting. Any proposed wind turbine generator or anemometer tower shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Each wind turbine generator or anemometer tower, including all accessory structures, shall be galvanized or painted a non-reflective neutral color to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) Each wind turbine generator tower may be monopole, monotube, or lattice style construction and shall not include guy wires. This provision shall not apply to anemometer towers.
K. Signs. A sign no more than four (4) square feet in area displaying the location of any shut off switch, an address, telephone number for emergency or information inquiries shall be posted at the wind turbine generator tower or anemometer tower erected prior to a wind turbine generator. No wind turbine generator tower or anemometer tower or site shall include an advertising sign other than the wind turbine and related equipment manufacturers.
L. Unauthorized Access. Wind turbine generators and anemometer shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access. The tower shall be designed and installed to not provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of ten (10) feet above the ground.
M. Essential Services. Wind turbine generators and anemometers shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this section of the zoning ordinance and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
N. Removal of Abandoned or Unsafe Wind Turbine Generators or Anemometer Towers.
(1) Any wind turbine generator or anemometer that is not operated for a period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned.
(2) A tower found to be unsafe or not in compliance with the special land use conditions related to noise or shadow flicker placed upon it by the Creston City Council, shall be found to be in violation of the conditional use permit.
(3) The owner of any wind turbine generator tower or anemometer tower that is abandoned or in violation of the conditional use permit shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City of Creston for such abandonment or violation.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
(4) Failure to remove an abandoned wind turbine generator or anemometer tower within the 90-day period provided in this subsection shall be grounds for the City of Creston to remove the wind turbine generator or anemometer tower at the owner’s expense. The City shall mail a statement of the total cost to the person failing to abide by the notice to remove and if the amount shown has not been paid within one (1) month, the cost shall be certified to the Union County Auditor and it shall then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general property taxes.
O. Engineer Certification. Applications for any wind turbine generator shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and footings. An engineering analysis of all components of the wind turbine generator showing compliance with the applicable regulations and certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.
P. Insurance. The owner/operator of a wind turbine must demonstrate adequate liability insurance with a minimum of $100,000.00 (One hundred thousand dollars) minimum coverage.
(Section 168.12 – Ord. 11-128 – Oct. 10 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 169
CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS
169.01 Short Title
169.12 Variances
169.02 Definitions
169.13 Appeals
169.03 Air Space Obstruction Zones & Airport Overlay Zoning Map
169.14 Judicial Review
169.04 Airport Zoning Requirements
169.15 Penalties and Fines
169.05 Airport Zones
169.16 Airport Zoning Commission
169.06 Zone Compatibility
169.17 Nonconforming Uses
169.07 Airport Zoning Ordinance Administration
169.18 Permits
169.08 Airport Zoning Permits
169.19 Conflicting Regulations
169.09 Hazardous Markings and Lighting
169.20 Severability
169.10 Airspace Height Limitations
169.21 Effective Date
169.11 Airport Board of Adjustment
169.01 SHORT TITLE. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Creston Municipal Airport Height and Land Use Zoning Ordinance.
169.02 DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
1. “Airport” means the Creston Municipal Airport.
2. “Airport elevation” means the highest point of an airport’s usable landing area measured in feet above mean sea level.
3. “Airport hazard” means any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near a public airport that – obstruct the airspace required for the flight of aircraft landing or taking off at the airport; or is otherwise hazardous to aircraft landing or taking off at the airport.
4. “Airport overlay zones” is a zone intended to place additional land use conditions on land impacted by the airport while retaining the existing underlying zone. The FAR Part 77 Surfaces and RPZs have been combined to create five airport overlay zones. The five specific zones create a comprehensive area focused on maintaining compatible land use around airports.
A. Zone A (Runway Protection Zone) – is intended to provide a clear area that is free of above ground obstructions and structures. This zone is closest to the individual runway ends.
B. Zone B (Approach Surface) – is a critical overlay surface that reflects the approach and departure areas for each runway at an airport. The size of Zone B is predicated upon the type of approach (visual, non-precision, or precision) that a specific runway has and the type/size of aircraft utilizing the runway.
C. Zone C (Transitional Surface) – includes those areas that are parallel to the runway pavement and extend from the edge of the primary surface.
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
D. Zone D (Horizontal Surface) – is typically elliptical in shape, depending upon the runway types and configurations at an individual airport.
E. Zone E (Conical Surface) – is the outermost zone of the overlay areas and has the least number of land use restriction considerations. Zone E begins at the edge of the horizontal surface and is 4,000 feet in width paralleling the horizontal surface.
5. “Airport Reference Code (ARC)” is a FAA coding system used to relate airport design criteria to the operational and physical characteristics of the airplanes intended to operate at the airport.
6. “Airport Reference Point (ARP)” is the latitude and longitude of the approximate center of the airport.
7. “Airport zoning permit” is a zoning permit allowing new development or alteration or expansion of a nonconforming use.
8. “Airside” is that portion of the airport facility where aircraft movements take place, airline operations areas, and areas that directly serve the aircraft, such as taxiway, runway, maintenance, and fueling areas.
9. “Airport land use & height overlay zoning map” is the airport land use & height overlay zoning map that is compiled from the criteria in FAR Part 77, “Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace.” It shows the area affected by the Airport Overlay Zoning Ordinance, and includes the layout of runways, airport boundaries, and area topography.
10. “Air traffic” means aircraft operating in the air or on an airport surface, exclusive of loading ramps and parking areas.
11. “Approach surface” means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface. The approach slope of a runway is set forth in this ordinance and is dependent upon the approach type.
12. “Aviation Easement” is a grant of a property interest in land over which a right of unobstructed flight in the airspace is established.
13. “Board of Adjustment” means a board consisting of five members appointed by the Council/Board of Supervisors as provided in Chapter 329.12 of the Code of Iowa.
14. “Conical surface” means a surface extending upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet horizontally for every one foot vertically (20:1) for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
15. “Commercial uses” means a use category including land uses or activities involving the production, processing, manufacturing, or sale of goods or services for financial gain, including uses that provide merchandise to the general public. Accessory use may include offices, storage, food service, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees and parking.
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
16. “Creston municipal airport” is defined as any areas of land or water that is used, or intended for use, for the landing, takeoff, and storage of aircraft. Any appurtenant areas that are used, or intended for use, for airport buildings, other airport facilities, or right-of-way; and all airport buildings and facilities located on the areas specified in this definition.
17. “Easement” is the legal right of one party to use a portion of the total rights in real estate owned by another party. This may include the right of passage over, on, or below property; certain air rights above the property, including view rights; and the rights to any specified form of development or activity, as well as any other legal rights in the property that may be specified in the easement document.
18. “Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)” is a federal agency charged with regulating air commerce to promote its safety and development; encourage and develop civil aviation, air traffic control, air navigation; and promoting the development of a national system of airports.
19. “Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR)” are regulations established and administered by the FAA that govern civil aviation and aviation-related activities.
20. “Hazard to air navigation” means an obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect of the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
A. FAR Part 36 (FAA FAR Sec. 36.1) is a regulation establishing noise standards for the civil aviation fleet.
B. FAR Part 91 (FAA FAR Sec 91.1) is a regulation pertaining to air traffic and general operating rules, including operating noise limits.
C. FAR Part 150 (FAA FAR Sec. 150.1) is a regulation pertaining to airport noise compatibility planning.
D. FAR Part 161 (FAA FAR Sec. 161.1) is a regulation pertaining to notice and approval of airport noise and access restrictions.
E. FAR Part 77 (FAA FAR Sec. 77.1) describes objects affecting navigable airspace – Part 77 (1) establishes standards for determining obstructions in navigable airspace; (2) defines the requirements for notice to the FAA Administrator of certain proposed construction or alteration; (3) provides for aeronautical studies of obstructions to air navigation to determine their effect on the safe and efficient use of airspace; (4) provides for public hearings on the hazardous effect of proposed construction or alteration on air navigation; and (5) provides for establishing antenna farm areas.
21. “General aviation airport” is any airport that is not an air carrier airport or a military facility.
22. “Height” for this ordinance is utilized for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this Ordinance; height shall be measured as
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
the highest point of a structure, tree, or other object of natural growth, measured from the mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
23. “Hold harmless agreement” means an agreement that holds airport sponsors or jurisdictions harmless for alleged damages resulting from airport operations. Such agreements are recorded in deeds or permits as a condition of approval of a regulatory land use decision.
24. “Horizontal surface” means a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation and encompasses an area from the transitional surface to the conical surface. The perimeter is constructed by generating arcs from the center of each end of the primary surface and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
25. “Industrial, wholesale trade, and storage uses” means a use category including the following use types:
A. Industrial development or uses involved in the research, design, manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, manufactured, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or customers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, they are a subordinate part of sales (typically 10% or less of the total gross floor area). Relatively few customers come to the site.
B. Industrial, manufacturing, wholesale trade, and warehouse/storage uses including uses that produce goods from raw or finished materials, uses that distribute goods in large quantities to primarily wholesale customers, or provide for storage or warehousing of goods, either in enclosed buildings or outdoors. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. Accessory activities may include sales, offices, parking or storage.
26. “Imaginary surfaces” are those surfaces established in relation to the airport and to each runway consistent with FAR Part 77 in which any object extending above these imaginary surfaces, by definition, is an obstruction.
27. “Incompatible land use” is the use of land which is normally incompatible with the aircraft and airport operations (such as, but not limited to, homes, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, and libraries).
28. “Instrument approach procedure” means a series of predetermined maneuvers for the orderly transfer of an aircraft under instrument flight conditions from the beginning of the initial approach to a landing or to a point from which a landing may be made visually. It is prescribed and approved for a specific airport by competent authority.
29. “Instrument flight rules” means rules governing the procedure for conducting instrument flight. In addition, it is a term used by pilots and controllers to indicate a type of flight plan.
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
30. “Instrument landing system” means a precision instrument approach system that normally consists of the following electronic components and visual aids: localizer, glideslope, outer marker, middle marker, and approach lights.
31. “Itinerant operation” means the takeoff or landing operations of airplanes going from one airport to another airport that involves a trip of at least 20 miles. Local operations are excluded.
32. “Land use compatibility” is the coexistence of land use surrounding the airport with airport-related activities.
33. “Lighting and marking of hazards to air navigation” is the installation of appropriate lighting fixtures, painted markings or other devices to such objects or structures that constitute hazards to air navigation.
34. “Mitigation” is the avoidance, minimization, reduction, elimination or compensation for adverse environmental effects of a proposed action.
35. “Navigation aids (NAVAID)” means any facility used by an aircraft for guiding or controlling flight in the air or the landing or takeoff of an aircraft.
36. “Navigable airspace” is the airspace above minimum altitude for safe flight, and includes the airspace needed to ensure safety in takeoff and landing of aircraft.
37. “Noise exposure contours” are lines drawn around a noise source indicating constant energy levels of noise exposure. DNL is the measure used to describe community exposure to noise.
38. “Noise impact” is a condition that exists when the noise levels that occur in an area exceed a level identified as appropriate for the activities in the area.
39. “Noise sensitive area” is defined as an area where noise interferes with normal activities associated with the area’s use. Examples of noise-sensitive areas include residential, educational, health, and religious structures and sites, and parks, recreational areas (including areas with wilderness characteristics), wildlife refuges, and cultural and historical sites where a quiet setting is a generally recognized feature or attribute.
40. “Nonconforming use” means any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an amendment thereto.
41. “Non-precision instrument runway” means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
42. “Object” includes, but is not limited to above ground structures, NAVAIDSs, people, equipment, vehicles, natural growth, terrain, and parked aircraft.
43. “Obstruction” means any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in this chapter.
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
44. “Overlay Zone” is a mapped zone that imposes a set of requirements in addition to those of the underlying zoning district.
45. “Part 150 Study” is the abbreviated name of the airport noise compatibility planning process outlined in Part 150 of the Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) that allows airport owners to voluntarily submit noise exposure maps and noise compatibility programs to the FAA for review and approval.
46. “Primary runway” means the runway used for the majority of airport operations. Large, high-activity airports may operate two or more parallel primary runways.
47. “Primary surface” means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in FAR Part 77. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
48. “Primary runway” is the runway used for the majority of airport operations. Large, high-activity airports may operate two or more parallel primary runways.
49. “Public Assembly Use” means a structure or outdoor facility where concentrations of people gather for purposes such as deliberation, education, shopping, business, entertainment, amusement, sporting events, or similar activities, but excluding air shows. “Public assembly use” does not include places, where people congregate for relatively short periods of time, such as parking lots and bus stops, or uses approved by the FAA in an adopted airport master plan.
50. “Public Use Airport” means either a publicly owned airport or a privately owned airport open for public use.
51. “Residential and Accommodation Uses” means a use category that includes the following use types:
A. Residential uses that provide living accommodations, including sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitary facilities, to one or more persons, and where tenancies typically last longer than 30 days.
B. Accommodation uses characterized by visitor-serving facilities that provide temporary lodging in guest rooms or guest units, for compensation, and with an average length of stay of less than 30 days. Accessory uses may include pools and other recreational facilities for the exclusive use of guests, limited storage, restaurants, bars, meeting facilities, and other offices.
52. “Runway” means a defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
53. “Runway Protection Zone” is an area of the runway end designed to enhance the protection of people and property on the ground.
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
54. “Runway Safety Area” is a defined surface surrounding the runway prepared or suitable for reducing the risk of damage to airplanes in the event of an overshoot, or excursion from the runway.
55. “Structure” means any object constructed or installed by humans, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission lines, including the poles or other structures supporting the same.
56. “Transitional surfaces” means the transitional surface that extends outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and extends at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each one foot vertically (7:1) from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces. The transitional surfaces extend to the point at which they intercept the horizontal surface at a height of 150 feet above the established airport elevation.
57. “Utility runway” means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight or less.
58. “Variance” is an authorization for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure, or for the establishment or maintenance of a use of land that is prohibited by a zoning ordinance. A lawful exception from specific zoning ordinance standards and regulations predicated on the practical difficulties and/or unnecessary hardships by the petitioner being required to comply with the regulations and standards from which a variance is sought.
59. “Visual approach” means an approach to an airport conducted with visual reference to the terrain.
60. “Visual runway” means a runway without an existing or planned straight-in instrument approach procedure.
61. “Visual Flight Rules (VFR)” means rules that govern the procedures for conducting flight under visual conditions. The term “VFR” is also used in the United States to indicate weather conditions that are equal to or greater than minimum VFR requirements. In addition, “VFR” is used by pilots and controllers to indicate the type of flight plan.
62. “Wetland” means land on which water covers the soil is present either at or near the surface of the soil or within the root zone, all year or for varying periods of time during the year, including during the growing season. Wetlands provide a variety of functions and can be regulated by local, state, and Federal laws. Normally, wetlands are attractive to many types of wildlife, including many that rank high on the list of hazardous wildlife species.
63. “Wildlife hazards” means species of wildlife (birds, mammals, reptiles), including feral animals and domesticated animals not under the control, that are associated with aircraft strike problems, are capable of causing structural damage to airport facilities, or act as attractants to other wildlife that pose a strike hazard.
64. “Zoning Permit” is a permit allowing new development or alteration or expansion of a nonconforming use.
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
169.03 AIR SPACE OBSTRUCTION ZONES & AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING MAP. The zones established by this ordinance are illustrated on the official Creston Municipal Airport Zoning Map. Such Official Airport Zoning Map may be amended from time to time, and all notations, references, elevations, data, zone boundaries, and other information thereon, is hereby adopted as part of this ordinance.
169.04 AIRPORT ZONING REQUIREMENTS. In accordance with Section 329.10, Iowa Code, there are three (3) principal airport zoning requirements supported by additional information contained within the following remaining sections of this ordinance. These basic zoning requirements state:
1. All airport zoning regulations adopted under this chapter shall be reasonable and none shall impose any requirement or restriction which is not necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.
2. a. Airport zoning adopted under this chapter may require, at the municipality’s expense, the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree, or a change in use, not conforming to the height regulations when adopted or amended.
b. Airport zoning regulations adopted under this chapter may require a property owner to permit the municipality at its own expense to install, operate, and maintain on the property markers and lights as necessary to indicate to operators of aircraft the presence of the airport hazard.
3. All such regulations may provide that a preexisting legal nonconforming structure, tree, natural growth, or use, shall not be replaced, rebuilt, altered, allowed to grow higher, or replanted, so as to constitute a greater airport hazard than it was when the airport zoning regulations or amendments to the regulations were adopted.
169.05 AIRPORT ZONES. In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to the Creston Municipal Airport. Such zones are shown on the Creston Municipal Airport Zoning Map, which is on file at City Hall. An area located in more than one (1) of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive limitations. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
1. Zone A – Runway Protection Zone (RPZ) – Zone A is intended to provide a clear area that is free of aboveground obstructions and structures. This zone is closest to the individual runway ends. The dimensional standards for this zone are shown in the following table:
Table 1. Zone A – Dimensional Requirements
Runway Ends
Approach Visibility Minimums
Dimensions
Length L feet
Inner Width W1 feet
Outer Width W2 feet
RPZ Acres
Runway 16
1 Mile
1,700
500
1,010
29.465
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Runway 34
1 Mile
1,700
500
1,010
29.465
Runway 04
Visual
1,000
250
450
8.035
Runway 22
Visual
1,000
250
450
8.035
Source: FAA AC 150/5300-13, current edition, Airport Design Standards
2. Zone B – Approach Surface – Zone B is a critical airport overlay zoning surface that reflects the approach and departure areas for each runway at an airport. The size of Zone B is predicated upon the type of approach (visual, non-precision, or precision) that a specific runway has the type/size of aircraft utilizing the runway.
The table on the following page illustrates the various sizes of Zone B based upon the specific runway criteria. A portion of Zone B is overlain by Zone A because the approach surface and RPZ overlap the entire length of the RPZ. Consequently, the length of Zone B begins at the inner edge of the RPZ.
Table 2. Airport Overlay Zones B through E Dimensional Standards
Item
Runway Dimensional Standards (Feet)
Runway 16
Runway 34
Runway 04
Runway 22
Primary Surface width and Zone B inner width
500
500
250
250
Zone B end width
3,500
3,500
1,250
1,250
Zone B length
10,000
10,000
5,000
5,000
Zone C width
1,050
1,050
1,050
1,050
Zone D radius
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
Zone E width
4,000
4,000
4,000
4,000
3. Zone C – Transitional Surface – Zone C includes those areas that are parallel to the runway pavement and extend 1,050' from the edge of the primary surface paralleling the runway and extended runway centerline until they reach the end of Zone A at a 90 degree angle. The specific dimensions for Zone C are based upon various options for the primary surface that is predicated upon the type of approach and critical aircraft.
4. Zone D – Horizontal Surface – Zone D is typically elliptical in shape, depending upon the runway types and configurations at individual airports.
5. Zone E – Conical Surface – Zone E is the outermost zone of the airport overlay zoning areas and has the least number of land use restriction considerations. The zone begins at the edge of the horizontal surface and is 4,000 feet in width paralleling the horizontal surface.
169.06 ZONE COMPATIBILITY. The following tables shall be utilized to evaluate land use compatibility for various land use classifications.
1. Uses identified as compatible shall not require additional review, however, consideration should be given to the following areas of concerns:
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
? Noise sensitivity related issues
? High concentrations of people
? Tall structures
? Visual obstructions
? Wildlife and bird attractants
? Additional Considerations
o Flammable substances
o Electrical, navigational, or radio interference
2. Uses found to be NOT compatible shall be precluded from development within the specific zones.
3. Uses found to require additional review shall be evaluated for general compatibility utilizing the Compatible Land Use Planning Checklist and the areas of concern noted above.
Creston Municipal Airport Zone Chart
C = Compatible AR = Additional Review Required NC = Not Compatible
Land Uses
Zone A
Zone B
Zone C
Zone D
Zone E Residential Activities
Single-Family Uses (1 dwelling per lot)
Detached Single Family Dwelling (i.e. farm dwelling, detached single family house, manufactured/modular/mobile homes if converted to real property and taxed)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Detached Zero Lot Line Dwelling (i.e. condominium)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Attached Single Family Dwelling (i.e. townhouses)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Two Family Uses (i.e. two principal dwelling units within one building on the same parcel)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Multi-Family Uses (i.e. three or more principal dwelling units within a single building on the same parcel, apartments such as condominium, elder, assisted living, townhouse-style)
Low-Rise (1-3 Levels)
NC
AR
NC
AR
C
Mid-Rise (4-12 Levels)
NC
NC
NC
AR
C
High-Rise (13+ Levels)
NC
NC
NC
AR
C
Group Living Uses (i.e. assisted living, group care facilities, nursing and convalescent homes, independent group living)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Manufactured Housing Parks
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Creston Municipal Airport Zone Chart
C = Compatible AR = Additional Review Required NC = Not Compatible
Land Uses
Zone A
Zone B
Zone C
Zone D
Zone E Commercial Activities
Eating and Drinking Establishments (i.e. restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, fast food restaurants, bars, nightclubs, taverns, cocktail lounges
NC
AR
AR
C
C
Quick Vehicle Servicing Uses (i.e. full-serve and mini-serve gas station, unattended card key service stations, car washes)
NC
AR
AR
C
C
Office Uses (i.e. business, government, professional, medical, or financial)
General Office (i.e. professional offices, financial businesses, government offices)
Low-Rise (1-3 Levels)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Mid-Rise (4-12 Levels)
NC
NC
NC
AR
C
High-Rise (13+ Levels)
NC
NC
NC
AR
C
Medical/Dental Office (i.e. medical and dental clinics, chiropractic clinics, physical therapy clinics)
Low-Rise (1-3 Levels)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Mid-Rise (4-12 Levels)
NC
NC
NC
AR
C
High-Rise (13+ Levels)
NC
NC
NC
AR
C
Retail Uses (i.e. sale, lease, or rent of new or used products)
Sales-Oriented (i.e. appliances, convenience stores, bakeries, electronics, furniture, garden supplies, gas stations, groceries, hardware, malls, strip malls, videos)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Personal Service-Oriented (i.e. retail service-banking establishments, Laundromats/dry cleaning, quick printing services, beauty/tanning salons, funeral homes)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Repair-Oriented (i.e. consumer goods-electronics, office equipment, appliances)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Hospitality-Oriented (hotels, motels, convention centers, meeting halls, event facilities)
Low-Rise (1-3 Levels)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Mid-Rise (4-12 Levels)
NC
NC
NC
AR
C
High-Rise (13+ Levels)
NC
NC
NC
AR
C
Outdoor Storage and Display-Oriented (i.e. outdoor storage-lumber yards, vehicle sales, landscape material and nursery product sales, farm supply, and equipment sales)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Surface Passenger Services (i.e. passenger terminals for buses, rail services, local taxi, and limousine services)
NC
AR
AR
C
C
Vehicle Repair Uses (i.e. vehicle repair or service shops, alignment shops, tire sales)
NC
AR
AR
C
C
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Creston Municipal Airport Zone Chart
C = Compatible AR = Additional Review Required NC = Not Compatible
Land Uses
Zone A
Zone B
Zone C
Zone D
Zone E Industrial/Manufacturing Activities
Industrial Service Uses (i.e. machine shops, tool repair, towing and vehicle storage, building supply yards, heating/plumbing/electrical contractors, exterminators, janitorial services, fuel oil distributors, solid fuel yards)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Manufacturing and Production Uses (i.e. manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging or assembly of goods)
Technical/Light Manufacturing (i.e. electrical components, engineering, scientific and research, office, computer hardware/software, optical, pharmaceuticals, printing/photo facilities, publishing)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
General Manufacturing (i.e. manufacturing, compounding, assembling or treatment of most articles, materials, or merchandise)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
*Heavy Manufacturing (i.e. concrete and asphalt plants, meat packing plants, wet corn milling, manufacturing of animal feed, paper/paperboard mills, ethanol plants)
NC
NC
AR
AR
C
Mining and Extraction Uses
NC
NC
NC
AR
C
Salvage Operations (i.e. firms that collect, store, and dismantle damaged or discarded vehicles, machinery, appliances, and building material)
NC
C
NC
C
C
Self-Service Storage Uses (i.e. mini-warehouses/storage facilities)
NC
C
AR
C
C
Warehouse and Freight Uses (i.e. major wholesale distribution centers, general freight storage, railroad switching yards, bus/rail care storage lots, parcel service, grain terminals)
NC
C
AR
C
C
Waste-Related Uses (i.e. recycling centers, sanitary landfills, waste transfer stations, composting, energy recovery plants, sanitary and water treatment facilities, hazardous waste collection sites)
NC
AR
AR
AR
AR
Wholesale Sales Uses (i.e. sale, lease, or rental of products to retailers for industrial, institutional, or commercial business users)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
* Heavy Manufacturing typically has excessive smoke, dust, or hazardous waste.
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Creston Municipal Airport Zone Chart
C = Compatible AR = Additional Review Required NC = Not Compatible
Land Uses
Zone A
Zone B
Zone C
Zone D
Zone E Institutional & Civic Activities
Basic Utility Uses (i.e. utility substation facilities, electrical substations, water and sewer lift stations, water towers)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
College and Universities (i.e. public or private colleges and universities, technical colleges, seminaries)
NC
AR
NC
AR
C
Community Service Uses (i.e. public, nonprofit, or charitable nature providing a local service to the people)
General Community Service (i.e. libraries, museums, transit centers, park and ride facilities, senior/community/neighborhood centers, police and fire stations)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Community Service-Shelter (i.e. transient housing)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Daycare Uses (i.e. childcare centers, adult daycare, preschools, after school programs)
NC
AR
NC
AR
C
Detention Facilities (i.e. prisons, jails, probation centers, juvenile detention homes, halfway houses)
NC
AR
NC
AR
C
Educational Facilities (i.e. public and private schools)
General Educational Facilities (i.e. public and private elementary, middle, junior, and senior high schools including religious, boarding, military schools)
NC
AR
NC
AR
C
Specialized Education Facilities (i.e. specialized trade, business, or commercial courses, nondegree-granting schools)
NC
AR
NC
AR
C
Hospitals (i.e. hospitals, medical centers)
NC
AR
NC
AR
C
Religious Assembly Uses (i.e. churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, Masonic, Eagles, Moose, or Elk lodges)
NC
AR
NC
AR
C
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Creston Municipal Airport Zone Chart
C = Compatible AR = Additional Review Required NC = Not Compatible
Land Uses
Zone A
Zone B
Zone C
Zone D
Zone E Infrastructure Activities
Communication Transmission Facility Uses (i.e. broadcast, wireless, point to point, emergency towers and antennae)
NC
AR
NC
AR
AR
Parking Uses (i.e. ground lots, parking structures)
AR
C
AR
C
C
Transportation Uses (i.e. highways, interstates, local and county roads)
AR
C
C
C
C
Utility Uses (i.e. solar power generation equipment, wind generators, wind farms)
NC
AR
NC
AR
AR
Agricultural Uses (i.e. commercial cultivation of plants, livestock production)
Plant-related (i.e. crop farming, vegetable, fruit, and tree, wholesale plan nurseries)
AR
AR
AR
C
C
Animal-related (i.e. livestock operations, dairy farms, horse farms)
AR
AR
AR
C
C
Resident-related (i.e. single-family home, mobile home if converted to real property and taxed)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Facility-related (i.e. fuel bulk storage/pumping facility, grain elevator, livestock/seed/grain sales)
NC
AR
AR
AR
AR
Floodplains
AR
AR
AR
C
C
Water Bodies (i.e. open bodies containing water)
Man-made resources (i.e. mining and extraction, water detention ponds, wetlands)
NC
AR
AR
AR
AR
Naturally occurring (i.e. lakes, ponds, prairie pot holes, rivers, streams, wetlands)
NC
AR
AR
C
C
Wildlife Preservation Areas (i.e. petting zoos, wildlife rehabilitation centers, zoos)
NC
AR
NC
AR
C
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Creston Municipal Airport Zone Chart
C = Compatible AR = Additional Review Required NC = Not Compatible
Land Uses
Zone A
Zone B
Zone C
Zone D
Zone E Parks and Recreation Activities
Commercial Recreational Uses (i.e. facilities used for physical exercise, recreation, or culture)
Outdoor (i.e. campgrounds, tennis/swimming facilities, drive-in theaters, skating rinks, pavilions, amphitheaters)
NC
AR
AR
AR
C
Indoor (i.e. physical fitness centers, health clubs, bowling alleys, skating rinks, billiard halls, arcades, indoor theaters)
NC
AR
NC
AR
C
Golf (i.e. golf driving ranges, outdoor miniature golf, 9+ hole courses)
NC
AR
NC
C
C
Utility Uses (i.e. amusement/theme parks, fairgrounds, racetracks, sports arenas)
NC
AR
NC
AR
AR
Parks (i.e. aquatic, mini, private, sports, neighborhood, school, community)
NC
AR
AR
C
C
Casino
NC
NC
NC
AR
C
169.07 AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION. As stated in Section 329.13, Iowa Code, all airport zoning regulations adopted under this ordinance shall provide for the administration and enforcement of such regulations by an administrative agency of which shall be the Airport Zoning Administrator. However, in no case, shall such administrative agency be or include any member of the Airport Board of Adjustment. The duties of any administrative agency designated pursuant to the Iowa Code of this ordinance shall not include any of the powers herein delegated to the Airport Board of Adjustment.
It shall be the duty of the Airport Zoning Administrator referred to herein as the “Zoning Administrator”, to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. The Zoning Administrator will be the first point of contact on the Creston Airport Zoning Ordinance regulations, in terms of enforcing zoning regulations.
Applications for permits and variances from the Airport Zoning Ordinance shall be made to the Zoning Administrator upon forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator. Applications for the action by the Airport Board of Adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the Zoning Administrator should an applicant request review. Permit applications shall be promptly considered and either granted or denied by the Airport Zoning Administrator according to the regulations prescribed herein.
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
169.08 AIRPORT ZONING PERMITS. Buildings or other structures located within the Creston Municipal Airport land use and height overlay zoning area as defined within this ordinance shall not be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without an airport zoning permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. Airport zoning permits may be reviewed and granted in conjunction with or supplemental to a City of Creston zoning permit or regulations. City of Creston zoning permits and regulations only apply to property within the corporate limits of the City of Creston.
It shall be the duty of the applicant to provide the Airport Zoning Administrator with sufficient information to evaluate the proposed action. This information shall include but not be limited to the following as noted in the Compatible Land Use Planning Checklist & Permit Application:
1. Contact information including applicant and engineer/architect information.
2. Structure information and/or type of construction.
3. Site information (a site plan consistent with the city’s zoning regulations).
4. Drawing information.
5. Identify current and potential compatibility concerns.
6. Develop compatible criteria.
7. Additional considerations/land use concerns.
The Zoning Administrator shall evaluate the proposal based upon information provided by the applicant. The Zoning Administrator shall approve the permit if after evaluation, the proposed project is found to be adequately compatible. Should the proposed project be found to be incompatible after review, the Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit. Should the permit be denied, the applicant shall have the right to request an appeal as prescribed in this ordinance. Any airport zoning permit shall be null and void if the purpose for which the permit is issued has not commenced within one (1) year from the date of issuance. Should the activity not be commenced within that time, a new zoning permit shall be required.
169.09 HAZARDOUS MARKINGS AND LIGHTING. This section provides for safe aircraft operations, as well as the health, safety, and welfare of individuals on the ground within the vicinity of the airport by identifying lighting and marking requirements. Lighting and marking requirements will be determined through an FAA 7460-1 airspace analysis. The owner of any structure, object, natural vegetation, or terrain is hereby required to install, operate, and maintain such markers, lights, and other aids to navigation necessary to indicate to the aircraft operators in the vicinity of an airport the presence of an airport hazard. Hazardous markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the municipality.
169.10 AIRSPACE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be grown, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zones.
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
1. Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone. Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
2. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone. Slopes thirty-four (34) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
3. Transitional Zones. Slopes seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 1,450.00 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) foot outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
4. Horizontal Zone. Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation or at a height of 1,450.00 feet above mean sea level.
5. Conical Zone. Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
6. Increase in Elevation of Structures. No structure shall be erected that raises the published minimum descent altitude or decision height for an instrument approach to any runway, nor shall any structure be erected that cause the minimum obstruction clearance altitude or minimum en route altitude to be increased on any Federal airway in the County.
169.11 AIRPORT BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
1. There is hereby created an Airport Board of Adjustment to have and exercise the following powers: (1) to hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of this chapter; (2) to hear and decide special exemptions to the terms of this chapter upon which such Airport Board of Adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass; and (3) to hear and decide specific variances.
2. The Airport Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members, two (2) appointed by the City of Creston, two (2) appointed by Union County, and one (1)
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
additional member to be selected by the members of the Airport Board of Adjustment. The terms of the members of the Airport Board of Adjustment shall be five (5) years, excepting that when the board shall first be created, one of the members appointed by each municipality shall be for a term of two (2) years and one for a term of (4) four. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant in which the member was selected. Members shall be removable by the appointing authority for cause, upon written charges after a public hearing.
3. The Airport Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in harmony with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the Airport Board of Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson, or in the absence of the Chairperson, the acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be public. The Airport Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations, and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the Clerk and on due cause shown.
4. The Airport Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of facts and conclusions of law giving facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this chapter.
5. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Airport Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant, on any matter upon which is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect variation to this chapter.
169.12 VARIANCES. In accordance with Section 329.11, Iowa Code, any person desiring to erect, alter, or increase the height of any structure, object, or to permit the growth of any natural vegetation, or otherwise use the person’s property in violation of airport zoning regulations adopted under this ordinance, may apply to the Airport Board of Adjustment for a variance from such zoning regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace as determined applicable by the Zoning Administrator. Such variances shall be allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest, but would do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of the regulations and this chapter; provided, however, that any such variance may be allowed subject to any reasonable conditions that the Airport Board of Adjustment may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
No application for variance to the height requirements of this Ordinance may be considered by the Airport Board of Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been submitted to the Iowa Department of Transportation Aeronautics Division for advice as the aeronautical efforts for the variance. If the Iowa Department of Transportation Aeronautics Division does not respond to the application within twenty-five (25) working days, excluding weekends and holidays after receipt, the Airport Board of Adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny said application. Any application for variance other than for height restrictions, must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for an opinion as to the aeronautical effects of the variance before the application may be considered by the Airport Board of Adjustment.
169.13 APPEALS.
1. Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator made in the administration of this chapter may appeal to the Airport Board of Adjustment.
2. All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Airport Board of Adjustment by filing with the Zoning Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Airport Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
3. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Airport Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would be the opinion of the Zoning Administrator cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by the order of the Airport Board of Adjustment on notice to the Zoning Administrator and on due cause shown.
4. The Airport Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
5. The Airport Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances.
169.14 JUDICIAL REVIEW. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Airport Board of Adjustment, may appeal to the Iowa District Court as provided in the Code of Iowa, Section 414.15.
169.15 PENALTIES AND FINES. In accordance with Section 329.14, Iowa Code, each violation of this ordinance or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a simple misdemeanor. Any violation of the Creston Municipal Airport Height and Land Use Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to the same fines and
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
penalties as a zoning violation, as stated in 165.09 of the Creston Code of Ordinances. The violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
169.16 AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION. In adopting, amending, and repealing airport zoning regulations under this chapter the governing body of the City of Creston shall follow the procedure in sections 414.4 and 414.6 and the Board of Supervisors for Union County shall follow the procedure in sections 335.6 and 335.8 of the Iowa Code. The appointed commission shall be known as the Airport Zoning Commission. The Airport Zoning Commission shall consist of two (2) members from both the City of Creston and Union County and one additional member to act as chairperson and to be selected by a majority vote of the members selected by the members of the Airport Zoning Commission. The terms of the members of the Airport Zoning Commission shall be for six (6) years excepting that when the board is first created, one of the members appointed by the City of Creston and Union County shall be appointed for a term of two years and one for a term of four years. Members may be removed for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant in the same manner in which the member was selected.
169.17 NONCONFORMING USE.
1. Regulations Not Retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be constructed to require the removal, lowering or other changes or alternation of any structure, tree, or use of land legally not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of legal nonconforming uses. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure or piece of property, the construction, alteration, or use of which was legally begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter, and is diligently prosecuted.
2. Marking and Lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding subsection the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Chairperson, Airport Commission, to indicate to the operations of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the City.
169.18 PERMITS.
1. Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or alteration of any structure or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this chapter except as set forth in Subsection 169.10.
CHAPTER 169 CRESTON AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Existing Uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a legal nonconforming use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted.
3. Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed. Whenever the Airport Board of Adjustment Chairperson determines that a legal nonconforming tree, structure, or use of land has been abandoned or regarding physical structures is damaged, torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed by more than 70 percent of the assessed value, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. With that being said, if a building or use is destroyed or deteriorated by more than 70 percent of the assessed value as defined in this chapter and falls within a use category that is labeled as Additional Review (AR), said building and/or use may be rebuilt and/or permitted so long as it meets the review criteria used in the Additional Review land use category.
169.19 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS. In accordance with Section 329.8, Iowa Code, where there exists a conflict between any of the regulation or limitations prescribed in this ordinance and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to height or structures, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
169.20 SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the ordinance, which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable.
169.21 EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its adoption by the governing body and publication and posting as required by law, as provided for in Chapter 380.6 and 380.7, Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380[1]; Sec. 380.7[3]; and Sec. 362.3)
(Ch. 169 – Ord. 15-159 – Feb. 15 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
CHAPTER 170
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
170.01 Purpose
170.11 Information Required on Final Plat
170.02 Application
170.12 Procedure for Approval and Acceptance
170.03 Recording of Plat
of Final Plat
170.04 Fees
170.13 Minimum Standards of Design and Development
170.05 Penalties
170.14 Improvements
170.06 Building Permit to be Denied
170.15 Plats Situated Outside the City
170.07 Definitions
170.16 Changes and Amendments
170.08 Pre-application; Required Plans and Data
170.17 Variances
170.09 Information Required on Preliminary Plat
170.18 Enforcement
170.10 Procedure for Approval of Preliminary Plat
170.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for the design, development and improvement of all new subdivisions and resubdivisions of land, so that existing land uses will be protected and so that adequate provisions are made for public facilities and services and so that growth occurs in an orderly manner, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City.
170.02 APPLICATION. Every owner of any tract or parcel of land who has subdivided or shall hereafter subdivide or plat said tract or parcel into three (3) or more parts, any of which are described by metes and bounds description for which no plat of survey is recorded for the purpose of laying out an addition, subdivision, building lot or lots, acreage or suburban lots within the City or within two (2) miles from the corporate limits of the City, shall cause plats of such areas to be made in the form and containing the information as hereinafter set forth before selling any lots therein contained or placing the plat on record.
(Ord. 02-60 - Jun. 02 Supp.)
170.03 RECORDING OF PLAT. No subdivision plat, resubdivision plat or street dedication within the City or within two (2) miles of the corporate limits of the City shall be filed for record with the County Recorder or recorded by the County Recorder until a final plat of such subdivision, resubdivision or street dedication has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon the approval of the final plat by the Council, it shall be the duty of the subdivider to immediately file such plat with the County Auditor and County Recorder as required by law. Such approval shall be revocable after thirty (30) days, unless such plat has been duly recorded and evidence thereof filed with the Clerk within such thirty (30) days.
170.04 FEES. The Council shall, from time to time, establish by resolution fees for the review of plats. No plat for any subdivision or resubdivision shall be
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
considered filed with the Clerk unless and until said plat is accompanied by the fee as established by resolution of the Council and as required by this chapter.
170.05 PENALTIES. Any person who disposes of or offers for sale any lot or lots within the area of jurisdiction of this chapter before the plat thereof has been approved by the Council and recorded as required by law, shall forfeit and pay fifty dollars ($50.00) for each lot or part of lot sold, disposed of or offered for sale. Nothing contained herein shall in any way limit the City’s right to any other remedies available to the City for the enforcement of this chapter.
170.06 BUILDING PERMIT TO BE DENIED. No building permit shall be issued for construction on any lot, parcel or tract where a subdivision is required by this chapter unless and until a final plat of such subdivision has been approved and recorded in accordance with this chapter and until the improvements required by this chapter have been accepted by the City.
170.07 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following words are defined.
1. “Alley” means public property dedicated to public use primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
2. “Block” means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, railroad rights-of-way, rivers, tracts of public land or the boundary of the subdivision.
3. “City Engineer” means the professional engineer registered in the State designated as City Engineer by the Council or other hiring authority. In the alternative, the City may designate the Public Works Director to perform the duties designated herein to be performed by the City Engineer that are not required to be performed by a licensed engineer. If the City so chooses, all references herein to the City Engineer shall be synonymous with Public Works Director.
(Ord. 97-20 - Oct. 97 Supp.)
4. “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City, as establishments by Chapter 23 of this Code of Ordinances.
5. “Comprehensive Plan” means the general plan for the development of the City, which plan has been adopted by the Council. Such Comprehensive Plan includes any part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
6. “Cul-de-sac” means a street having one end connecting to another street and the other end terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
7. “Easement” means authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of said person’s property.
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
8. “Flood hazard area” means any area subject to flooding by a one percent (1%) probability flood, otherwise referred to as a one hundred year flood, as designated by the State Department of Natural Resources or the Federal Insurance Administration.
9. “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent lands that must be reserved in order to discharge the waters of a one hundred year flood without cumulatively raising the waterway surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
10. “Improvements” means changes to land necessary to prepare it for building sites including but not limited to grading, filling, street paving, curb paving, sidewalks, walkways, water mains, sewers, drainage ways and other public works and appurtenances.
11. “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development.
12. “Lot, corner” means a lot situated at the intersection of two streets.
13. “Lot, double frontage” means any lot which is not a corner lot which abuts two streets.
14. “Owner” means the legal entity holding title to the property being subdivided or such representative or agent as is fully empowered to act on the owner’s behalf.
15. “Plat” means the map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider’s plan for the subdivision is presented in the form which, if approved by the Council and Commission, will be filed and recorded with the County Recorder.
16. “Plats Officer” means the individual assigned the duty to administer this chapter by the Council or other appointing authority.
17. “Resubdivision” means any subdivision of land which has previously been included in a recorded plat. In appropriate context it may be a verb referring to the act of preparing a plat of previously subdivided land.
18. “Street” means public property, not an alley, intended for vehicular circulation. In appropriate context, the term “street” may refer to the right-of-way bounded by the property lines of such public property or may refer to the paving installed within such right-of-way.
19. “Street, arterial” means a street primarily intended to carry traffic from one part of the City to another, and not intended to provide access to abutting property.
20. “Street, major” means an arterial street or other street which has or is planned to have continuity to carry traffic from one section of the City to another.
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
21. “Subdivider” means the owner of the property being subdivided or such other person or entity empowered to act on the owner’s behalf.
22. “Subdivision” means the division of land into two or more parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development. The term, when appropriate to the context, may refer to the process of subdividing or to land subdivided. However, the sale or exchange of small parcels of land to or between the owners of adjacent platted lots, where such sale or exchange does not create any additional lots and where the land sold or exchanged constitutes less than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the enlarged lot after such transfer, is not considered a subdivision.
23. “Utilities” means systems for the distribution or collection of water, gas, electricity, waste water and storm water.
170.08 PRE-APPLICATION; REQUIRED PLANS AND DATA.
1. General subdivision information shall describe or outline existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to supplement the drawings required below. This information may include data on existing covenants, land, characteristics and available community facilities and utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal such as a number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas, playgrounds, park areas and other public areas, proposed protective covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements.
2. Location shall show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities which serve or influence it. Included are development name and location; main traffic arteries, public transportation lines; shopping centers; elementary and high schools; parks and playgrounds; principal places of employment; other community features such as railroad stations, airports, hospitals and churches; title; scale; north arrow and date.
3. Sketch plan on topographic survey shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a free-hand pencil sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey. In any event the sketch plan shall include either the existing topographic data listed in Section 170.09 below or such of these data as the Commission determines necessary for its consideration of the proposed sketch plan.
170.09 INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PRELIMINARY PLAT. In seeking to subdivide land into lots and/or to dedicate streets, alleys or other lands for public use, the owner shall submit four copies of a preliminary plat to the Commission before submission of a final plat. The preliminary plat shall be drawn
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
to a scale of 100 feet to 1 inch or larger and shall show or be accompanied by the following:
1. The dimensions and location of the property to be platted.
2. The location of property lines, buildings, water courses, tree masses and other existing features affecting the plat.
3. The location and width of proposed and existing streets, alleys and lots included in the plat; also similar facts regarding streets and alleys in the property immediately adjacent.
4. The location and size of existing public sewers, gas and water mains within the tract immediately adjacent thereof.
5. The names and location of all adjoining subdivisions.
6. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded and the name of the subdivider.
7. Contours at intervals of two feet or less.
8. The scale, date and north point.
9. The plat shall be accompanied by a written and signed statement in which the subdivider sets forth the proposed restrictions, easements, building lines, public improvements, etc. within the area of the plat. The plat must meet all requirements of the zoning regulations for the district in which it is located and shall be in general conformity with the Comprehensive Plan.
10. The plat shall be plainly marked “Preliminary Plat.”
11. The plat shall be accompanied by three (3) reduced copies no larger than 8.5 x 14 inches for submission to members of the Planning and Zoning Commission for review. (Ord. 97-20 - Oct. 97 Supp.)
170.10 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT. Four copies of the preliminary plat, one copy of an attorney’s title opinion addressed to the Commission, together with three copies of the owner’s statement, shall be filed with the Commission and there shall forthwith be referred one copy of the plat and a copy of the owner’s statement to the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall examine said plat as to its compliance with the laws and ordinances of the City, the existing street system, and good engineering practices and shall submit findings in duplicate to the Commission, together with the copy of the plat received. When the Engineer’s report is received by the Commission, it shall then set forth its recommendations in writing, whether of approval, modification or disapproval. In case of modification or disapproval, it shall give its reasons therefor. The Commission shall forthwith submit all four copies of the preliminary plat, together with a copy of the owner’s statement, a copy of the Engineer’s report and a signed copy of its recommendations to the Council. The Council shall then take action upon the preliminary plat, certifying its approval or disapproval. In case of
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
disapproval, it shall give its reasons therefor. If approved and all four copies duly certified, one copy shall be delivered to the Commission, one to the City Engineer, one to the Clerk and the fourth shall be returned to the owner or subdivider. The approval of the preliminary plat by the Council does not constitute acceptance of the subdivision, but shall be authorization to proceed with the preparation of the final plat.
170.11 INFORMATION REQUIRED ON FINAL PLAT. The final plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to 1 inch or larger and shall show or be accompanied by the following:
1. The boundaries of the property and lines of all proposed streets and alleys, with their widths and names and the lines and dimensions of any other portions intended to be dedicated to the public use, and the centerline elevations duly recorded.
2. All lots lines, and an identification system for all lots and blocks, with figures showing their dimensions.
3. Building lines and easements for any rights-of-way provided for public use, services or utilities, with figures showing their dimensions, unless the subdivider desires to describe the easements for public use, services or utilities in the owner’s statement of the plat.
4. All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating lots, tracts or parcels of ground, streets, alleys and easements, and the boundaries of the subdivision; the linear dimensions are to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot.
5. The necessary functions for all curvilinear lines and streets and radii for all rounded corners.
6. All survey monuments, ties to a section or quarter section corner, and bench marks, together with their description and measurements relative to the plat.
7. Name of subdivision, location and extent of property subdivided, points of compass, scale and date of plat.
8. Where previous easements appear on a separate instrument, reference to such instrument shall be made on the plat.
9. Complete engineering data covering cross sections, profiles and proposed grades for the improvements required, all to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
10. The final plat shall be accompanied by the following instruments:
A. Certification under seal by a land surveyor, licensed under the laws of the State.
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
B. A certified statement from the owner and spouse, if any, that the subdivision as it appears on the plat is with their free consent and is in accordance with the desires of the owner and spouse;
C. An opinion by an attorney-at-law who has examined the abstract of title of the land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the proprietors and holders of mortgages, liens or other encumbrances on the land being platted and shall not the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing the encumbrances.
D. A certified statement from the Treasurer of the County that the land is free from taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by a bond in compliance with Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa.
E. A certified statement from the Clerk of the District Court that the land platted is free from all judgments, attachments, mechanics or other liens as appears by the record in that office.
F. Resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and signature of the Mayor and Clerk.
170.12 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL AND ACCEPTANCE OF FINAL PLAT. Four copies of the final plat, together with three copies of the owner’s statement, shall be submitted to the Commission, and there shall forthwith be referred one copy of the plat, together with a copy of the owner’s statement to the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall carefully examine said plat as to its compliance with the approved preliminary plat and shall submit findings in duplicate to the Commission, together with a copy of the plat received. When the Engineer’s report is received by the Commission, it shall, as soon as possible, consider said report and pass upon the plat. When the final plat has been passed upon by the Commission, all four copies of the plat shall forthwith be transmitted to the Council, together with a copy of the owner’s statement, a copy of the Engineer’s report and a signed copy of its approval to the Council. When the final plat has been approved by the Council and all four copies duly certified, one copy shall be delivered to the Commission, one copy to the City Engineer, one to the Clerk and the fourth copy to the owner or subdivider for filing with the County Recorder. If the plat is disapproved by the Council such disapproval shall point out wherein said proposed plat is objectionable.
170.13 MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT.
1. Standards Prescribed. The standards set forth in this chapter shall be considered the minimum standards necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
2. Land Suitability. No land shall be subdivided which is found to be unsuitable for subdividing by reason of flooding, ponding, poor drainage, adverse soil conditions, adverse geological formations, unsatisfactory topography or other conditions likely to be harmful to the public health, safety or general welfare, unless such unsuitable conditions are corrected to the satisfaction of the City. If land is found to be unsuitable for subdivision for any of the reasons cited in this section the Council shall state its reasons in writing and afford the subdivider an opportunity to present data regarding such unsuitability. Thereafter, the Council may reaffirm, modify or withdraw its determination regarding such unsuitability.
3. Lands Subject to Flooding. No subdivision containing land located in a floodway or a flood hazard area shall be approved by the City without the approval of the State Department of Natural Recourses. No lot shall be located so as to include land located within a floodway or flood hazard area unless the lot is of such size and shape that it will contain a buildable area not within the floodway or flood hazard area, suitable for development as allowed by the Zoning Code for the zone in which the lot is located. Land located within a flood hazard area or a floodway may be included within a plat as follows, subject to the approval of the City:
A. Included within individual lots in the subdivision, subject to the limitations of this section.
B. Reserved as open space for recreation use by all owners of lots in the subdivision, with an appropriate legal instrument, approved by the City, providing for its care and maintenance by such owners.
C. If acceptable to the City, dedicated to the City as public open space for recreation or flood control purposes.
4. Plat to Conform to Comprehensive Plan. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets and the general nature and extent of the lots and uses proposed shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan of the City; and shall conform to such other plans, including but not limited to a Major Street Plan, a Sanitary Sewer Plan or a Parks and Open Spaces Plan.
5. Construction Standards for Improvements. In addition to the standards set forth in this chapter, the City Engineer shall from time to time prepare, and the Council shall from time to time adopt by resolution, technical standards for public improvements. Such technical standards for public improvements shall contain the minimum acceptable specifications for the construction of public improvements and may vary for classes of improvements, giving due regard to the classification of streets or other improvements, and the extent and character of the area served by the
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
improvements. Upon adoption by the Council by resolution, such technical standards for public improvements shall have such force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.
6. Acreage Subdivisions. Where the parcel of land is subdivided into larger tracts than ordinarily used for building lots, such parcel shall be divided so as to allow for the opening of major streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent minor streets. Easements providing for the future opening and extension of such streets may, at the discretion of the Council, be made a requirement of the plat.
7. Relation to Adjoining Street System. New subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining additions (or for their proper projection where adjoining property is not subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. In general, such streets shall be of a width as great as that of the streets so continued or projected but shall not be less than the minimum width requirements.
8. Street Arrangements. The street system shall be so arranged to comply as far as practicable with the major street plan of the City. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible to a right angle and in no case shall they intersect at less than 60 degrees. No street shall be parallel or approximately parallel to a railroad, unless it is 150 feet or more from the line of the railroad right-of-way. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
9. Street Right-of-ways.
A. The widths for all street rights-of-way shall conform with the following table, which refers to street types as designated on the Major Street Plan:
RIGHT-OF-WAY STREET TYPES
IN FEET
State Arterials
Requirements set by Iowa DOT
Regional Arterials
80 feet
Community Arterials
70 feet
Collector Streets
60 feet
Minor Streets
60 feet
B. The minimum width for streets shall be 60 feet between property lines, except that in cases where the topography or special
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
conditions make a street of less width more suitable, the Commission and Council may waive the above requirements.
C. Half streets are prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations; and where the Commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted with such tract.
10. Street Grades. Street grades, if practical, shall not exceed six percent for all minor streets.
11. Alleys. The minimum width of an alley in a residential block shall be 20 feet (alleys are not recommended for residential districts except under unusual conditions). Alleys will be required in the rear of all business lots and shall be at least 24 feet wide. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end.
12. Easements Where There Are No Alleys. Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than five feet shall be provided on each side of all rear lots and side lines where necessary for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat mains. Easements of greater width may be required along lines or across lots where necessary for the extension of main sewers and similar utilities. The subdivider shall consult with the City Engineer and the managers of local utility companies regarding need and location of easements.
13. Places. Where it is desired to subdivide a parcel of land, which because of its size or location does not permit a normal lot or street area, there may be established a “place.” Such a place may be in the form of a court, non-connecting street or other arrangement, provided, however, that proper access shall be given to all lots from a dedicated place (street or court). If any dead-end place is more than 250 feet in length, it shall terminate in an open space, preferably circular, having a minimum diameter of 100 feet. Except in unusual instances, no dead-end street or place shall exceed 600 feet in length.
14. Blocks. All blocks shall be required to have a maximum length of 500 feet.
15. Lot Lines. All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines, unless a variation to this rule will give a better street and lot plan. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least 10 feet shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use and no right of access shall be provided across said easement.
16. Size and Shape of Lots. Minimum lot size shall be governed by the City Zoning Regulations. Lots shall be conveniently shaped and the depth of lots shall generally not exceed their width by more than 2½ times provided the width is at least 60 feet at the building line. Each lot shall have at least 20 feet of frontage on a street.
17. Corner Lots. Corner lots on major street intersections and at all other points likely to be dangerous shall have a radius of not less than 15 feet at the street corner. On business lots, a chord may be substituted for the circular arc. Corner lots shall not be less than 70 feet in width.
18. Street Names. Streets that are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the name of existing streets; otherwise, names shall not duplicate existing street names and names similar to existing street names shall not be permitted.
19. Building Lines. Building lines shall be shown on the plat or included in the owner’s statement on all lots whenever the depth of such building lines is greater than those required by the Zoning Code. Provisions shall be made in the owner’s statement requiring all enclosed parts of buildings to be set back to such building lines.
20. Character of Development. The Commission and the Council may require that certain minimum regulations regarding type and character of development be incorporated in the owner’s statement of plat. Such regulations shall be intended to protect the character and development of the platted subdivision, as well as that of the surrounding development.
21. Easements Along Streams and Water Courses. Whenever any stream or surface water course is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall, at his or her own expense, make adequate provisions for the proper drainage of surface water and shall also provide and dedicate to the City an easement along said streams and water courses meeting the approval of the Council.
170.14 IMPROVEMENTS. Before the final plat of any subdivision area shall be approved and recorded, the subdivider shall make and install the improvements required in this section. In lieu of final completion of the required improvements, before the final plat is finally approved, the subdivider shall enter into contract with the City to insure the completion of the improvement within a specific time not to exceed 180 days. The performance of said contract shall be secured by the filing of
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
a bond (or cash) to be approved by the Council. Said bond or cash shall not be less than the approximate cost of the improvements as estimated by the City Engineer.
1. Street Grading and Surfacing. All streets within any subdivision shall be brought to grade established from the City datum plane. All street surfaces shall conform in width with the following table which refers to street types as designated on the Major Street Plan.
MINIMUM WIDTHS OF STREETS
STREET TYPE
STANDARDS
State Arterials
Requirements set by the Iowa DOT
Regional Arterials
24 to 48 feet plus curbs
Community Arterials
24 to 48 feet plus curbs
Collector Streets
30 feet plus curbs
Minor Streets
28 feet plus curbs
Cul-de-sac
45 feet minimum radius
plus curb
All streets shall be paved with at least six (6) inches of concrete or equivalent as approved by the Council after receiving the report and recommendation of the City Engineer. All streets shall have integral curb and gutter according to the City Engineer’s specifications. The Planning and Zoning Commission, upon application by the subdivider and appropriate review and approval by the City Engineer, may consider alternative street construction. (Ord. 97-20 - Oct. 97 Supp.)
2. Water Service. The subdivider shall connect with the public water main and provide water connections to each lot in accordance with the standards and procedures established by the City Waterworks. The cost of construction of all such water mains and connections with existing public water mains shall be paid by the subdivider.
3. Sanitary Sewers. The subdivider shall connect or provide for the connection with sanitary sewers and shall provide within the subdivision the sanitary sewer system required to make the sewer accessible to each lot in the subdivision. The cost of all such sanitary sewers shall be borne by the subdivider. Said sanitary sewer system shall be approved by the Council and the Board of Health of the State and the construction thereof shall be subject to the supervision of the City Engineer.
4. Storm Sewers. The subdivider shall be required to construct storm sewers in accordance with Chapter 2, Storm Water Management and
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
Drainage for public improvements of the 2005 edition or latest edition of the Iowa State-wide Urban Design Standards (SUDAS) in each development. (Ord. 05-82 – Apr. 05 Supp.)
5. Engineering. The City shall not be responsible for engineering costs associated with new development. All the above mentioned facilities constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall be inspected and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer or a representative of the City acting in the capacity of City Engineer and the subdivider shall reimburse the City for all costs of inspection. All material used shall be required to meet all of the following standards: American Association of State Highway Officials, American Society for Testing Materials, American Waterworks Association and Iowa Highway Commission specifications.
6. Off-street Parking. Each lot shall have off-street parking facilities.
7. Other Improvements. The Council may also require certain other improvements such as sidewalks and any other accessories normally found in residential areas.
8. The subdivider shall be required to construct all public improvements in accordance with the 2005 edition or latest edition of the Iowa State-wide Urban Design Standards (SUDAS) in each development. (Ord. 05-83 – Jul. 05 Supp.)
170.15 PLATS SITUATED OUTSIDE THE CITY. All additions, subdivisions and resubdivisions of property situated within two (2) miles, as provided in Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, from the corporation limits of the City which require action by the Commission and Council shall comply with the foregoing regulations. The owner’s statement of plat shall include a statement to the effect that all buildings to be erected on any of the lots shall be constructed in accordance with the Zoning Code of the City.
170.16 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS. Any of the provisions of this chapter may be changed and amended at any time by the Council; provided, however, such changes or amendments shall first be submitted to the Commission for report and recommendations, and shall not be effective until after the Council has held a public hearing thereon. Notice of any such public hearing shall be given by publication of a newspaper having general circulation in the City and shall be published at least 15 days prior to the date fixed for public hearing thereon.
170.17 VARIANCES. Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this ordinance would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider, the Council may vary, modify or waive the requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured. Provided, however, such variance, modification or waiver will not
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CRESTON, IOWA
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. In no case shall any variance or modification be more than minimum easing of the requirements as necessary to eliminate the hardship. In so granting a variance, the Council may impose such additional conditions as are necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the requirements so varied, modified or waived.
170.18 ENFORCEMENT. When the Zoning Administrator is apprised of any violation of this chapter or the disregard or ignorance of any of the provisions thereof, said officer shall, after proper investigation and confirmation, notify the owner in writing. If the owner of the property is not available for such notice, the Zoning Administrator may notify the person causing such violation, if other than the owner, or the tenant or agent of such owner. If prompt correction of such violation is not made within three (3) days after the service of such notice, the Zoning Administrator is authorized in the name of the City to institute injunction proceedings or any other proper proceedings in the District Court to restrain and enjoin said violation of this chapter.